

===== PAGE 1 =====
i.! t:r?F|
> ' J
O 'i' !
I t ^ t™. , ^ i. « V «
- -1 » i >' I - « _ J J r _s
I -» ! i . r I
^ * i - • » ' " ,
J . _ J, I I « .»> .a U ^r-i- -.4 £ y 0 •
} * y •:.
» ^ •
J -i ,3 *
t » > * ^i -t i
S < ^ * t
L .. )' n^ ^J -' ii ' - r r r ' t i i r ^ r n±^ f ti M±-^^ 1 1 J 4111 1!)i
Y j. --i
i $1 ,
». J
* •» J .
-i-^- ° J . .. i
- > —
, " . Jj —
. . ' , . J- J * -r . J . , - J J ' u.ul
- - ^ v ^ - ' . ^ r - ' r ,i .^
-J. > J
^ — ? * t - I
. ; - J. U -u-'Jj Jj-i,
•J' - .Jr-'Ts-r-.-^v^-,-^ —--w-v -I .T.'^
^ — J . j j j jj I'J'HI!]
J.
•;q u . u . l k u . u .u aj » L i t i . a , h j; ;
.>.•-•- r'
•j.-i. r^j.
i.Jl. Tij ^ • — —' i' i i i • • . i • } <1 • • •rl ' » • t • t J M • ' • 1 t t ' ( ' •- '•! t MU
tm^i-^-ii - rtilrtU [HWfR-^ M i
^ . ili.i.,! I T t- j lT "T f^-'il- Jl ! i I h
miii TiriTlillftHWjLLUliUJ 111114 ii
I !
h i-
• P-^- - I ' M-
- Irl4l WfHj ^^^^ r
.iii'jW'i
•J !-J •• t; i
• 1 •' 11 •
•• IJ ' '-J-.'-J—-i- TJ j ) >1(1
I ? ''.Ml
—• -J r 5 ' 1 ' » ' ( • ( < !' 1 <»< » lit ( » I j t t i I » n • t • ! '^f l.t • i.
ii
t H t III ti II i n n U (•
-i i i M ' - • ! r-i i » «tt
! . ' f ( • ; I i - i - ' j . < _ t » (t J M n t I 11 t ) n 11 11 I 111 i " - ! - ! . " ^r T'
t s ' .( .1 ,f. J
» 1 t ,
• '!
V'i.C
ff fi r ) J 1 < s'
{ f - H i
•Si'

===== PAGE 2 =====
«

===== PAGE 3 =====
Annual Report
for the year ended December 31,
1966
International Business Machines
Corporation
Contents: Highlights of the Year
4 Letter to Stockholders
7 Report to Stockholders
30 Opinion of Independent Accountants
31 Earnings and Retained Earnings Statement
32 Balance Sheet
34 Source and Application of Funds
38 10-Year Statement of Operations
40 Directors and Officers
Cover Picture: A greatly magnified photo-
graph of a magnetic core plane. Thousands
of tiny cores, strung on wires much finer
than a human hair, provide the main type of
high-speed memory for the System/360.

===== PAGE 4 =====
Highlights of the year:
1966 1965
Gross income from sales, service and rentals i 4,247,706,091 $ 3,572,824,719
Net earnings before taxes i 1,054,130,192 $ 959,902,490
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 528,000,000 $ 483,000,000
Net earnings 526,130,192 $ 476,902,490
Per share t 9.66 S 9.03
Cash dividends • 230,671,168 $ 210,767,482
Per share t 4-30 S 4.00
Stock split 50%
-
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property ; 1,584,475,383 $ 1,165,907,756
At end of year:
Total assets i 4,660,778,651 $ 3J44>9I8,46O
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property. i 3,098,618,614 $ 2,303,509,000
Long-term indebtedness i 458,871,518 $ 398,849,604
Net current assets i 723,096,414 $ 698,652,848
Number of employees 198,186
Number of stockholders 328,427 275,650
Stock Transfer Offices:
International Business Machines Corporation, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022
Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust Company of Chicago, 231 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60690
Trust General du Canada-Montreal, 84 Notre Dame Street West, Montreal i, Quebec, Canada
Wells Fargo Bank, 464 California Street, San Francisco, California 94120
National Trust Company, Limited, 21 King Street East, Toronto i, Ontario, Canada
Registrars:
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, 30 West Broadway, New York, New York 10015
The First National Bank of Chicago, 38 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois 60690
Montreal Trust Company, 777 Dorchester Boulevard West, Place Ville Marie, Montreal 2, Quebec, Canada
Crocker-Citizens National Bank, 79 New Montgomery Street, San Francisco, California 94120
Montreal Trust Company, 15 King Street West, Toronto i, Ontario, Canada
Right: Installing System/360's in customer
offices around the world was one of the major
activities of IBM customer engineers during
the past year.

===== PAGE 5 =====


===== PAGE 6 =====
To the Stockholders :
The year 1966 marked the achievement of full-scale produc-
tion and installation of the new IBM System/360 data processing
product family, as well as significant advances in all other areas
of the business, thanks to outstanding efforts by IBM people
throughout the world.
Consolidated gross income from worldwide operations
amounted to $4,247,706,091, an increase of $674,881,372 over
1965. Earnings were $526,130,192, a $49,227,702 increase
over the prior year.
The rate of increase in gross income is 18.9% compared to an
increase of 10.3 % in net earnings. The lower increase in earn-
ings resulted from the heavy introductory expenses and higher de-
preciation expense associated with the phasing in of System/360.
Earnings per share were $9.66 based on the 54,448,200 shares
outstanding at the end of the year. This compares with earnings
of $9.03 per share on the 52,837,371 shares outstanding on
December 31,1965, adjusted for the 50% stock split effected
May 3, 1966.
Foreign operations, which are included in consolidated results,
showed gross income of $1,318,099,225, an increase of $232,-
593,474 over 1965. Earnings from foreign operations were $174,-
605,772 in 1966, an increase of $30,579,442 over the year before.
Our industry is experiencing an expanding potential for its
products and services. In many fields of business, government, and
science, new opportunities are developing for the application of
advanced information-handling technologies and methods.
Customer demand for System/3 60 remains strong and resulted
in a continued high level of orders. A number of new products
Chairman Thomas J. Watson, Jr.
and services were introduced in 1966, some of which are described
in this report. In our laboratories, important advances were made
in developing the technologies of the future. Worldwide em-
ployment grew to more than 198,000 during 1966 as over 25,000
new employees joined the Company. Approximately three mil-
lion square feet of manufacturing and laboratory space were com-
pleted throughout the world.
Most of the early production problems encountered with
System/360 have been overcome and production has reached a
worldwide rate of over 1,000 systems a month. To bring this
new product family to maximum performance is requiring ex-
tensive programming systems support. A substantial part of
this work was completed during 1966, but we have experienced

===== PAGE 7 =====
delays in meeting our original objectives for some of the ad- Mr. T Vincent Learson, Senior Vice President, was elected Presi-
vanced programming systems needed to enable the large-scale dent of IBM to succeed Mr. Williams. Mr. Arthur K. Watson, also
computers and time-sharing systems to achieve their maximum a Senior Vice President, was elected Vice Chairman of the Board
capability. While significant progress is being made in this of Directors. Mr. Williams asked to be relieved of his day-to-day
area, it has been necessary to withdraw at this time certain of the responsibilities in keeping with a long-standing personal desire to
most advanced programming systems support for time-shar- retire at age 55. However, at our request he has agreed to con-
ing. The highest priority will continue to be placed on program- tinue to give a portion of his time to IBM general management
ming systems development to improve the usefulness of matters. Everyone who has worked with him knows of the great
System/360 to our customers. We have also expanded our field contributions he has made to the success of IBM over the past
organization's resources to assist customers in the successful 30 years, and I personally am deeply indebted to him for the help
installation and utilization of their System/360's. he has given me. Mr. Learson and Mr. A. K. Watson bring to
The rental and sale of data processing machines and systems their new posts over 50 years of combined service in all phases of
accounted for approximately three-quarters of the Company's IBM's operations. They have held a number of senior manage-
business in 1966. Most of IBM's customers choose to rent their ment positions in IBM and were the Company's two senior vice
equipment rather than purchase it outright, which means that presidents from 1964 until they assumed their additional re-
the capital investment in these rental machines must be financed sponsibilities in 1966.
by IBM. Because of the plant construction program and the The IBM Company's ability to improve its products and to
System/360 production build-up, 1966 required a worldwide in- make them most useful to customers is attributable to the dedicated
vestment of approximately $1.6 billion in rental machines efforts of our many employees. Nineteen-sixty-six was a year of
and parts, factory, laboratory and office equipment, and land and particularly great accomplishment by the people in IBM. Their
buildings. To help finance this expansion in our business, addi- achievements have enhanced the Company's ability to show
tional capital stock was offered to stockholders last June. $371 mil- continued progress in our dynamic and challenging industry.
lion of new capital was raised in this manner. In addition, the
long-term indebtedness of IBM World Trade Corporation and its January 24,1967, order of the Board of Directors,
subsidiaries was increased by $65 million, borrowed abroad,
to help finance our foreign operations. Continued heavy rental
machine production during the coming year is anticipated
both here and abroad, and while most of the necessary funds will
be provided from operations of the business, substantial addi-
Chairman of the Board
tional funds will be required from outside sources. It is expected
that borrowings will be utilized to meet these requirements.
The increased volume of System/360 rental machine instal-
lations, for new and additional business and to replace older
IBM equipment, will result in a higher level of depreciation expense
in 1967 as the introduction of this new product line progresses.
However, this high volume of installations is most encouraging
for further revenue and profit growth.
On January 25,1966, the Board of Directors elected three
principal officers of the Company to new posts. Mr. Albert L.
Williams, President of the Company since 1961, was elected
Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Board of Directors.

===== PAGE 8 =====
m m ^-
m kii^
Jk 1
D # .r. #
w
© # f #
t
••c
• i:
ii
1
f ®'
•iWA

===== PAGE 9 =====
System/360 Progress Report Incoming orders for System/360 continued who can select from a choice of over 250
at a record rate during 1966, and produc- clothing styles, each of which can be tailored
tion capacity was expanded accordingly. By from 1,700 variations in fabric and in-
year end the worldwide production of numerable combinations of threads, linings,
System/360 had reached the rate of over zippers, buttons and other garment com-
1,000 systems a month. ponents.
System/360 is an integrated family of In the Midwest, a large manufacturer of
computers usable for both business and sci- animal feed concentrates uses a System/360
entific applications. Today, there are eight for applications ranging from feed formu-
basic models of the system with a wide range lization to billing, accounting and salesmen's
of peripheral units permitting many com- compensation.
binations of processing speed and memory The U. S. Coast and Geodetic Survey is
capacity. This range of capability and cost using a System/360 at its Rockville, Mary-
allows the customer to choose the equipment land, headquarters, for a number of sci-
best suited for his particular requirements. entific applications, such as analyzing data
As his data processing needs grow, the archi- obtained from satellites, locating earth-
tecture of System/360 and the program- quakes, providing tidal data, and assisting
ming support available allow him to add in geomagnetic studies.
more powerful units to his present system or
to move up to more powerful models of
System/360 without extensive reprogram-
ming. Expanded Worldwide
To make System/360 even more useful
Manufacturing Capacity
to the customer, the Company continued
to introduce new system capabilities. A vari- During 1966, the expansion of manu-
ety of new peripheral units has been facturing and development facilities for
added to the 44 devices originally announced System/360 neared completion.
for use with the basic computer models. The plant at Burlington, Vermont, came
For example, the power of the Model 20, on line to produce Solid Logic Technology
the smallest System/360, was expanded dur- (SLT) modules, the basic microcircuit units
ing the year through the addition of two of System/360 electronics, adding its ca-
direct access auxiliary memories previously pacity to that of Corbeil-Essonnes, France,
available only on larger models. They can and the expanded East Fishkill, New
store up to 10.8 million characters of infor- York, plant, to make IBM the world's largest
mation on magnetic disks and enable the producer and user of these hybrid inte-
Model 20 to perform hundreds of jobs grated circuits. Further progress in the auto-
previously practical only with larger, more mation of the production lines in these
powerful computer systems. plants added materially to the increased
In addition, last year the IBM 1287 Optical output of SLT modules.
Reader was announced to give System/360 New plants at Boulder, Colorado, and
a new source of input. This unit can read in the Research Triangle Park near Raleigh
hand-printed numbers and five different and Durham, North Carolina, were com-
hand-printed alphabetic characters from a pleted during the year. The Boulder location,
number of different types of source docu- where construction was started in mid-
ments and feed the information directly into 1965, now has over 3,900 employees. In
a System/360 for processing. North Carolina, where construction be-
System/360 has been applied to a wide gan shortly thereafter, approximately 2,800
Left: A group of experimental monolithic variety of uses. For example: In the South- manufacturing, development and adminis-
circuit chips as seen through a microscope. Each of west, a System/360 is helping a natural trative people are employed. Abroad, major
these chips—i/igth of an inch square—contains
150 electronic elements making up 16 circuits. gas company analyze the profit potential of new plants in Mainz, West Germany, and
proposed major capital expenditures by Vimercate, Italy, went into production of
calculating, within minutes, the efl^ect of System/360 last year. As is the case with
numerous variables. other plants around the world, in order to
A market research organization in Aus- take advantage of mass production tech-
tralia uses its System/360 to process market niques, each of these new facilities has been
research reports for pharmaceutical and assigned prime responsibility for the pro-
grocery concerns to show the flow of 5,500 duction of certain System/360 units for the
products from the factories through the overseas market.
distribution channels to 900 retail stores. A number of existing facilities were ex-
A major U.S. manufacturer of men's panded during the year to further support
clothing has installed a System/360 to ana- the System/360 effort. Major building proj-
lyze incoming orders from 2,000 dealers ects were completed or neared completion

===== PAGE 10 =====
in Rochester, Minnesota; San Jose, Cali-
fornia; and Kingston, New York; as well as
in France, Germany and the United
Kingdom. Construction was begun on a new
plant in Japan, and plans were announced
to build a manufacturing facility at Havant,
England, near IBM's Hursley laboratory.
When all of these projects are completed,
there will be 22 IBM plants and 13 IBM
laboratories around the world engaged in
the manufacture and development of
System/360 components and equipment.
Customer Support
Basic to the success of any computer in-
stallation is the support given to the cus-
tomer. IBM customer engineers—the people
in the local branch offices who maintain
the system—have the responsibility for the
installation of the equipment.
These men are equipped with several
newly developed aids designed to help them
install and service computers quickly and
efficiently. For example, a communications
network speeds new and updated techni-
cal information daily to key field locations.
The Company also expanded the use of
computer simulators for training purposes.
The simulators duplicate significant por-
tions of System/360 operation and provide
valuable "hands on" experience for the
customer engineer while reducing the num-
ber of System/360's needed to train them.
IBM systems engineers in the branch office
are also key members of this support organ-
ization. These men and women work with
the salesmen and the customers before,
during and after installation on such vital
areas as the analysis of the customer's re-
quirements and the selection of the com-
puter and peripheral units best suited to do
the job. They also assist in the training
of customer personnel on equipment and
programming and the testing of the cus-
tomer's programs prior to the installation. attend the IBM Systems Research Institute were conducted at branch offices and district
After installation, the systems engineers to study advanced data processing subjects education centers throughout the United
continue to assist the customer in making on a graduate school level. States and in 66 foreign cities, as well as at
necessary modifications to the system as Other Company education facilities the Company's residence centers for cus-
requirements change and in applying the played a vital role in the support program tomer executives, at Poughkeepsie and Endi-
computer to additional applications. for System/360. IBM salesmen and system cott. New York; San Jose, California;
To supplement the work of systems engi- engineers attended courses, not only on Cuernavaca, Mexico; and Blaricum, The
neers in the branch office, the Company new equipment, but also on the specifics of Netherlands.
has expanded its Field Systems Center or- the industries—such as banking, transpor-
ganization. These centers are staffed by tation, utilities—to which they have been as-
systems engineers who are specialists in such signed. Courses for customers ranged from
areas as programming systems, equipment "Executive Computer Concepts," tailored for Above: Job assignments for these longshoremen,
capability or the application of data process- top management, to basic programming and 24,000 others like them, are made with
the help of a System/360 installation and special
ing to specific industry requirements. and computer operations for their data proc-
input-output terminals.
Each year, selected systems engineers essing personnel. These training programs

===== PAGE 11 =====
System/360 Programming
Programs are the step-by-step instruc-
tions which tell the computer what to do.
During the year, IBM programmers, techni-
cians, machine operators and technical
writers at 14 locations in the United States
and overseas were engaged in this vital
support activity.
They continued developing System/360
operating and control support programs,
the basic programming packages which auto-
matically schedule and supervise the flow
of work through the computer, translate pro-
gramming instructions into computer
language and perform other computer-man-
agement services. In addition, IBM pro-
grammers continued work on a variety of
application programs which enable the
System/360 to process specific jobs.
Last year, the Company developed and re-
leased to customers more than 125 new
program packages, made up of nearly
2,000,000 individual computer instructions.
A typical customer application program
released last year is Retail IMPACT, a pro-
gram for department stores and other large
retail organizations. This program pack-
age enables a System/360 to keep track of
the movement and sale of a vast number of
inventory items and thus helps to gear inven-
tories more closely to consumer demands.
It automatically produces reorder documents
and sales reports which help buyers and
executives of the stores make vital merchan-
dising decisions much faster and more
accurately than before.
Left: IBM research technician uses new equipment
and testing technique developed by Company
scientists to allow them to predict how lenses will
perform before they are installed in an
optical system.
Right: The information that this department store
salesperson is recording can be read directly
into System/360 through IBM's new 1287 Optical
Reader, announced in 1966.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Other Products and Services A number of other products in the field of
information-handling were announced or
first delivered by the Company during 1966:
Deliveries of the low-cost IBM 1130 com-
puting system began in June. This small
computer was designed for individual use
by engineers, scientists and mathematicians.
Customers for this system range from the
National Aeronautics and Space Adminis-
tration, which is using it in antennae de-
sign for its Saturn rocket; to engineering
firms which use it for structural analyses; to a
small foundry in Georgia, which uses it to
determine the least-cost mix it can achieve

===== PAGE 13 =====
for its melting furnaces. Modifications to ferent locations to use a single computer for
SBC Establishes
this computer permit it to act as a communi- preparing, storing and revising business
Computer Network
cations terminal which can be linked to a and technical reports ranging from legal
System/360 to tap the power and memory documents to sales proposals. DATATEXT is
The Service Bureau Corporation, a wholly
capacity of the larger system. similar to QUIKTRAN, introduced by IBM
owned and independently operated sub-
Initial deliveries of the IBM 1800 Data in 1965. QUIKTRAN provides remote scien- sidiary of IBM, installed more than 30 Sys-
Acquisition and Control System began dur- tific computing capability to scientists, tem/360's during 1966, as it began es-
ing 1966. This system is a process control engineers and others with mathematically tablishing its nationwide network of inter-
computer that operates on a "closed-loop" oriented short run jobs to process. In both connecting data processing centers. The
basis. This means that in controlling a of these systems the customer is provided network will be fully operational in 1969,
process—such as a manufacturing line in a with a typewriter-like terminal unit in his at which time more than 125 IBM Sys-
plant, refinery or mill—the system reads office which is linked to a central com- tem/360's and more than 181,000 miles of
measuring and sampling instruments, checks puter owned and managed by IBM. During leased private lines will be utilized.
the readings for conformance to pre-set 1966, DATATEXT centers were opened in System/360's in the network will range
limits, relays corrections to adjusting devices San Francisco, Los Angeles, New York and from the smallest to one of the most power-
and then rereads the measurements in a Cleveland. IBM QUIKTRAN centers are ful. This will permit SBC to use the facility
continuing cycle or "loop." The system is now operating in New York City, Chicago, best suited to the customer's problem.
being used in a variety of process applica- Los Angeles, Philadelphia and Toronto, During the year, SBC developed and an-
tions. In Belgium, a manufacturer of Canada. nounced several new computer application
glass fiber uses an IBM 1800 system to con- Also introduced and demonstrated last packages on the basis of which it ren-
trol automatically the operation of five year was the IBM 9370 Document Repro- ders data processing services for a fee. One
glass furnaces, and has improved quality and ducer. This machine is an offset duplicator of these packages, an SBC management
efiiciency. Other i8oo's are controlling which uses rolls of paper instead of single information system for accounts receivable,
manufacturing processes for paper mills, sheets, and can reproduce on both sides of provides more data for businessmen to
basic metals firms and refineries. In the the paper at the rate of 50,000 impressions control accounts receivable, improve collec-
cities of San Jose, California, and Wichita per hour. It operates faster than comparable tions, regulate credit and pinpoint trouble
Falls, Texas, the 1800 system is used to duplicating methods, and can substantially areas. Another development consolidates sev-
control traffic by sensing the movement of reduce paper costs. eral general purpose computer programs
vehicles and regulating traffic lights. The Company also began deliveries of its for chemical engineering data processing.
The Company announced, during 1966, Document Viewers which are used for the This system, called CHIPS (Chemical
the new IBM 1080 Data Acquisition System display of microfiche. Microfiche is a minia- Engineering Information Processing Sys-
designed to help speed the computation and ture microfilm sheet, about the size of tem) , is designed to simulate, within a
reporting of laboratory test results. A an IBM card, containing up to 90 individual computer, the operation of part or all of a
prototype installed in a hospital in Ohio page images. Each image can be mag- chemical or petroleum plant to find the
records, on punched cards, readings from nified larger than original document size. best operating methods.
automated chemistry instruments. The IBM's customer engineers are being equipped Scientists at Walter Reed Army Institute
cards are then processed by a computer and with these Document Viewers so that they of Research in Washington, are using an
the results made quickly available to the can use microfilmed diagrams and main- SBC information retrieval system in search
examining physician. The system can moni- tenance instructions instead of bulky printed of a cure for new forms of malaria, a dis-
tor a number of different tests simultane- service manuals. The American Broad- ease which is a growing problem among
ously, and eliminates much of the time- casting Company used an IBM Document armed forces in Vietnam. The SBC system
consuming clerical work performed by medi- Viewer on television to illustrate the permits researchers to probe the effects
cal technologists. highlights of the launch, flight, space walk of over 100,000 chemical compounds to find
In May, IBM announced a new industry and re-entry of the Gemini 9 space flight. those which may be effective against this
information service which provides disease.
computer-generated market research reports
based upon electronic banks of data.
One data bank contains Dun and Bradstreet
statistics on some 390,000 businesses
throughout the country. The other data
bank, now being compiled by IBM, will be a
detailed model of the national industrial
economy, tracing the flow of goods and
services among manufacturers. With the in-
formation stored in these two files, IBM
computers can provide to customers market
descriptions and analyses that have been
largely unavailable until now and at a cost
within reach of smaller businesses. Right: The decision to widen this highway was
based, in part, on information contained in Service
IBM began to market DATATEXT during
Bureau Corporation reports that help highway
1966. DATATEXT is a text-editing capability engineers determine areas for road improvement
that allows a number of customers at dif- or relocation.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Office Products Division
Has Excellent Year

===== PAGE 15 =====
The Office Products Division's sales of
electric typewriters, dictation equipment,
Magnetic Tape SELECTRIC Typewriters
and related supplies were greater in 1966
than at any point in its history. To meet
this continuing demand, late last year the
Office Products Division announced
plans for a new manufacturing and engi-
neering facility in Austin, Texas. The
new plant will supplement the division's
manufacturing facility in Lexington,
Kentucky, which was svibstantially expanded
last year.
Two products in the composing field
were introduced in September to provide
a fast, economical means of high-quality,
direct-impression typesetting. Called the
IBM SELECTRIC Composer and the IBM
Magnetic Tape SELECTRIC Composer, they
utilize the single element typing prin-
ciple of the IBM SELECTRIC Typewriter intro-
duced in 1961. Both machines have the
ability to calculate spacing between words to
produce copy with straight right- as well
as left-hand margins.
The Composers incorporate a unique
proportional spacing system and the flexibil-
ity of interchangeable printing elements.
This allows the operator to quickly switch
from one style or size of type to another. ^ ^ . ^ i i > gmt
Over 50 type styles are available.
Using the technology employed in the
popular IBM Magnetic Tape SELECTRIC
Typewriter, introduced in 1964, the mag-
netic tape version of the Composer re-
cords all letters, numbers, and punctuation
marks on magnetic tape as the operator
types the original copy. The operator enters
format instructions through a console
unit. Camera-ready copy is then automati-
cally produced at a speed of 14 characters
per second on a modified SELECTRIC type-
writer in the desired format.
The machines are expected to find wide
use with commercial printers and firms
having "in house" reproduction or publish-
ing departments producing brochures,
catalogs, manuals or bulletins.
Left: The unique stationary carriage of IBM's
SELECTRIC typewriter has made it particularly use-
ful in shipboard applications. The Danish Navy,
for instance, has equipped the radio rooms on 50
of its ships with this IBM product.
Right: A System/360 customer processes
production records on more than 130,000 dairy
cows through his computer to generate infor-
mation that helps determine how feeding, culling
and breeding changes can improve yield and
quality.

===== PAGE 16 =====
A Brazilian landowner is
interviewed as part of a census of
all rural property in that nation
last year. The IBM Brazil service
bureau processed data on
approximately 30,000,000
punched cards to complete this
major contract.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Another Growth Year Overseas The Company's international business, con- grammers, in cooperation with their counter-
ducted by the IBM World Trade Corpo- parts in the United States, helped develop
ration, continued to expand last year. At application programs for such processes as
year's end. World Trade had more than road visibility computations for highway
69,000 employees at work in 331 sales of- design, installment loan processing for
fices, 223 service bureaus and datacenters, banks, and wage and equipment accounting
16 manufacturing plants, six development for construction companies.
laboratories and other facilities in 103
countries in all parts of the globe.
Since World Trade markets and services
the same products abroad as the domestic
SRA Continues Sales Growth
organization does in the United States,
the Company's worldwide manufacturing Science Research Associates, Inc., another
and development operations are closely wholly owned subsidiary of IBM, showed
interrelated. For example, a World Trade continued progress in 1966. The Chicago-
laboratory in Germany is responsible for all based company publishes instructional
engineering activity on one of the Sys- materials, learning systems, guidance mate-
tem/ 360 models which is manufactured in rials and educational and psychological
Germany, Canada, Japan, Italy and the tests for schools, government and industry.
United States. To speed engineering im- Some of SRA'S best-known products used
provements into the System/360 manufac- in schools include the Reading Laboratory®
Series, the Basic Reading Series and the
turing process, the Company now pre-
Greater Cleveland Mathematics Program.
pares most engineering drawings with both
metric and inch dimensioning. These Last year, SRA added to its operations
drawings, along with bills of material and in the educational area by including adult
other documents, are sent, on microfilm and special education, college, junior col-
or magnetic tape, to every location involved lege, and pre-school departments. Editorial
with the product. offices in New York City and Palo Alto,
World Trade's sales are as diverse as the California, and four regional sales offices,
international complex of industries, were opened.
governments and educational institutions it The Rodman Job Corps Center in New
serves. During the year. System/360's were Bedford, Massachusetts, which is admin-
installed at each of a major oil company's fa- istered by SRA for the Federal Government's
cilities in 15 countries. Large-scale com- Office of Economic Opportunity, gradu-
puters were installed in 1966 in a Japanese ated more than 150 students during 1966.
utility association to simulate Eastern The young men were trained in a range
Japan's long-range power schedules, and of office skills and are qualified to work in
jobs ranging from clerk to computer pro-
in a service bureau of the Canadian govern-
grammer.
ment in Ottawa to perform statistical ap-
plications and provide management infor-
mation for many government departments.
A System/360 is helping solve high en-
ergy physics and other basic research prob-
lems at a United Kingdom laboratory.
Large computers are also performing re-
search in many technical disciplines at
British and Canadian universities.
Punched card equipment, IBM's primary
product line before the development of
computers, was used by a number of World
Trade customers during 1966 for such
tasks as tabulating Lesotho's first modern
census, registering voters in El Salvador
and compiling statistics for the Pakistan gov-
ernment.
Customer support activity was intensified
during 1966 throughout World Trade's
area. In Europe, multi-national teams of sys-
tem planners and analysts worked on sev-
eral advanced pilot projects with customers
in the United Kingdom, Belgium, France,
Switzerland and Italy. World Trade pro-

===== PAGE 18 =====
f''
7 f.-K/ U id' v-v^
KV,
p. ' '-M
ar^i^^y^-

===== PAGE 19 =====
Below : Medical technician operates an
experimental blood cell separator developed
jointly by IBM and the National Cancer Institute.
By separating whole blood into its major
components on a sterile, continuous, automated
basis, the machine may contribute significantly
to biomedical research.

===== PAGE 20 =====
New Technologies During 1966, scientists and engineers in the computations which formerly took hours, or
Company's research and development facil- even days, on the most powerful com-
ities continued to explore many avenues puters. Based on a mathematical technique
of science and technology to extend the use- called the Cooley-Tukey algorithm, the
fulness of existing products and to develop program provides a simplified method of
areas for future growth. analyzing complex wave patterns gen-
The Solid Logic Technology (SLT) cir- erated in studies of geophysics, astronomy,
cuits used in today's System/360 function in electroencephalograms, image process-
a few billionths of a second. The SLT cir- ing and many other scientific applications.
cuits are made by assembling minute elec- This program was included among a
tronic elements, such as silicon chip number of scientific programs announced
transistors and diodes the size of a pinhead, last year for System/360.
onto conductive patterns printed on a Important progress has been made in ap-
ceramic base of thumbnail size. plying the Company's capabilities to the
Engineers and scientists in IBM have field of medicine. Several products are in the
developed experimental monolithic circuits advanced development stage and are be-
that will function faster than high-per- ing tested in cooperation with hospitals and
formance circuits currently in production. medical teaching institutions.
They have also produced monolithic de- For example, an experimental Clinical
vices containing more than 50 circuits, all Decision Support System is being tested as a
infused into, rather than assembled on, a tool to help physicians diagnose adult ill-
single tiny chip of silicon. Many of the same nesses. This system is designed to store clini-
manufacturing techniques that are used cal knowledge electronically and provide
to produce the transistors and diodes for SLT the doctor with the facts he needs in the care
circuits are also used to make these mono- and treatment of a patient. Through a ter-
lithic circuits—namely photographing a tiny minal, a doctor can communicate with the
screen or mask onto the chip and diffusing computer to gain access to pertinent
desired elements into the exposed areas. medical knowledge. This also helps him to
The Company's continuing advances in keep abreast of the rapidly progressing
monolithic circuit development hold prom- medical field.
ise for even more powerful computers. IBM engineers are also working with
A new mathematical technique, devised leading medical institutions to develop an
by Company scientists, provides a scien- experimental electrocardiogram (ECG)
tific approach to the design of optical lenses system which allows ECG'S to be recorded
used in special applications such as the and then read and analyzed by a computer.
fabrication of silicon chips into transistors Eventually, physicians hope to enter all
and diodes and into monolithic circuits. ECG'S directly into computers and give car-
With traditional design methods, it was dif- diologists more time for direct patient
ficult to include all the desired properties care and medical research.
of a lens in the design equation.
IBM research scientists have reported a
number of significant developments in their
continuing investigation of lasers. These
are devices which emit intense, coherent
beams of amplified light. For the first
time, scientists were able to "scan" with a
laser beam by controlling the direction
of the beam with a small electrical signal
before it leaves the laser rather than
deflecting the beam after it leaves the laser.
This conserves more of the output power of
the laser for useful purposes. A system that
allows laser beams to be separated into their
color components was also developed.
The results of these laser studies may lead to
computer memories in which the data is
stored in optical, rather than magnetic, form,
and may be useful in optical displays and
in the fabrication of microminiature circuits.
Company research scientists also de-
veloped a computer program which makes it
possible to complete in minutes certain

===== PAGE 21 =====
Above: Thousands of computer programs are
distributed to customers from a network
of IBM program distribution centers around the
world. This young lady is labeling a magnetic
tape, containing a program, to be shipped from
the center in Hawthorne, New York.

===== PAGE 22 =====
space and Defense
During 1966, IBM people were deeply
involved in advancing the nation's space and
defense programs and the Company was
awarded some substantial government con-
tracts to continue work in these areas.
In the manned space program the em-
phasis is now on Apollo/Saturn, after the
completion of the successful Gemini flights.
Gemini astronauts, using a 59-pound IBM
computer in the spacecraft, and supported
by IBM computers in the National Aero-
nautics and Space Administration's Manned
Spacecraft Center at Houston, Texas, made
several dramatic achievements during the
year. Among them were the first rendezvous
and docking with another space vehicle,
and the first re-entry and splashdown com-
pletely controlled by the IBM computer
on board the spacecraft. During each of the
Gemini flights the Real-Time Computer
Complex at Houston, which was developed
and is operated by IBM for NASA, performed
over 40 billion calculations a day, using
programs, written by IBM people, which
contained more than 400,000 individ-
ual computer instructions for each mission.
The Apollo spacecraft Saturn rocket con-
figuration is designed to carry a three-man
crew of American astronauts to a moon land-
ing. To achieve the computation capacity
required during these flights, the five IBM
7094 computers in the computer com-
plex at Houston are being replaced with the
more powerful System/360's. NASA has
awarded IBM an additional five-year contract
to continue work on this program.
In addition to this ground support, IBM
is responsible for providing the major flight
control stage for the Apollo/Saturn launch
vehicle—the Instrument Unit. This three-
foot-high ring, 68 feet in circumference, is
mounted between the three-stage Saturn
rocket and the Apollo spacecraft configura-
tion. IBM people at the Company's Hunts-
ville, Alabama, facility are assembling and
testing this unit which contains nearly and operate the ground equipment required
60 separate instrument packages, made by for pre-launch and launch operations.
IBM and other manufacturers. This In- IBM people and systems at NASA's God-
strument Unit will guide the Saturn V vehi- dard Spaceflight Center in Greenbelt,
cle into an orbit around the earth, control Maryland, also support the flights of un-
the checkout of all vehicle systems, and manned scientific satellites.
stabilize the vehicle during the necessary A number of orders have been received
docking maneuvers while on the way to for the Company's new, small, extremely
the moon. rugged computers, called System/4 Pi. Several
In 1966, three of these IBM-assembled Sat- models of these computers are being devel-
urn Instrument Units were successfully oped for use in missiles, helicopters, ad- Above: Solid Logic Technology modules, the basic
flight tested. IBM engineers and technicians vanced aircraft and orbiting space stations. units of System/3 60 electronics, are prepared
for another step in the production process. These
at Cape Kennedy, Florida, conduct the Other models can be used for tactical com-
devices are now manufactured at two IBM
precise tests and complex analyses required mand posts and other ground-based military locations in the United States and one location
to certify the instrument unit for flight requirements. in France.

===== PAGE 23 =====
A militarized version of IBM's 1311 Random Organization Suhsidiafies:
Access Disk Memory has been selected by
the U. S. Navy to be used in a fire control sys- To conduct its business in the United IBM World Trade Corporation: conducts
tem for Poseidon, an advanced version of States and overseas, the Company is organ- IBM's business outside the United States
the Polaris under-sea missile. ized into 11 operating divisions and three directly or through subsidiaries.
Computer programs for testing the effec- wholly owned subsidiaries. Within its area Science Research Associates, Inc.: devel-
tiveness of Air Force weapons are being of responsibility, each of these segments ops and publishes a full range of modern
developed. The programs are designed to be is charged with satisfying today's customer learning and guidance materials and intelli-
used during war games to evaluate the requirements and planning and devel- gence, aptitude and achievement tests for
effectiveness of conventional weapons in oping future products and services. schools, government and industry.
typical tactical situations. A data proc- The Service Bureau Corporation: offers to
Divisions:
essing system was devised and installed to American business and industry facilities
improve the flow of supplies to U. S. Advanced Systems Development: ex- for rapid and economical data processing as
Marines in Vietnam. At the Marine supply plores product and business areas new to the well as computer programming services
headquarters on Okinawa this system helps Company, establishes their potential value, on a daily, weekly, monthly or specific one-
analyze logistical problems so as to speed the and then transfers responsibility for further job basis.
flow of vital materials to our fighting development, manufacturing, and market-
forces. The Company also continued devel- ing activity to another operating group.
opment of a data handling and commu- Components: develops, manufactures and
nications system to be used by army field purchases electronic components used in
commanders to control tactical military IBM data processing systems.
situations. Data Processing: markets IBM's full line of
At Rockville, Maryland, the Company has information-handling systems and equip-
established a Center for Exploratory Stud- ment through offices across the United States.
ies. At this Center, a group of IBM scientists Federal Systems: concentrates on ad-
is conducting long-range technical and vanced technology and special systems for
economic studies of advanced applications the grovind-based, airborne and space-
for computers that will meet Federal Gov- borne information-handling and control
ernment needs. needs of the U. S. Government.
Field Engineering: provides maintenance
and related services for the Company's
domestic information-handling systems and
IBM People equipment.
Information Records (formerly Sup-
Help Company Grow
plies Division): develops, manufactures and
To offer employees opportunities for job markets data processing cards and paper
enlargement and career advancement, forms, magnetic storage media and other con-
the Company continued its emphasis on sumable products used in data processing
training and education. During 1966 systems. Its product line also includes systems
many IBM people participated in voluntary and services for the storage, retrieval,
education programs, on-the-job training distribution and display of business records.
and in the formal training programs for Office Products: develops, manufactures
salesmen, customer engineers and systems and markets electric typewriters, mag-
engineers. Approximately 14,000,000 stu- netic tape typewriters, dictation equipment,
dent hours were devoted to these educa- cold-type composing equipment, and re-
tion programs throughout the world. lated supplies.
The creativity of IBM people contributed Real Estate and Construction: arranges
materially to the Company's progress. For for the design, construction, purchase, or
example, scientists and engineers in IBM's lease of new Company facilities, including
domestic and foreign locations produced the planning and location of sites.
more than 1,500 inventions during the year. Research: develops the advanced con-
IBM employees around the world received cepts, technologies, devices and com-
over $2,500,000 in awards for some puter applications to provide new and better
29,000 suggestions which were adopted solutions to customers' information-han-
during the year. These awards were based dling requirements in the future.
on total estimated annual net savings to Systems Development: develops, through
the Company of approximately $12,000,000. a worldwide effort, IBM's regular product line
The highest award presented to an indi- of information-handling systems and equip-
vidual employee last year was for $22,555, ment, and provides programming support.
earned by a systems technician in Endi- Systems Manufacturing: manufactures
Right: The hand of a young child points to a
cott for improving a System/360 manufac- equipment and systems in the IBM data mathematics problem as it appears on the display
turing operation. processing product line. console of IBM's 1500 Instructional System.

===== PAGE 24 =====
The Evolution of a Product

===== PAGE 25 =====
The Evolution of a Product At the Brentwood Elementary School in East and he is motivated to proceed.
Palo Alto, California, the Company, last IBM researchers, looking beyond pro-
year, installed an IBM i^oo Instructional grammed instruction, believed an entirely
System—the first such instructional system new method of individualizing instruction
to he used as an integral part of a school could be developed by using a computer.
classroom. The purpose of this installation The computer clearly has great speed, large
is to explore the value of the system for storage and unique logical capabilities. It
use in teaching first graders arithmetic and can modify its operation on the basis of in-
reading. The story of its development is formation fed it, and it can act on ele-
told below. ments of the response, not just on the entire
response.
The time was ripe for in-depth explora-
tion of the idea. Educators were becoming
concerned about problems such as the
knowledge explosion and teacher shortage,
Every day at 9 a.m., six-year-old Gary and whether new techniques could be de-
Pounds and a group of his friends enter a veloped to help schools meet these problems.
neat wooden building on the playground of In this atmosphere IBM researchers were
the Brentwood Elementary School in East encouraged to develop preliminary com-
Palo Alto, California, near the Stanford Uni- puter programs. Such courses as stenotyping
versity campus. At a word from the teacher and statistics were early targets. In York-
Gary slips into one of 16 booths and seats town, New York, a group of youngsters re-
himself in front of an unusual console, con- ceived computer-assisted instruction in
sisting of a film projector screen, a familiar arithmetic. Other researchers at the same
television-like screen which displays his time set up a program with the New York
name on the bottom, and a typewriter key- Board of Cooperative Educational Services
board. Gary places earphones on his head of North Westchester, based on the IBM
and then touches a spot on the TV screen 7090 data processing system. This experi-
with the tip of a special "light sensing" pen ment was in the use of economic games,
which electronically communicates with a problem-solving technique which was then
a computer. In a flash numbers and simple coming into prominence.
pictures appear on the screen and a teacher's While these experiments were going on.
voice livens the earphones with instructions. Company planners were studying the new
Gary has begun his lesson in arithmetic. market opportunities presented by computer-
For the next 30 minutes he will be entirely assisted instruction. In 1964, the Company
on his own in this unique computer ter- set up the Instructional Systems Develop-
minal booth, absorbed with answering tape ment Department to explore the application
recorded questions about material dis- and development of new technology in ad-
played on the screen, and encouraged by the vanced educational systems. The program,
teacher's recorded voice. When he "signs which had begun in research, grew into a
off," he will have left recorded on mag- collaborative study involving more than a
netic tape a complete and permanent record dozen groups in universities and other edu-
of how well he responded. cational institutions.
Gary is one of a hundred first graders who In the meantime, at Stanford University,
this year started to take part in a Stanford Professors Patrick Suppes and Richard
University experiment that some authorities Atkinson decided to test computer-assisted
believe could contribute to a dramatic instruction on elementary school pupils,
change in education. A form of computer- and, as a first step. Professor Suppes called
assisted instruction (CAI), the Brentwood for various components from a number
project is the first full-fledged attempt to of companies. IBM's Advanced Systems De-
determine whether elementary school chil- velopment Division contributed an ex-
dren can efficiently learn two of their R's perimental instructional display terminal
(reading and arithmetic) with the help of equipped with the "light sensing" pen,
high-speed computers. which was installed and tried out with a
This story of computer-assisted instruc- group of children.
tion in IBM begins in 1958. At that time in- The results were so encouraging that Pro-
terest was high in programmed instruction. fessor Suppes, with a grant from the U. S.
Studies had shown early in the 1950's Office of Education, decided to test a com-
that learning of complex tasks can be broken plete system to see how it would work
down into simple steps. As each step is with children over an extended period of
successfully completed, the individual stu- time.
dent is rewarded and hence reinforced, IBM began designing a general purpose

===== PAGE 26 =====
instructional system—the 1500 system— parts of the country to encourage develop-
that could be made available to a number of ment of necessary curricula, and for further
educators. One requirement, for instance, validation of the system.
was for the system to accommodate at least The Company also is pursuing computer-
16 students, making sure each would get assisted instruction in a number of other
his answers immediately after he responded promising directions with educators and stu-
to a question. The system, as finally devel- dents at all levels of learning.
oped, can accommodate 32 students. While computer-assisted instruction ap-
Since many educators believe that chil- pears to hold great promise, it is still too
dren learn best when they can use several early to make claims about its effects on the
different senses, such as hearing, vision, and future of education. This remains to be
perhaps touch, the system had to call into demonstrated.
play the comfortable use of these senses. The
1500 Instructional System provides a type-
writer keyboard on which a child can press
keys and see the response. He can also use
the "light sensing" pen which communicates
with the computer through the face of the
cathode ray tube on contact.
The system also had to be easy to operate
and to program. IBM specialists developed
the Coursewriter "language," a set of sym-
bols and simple words which allows the
author to communicate readily with the com-
puter in preparing course material.
The first IBM 1500 Instructional System
Above: Brentwood School student uses the
was completed in July 1966, and installed at
"light sensing" pen to register his answer to a
Brentwood. Additional systems will be question that has been asked by the IBM
made available to other educators in various Instructional System.

===== PAGE 27 =====
These write-offs were charged against
reserves provided out of prior and current
Gross income from worldwide IBM opera- years' earnings, or to cost of sales.
tions amounted to $4,247,706,091 last Listed here are the new facilities and ex-
year, an increase of $674,881,372 over the pansions that were completed or under con-
$3,572,824,719 total for 1965. struction during the year. Also in 1966, the
During 1966, sales, service and rentals of Company occupied a number of newly leased
data processing machines and systems ac- or purchased facilities.
counted for approximately 76% of gross in-
come, other regular products and services United States Purpose Square Feet
accounted for 20%, while special products
and services for United States space, de- * Boulder, Colorado Manufacturing
and Development 767,000
fense and other agencies contributed 4%.
* Raleigh, North Carolina Manufacturing
and Development 605,000
*t Rochester, Minnesota Manufacturing
and Development 325,000
t San Jose, California Manufacturing
Earnings
and Development 319,000
The Company's earnings before taxes *t Lexington, Kentucky Manufacturing 269,000
totaled $1,054,130,192, which was $94,227,- * Gaithersburg, Maryland Development and
Administration 245,000
702 more than the $959,902,490 earned
*t Kingston, New York Manufacturing 230,000
in 1965.
t East Fishkill, New York Manufacturing 153,000
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes
t Dayton, New Jersey Developm-ent and
were $528,000,000 in 1966, an increase of Administration 144,000
$45,000,000 over the $483,000,000 in 1965. * Albany, New York Marketing 106,000
IBM's earnings after taxes were $526,- *t Burlington, Vermont Manufacturing 100,000
130,192, or $49,227,702 more than the t Huntsville, Alabama Development 46,000
$476,902,490 earned in 1965. *+ Yorktown Heights, Developmmt 15,000
New York
IBM's earnings in 1966 equaled $9.66 a
share on the 54,448,200 shares of capital
stock outstanding on December 31, 1966.
Foreign Purpose Square Feet
This compares with $9.03 a share earned on
the 52,837,371 shares outstanding at the * Mainz, West Germany Manufacturing 256,000
end of 1965, adjusted for the 50% stock t Mainz, West Germany Manufacturing 152,000
split effected May 3, 1966. * Vimercate, Italy Manufacturing 325,000
t Amsterdam, Manufacturing 304,000
The Netherlands
* Montpellier, France Manufacturing 230,000
Fujisawa, Japan Manufacturing 222,000
Dividends t Toronto, Canada A dministration 206,000
Madrid, Spain Administration 156,000
Cash dividends totaling $230,671,168
* Orleans, France A dministration 136,000
were paid to stockholders in 1966 com-
Diegem, Belgium Manufacturing and
pared with $210,767,482 in the previous Administration 101,000
year. t Hursley, England Development 91,000
The regular quarterly cash dividend t Greenock, Scotland Manufacturing 56,000
payable March 10, 1967, at the rate of $1.10 t Uithoorn, Development 45,000
per share, will be IBM's two hundred and The Netherlands
eighth consecutive quarterly cash dividend.
* Completed in ig66
^Expansion of Existing Facilities
Capital Expenditures
Annual Meeting of Stockholders
During 1966, IBM's growing business, to-
gether with its need to replace obsolete This year's stockholders' meeting will be held
equipment, required a worldwide invest- at the Coliseum in New York City on Monday,
ment of $1,584,475,383 in plant, rental April 24,1967. On or about March 15, stock-
machines and other property. holders will be mailed a notice of the meeting,
Retirements amounted to $329,468,988, proxy statement, and proxy ballot.
covering obsolete and dismantled equip-
ment, as well as rental machines sold which
previously were under lease to customers.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Gross Income from Sales, Service and Rentals Net Earnings I and Income Taxes
1957
1958
1959 1959
1960 1960
1961 1961
1962 1962
1963 1963
1964 1964
1965 1965
1966 1966
In millions of dollars O 1,500 2,000 2,500 3,000 3,500 4,000 hi millions of dollars O 625 875
Capital Expenditures
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
In millions of dollars o 600 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600

===== PAGE 29 =====
To the Stockholders of
International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
financial statements present fairly the financial
position of International Business Machines
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December ^i,
ic)66, the results of their operations and the
supplementary information on funds for the year,
in conformity with generally accepted account-
ing principles applied on a basis consistent with
that of the previous year. Also, in our opinion,
the comparative statement of operations for
the past ten years presents fairly the financial
information included therein. Our examination
of these statements was made in accordance
with generally accepted auditing standards and
accordingly included such tests of the account-
ing records and such other auditing procedures
as we
24> Price Waterhouse & Co.
Neto York, New York
Above: IBM directors Bruce Bromley, left, and
Walker G. Buckner, right, with IBM host Lawrence
Holzer, examine automated component test-
ing equipment during a visit to the Company's
East Fishkill, New York, plant.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings and
Retained Earnings for the year ended December 3
1966 1965
Gross Incmne from Sales, Service and 'Rentals $ 4,247,706,091 3,572,824,719
Cost of sales, service and rentals, operating expenses, and
development and engineering expense, exclusive of
depreciation 2,561,352,334 2,104,072,904
Depreciation of plant, rental machines and other property 640,619,779 523,318,662
Amortization of goodwill 3,000,000 3,000,000
Interest on indebtedness 23,845,143 18,140,970
3,228,817,256 2,648,532,536
1,018,888,835 924,292,183
Other income, principally interest 35,241,357 35,610,307
Net earnings before income taxes 1,054,130,192 959,902,490
Provision for U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes, estimated 528,000,000 483,000,000
Net Earnings for the year 526,130,192 476,902,490
1,715,921,031 1,449,786,023
Retained Earnings, January i..
2,242,051,223 1,926,688,513
Total
230,671,168 210,767,482
Cash dividends
2,011,380,055 1,715,921,031
Retained Earnings, December 31.
31 The notes on pages to are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31
Assets 1966 1965
Current Assets/
Cash 237,582,373 195,612,788
Marketable securities, valued at lower of cost or market. 276,643,191 470,134,453
Notes and accounts receivable... less reserve:
1966, $13,308,559; 1965, $10,247,869 802,994,883 573,681,473
Inventories, valued at lower of average cost or market. . 190,200,665 146,674,350
Prepaid insurance, taxes, etc 32,602,5 18 28,619,446
1,540,023,630 1,414,722,5 10
Othr Investments and Sundry Assets 14,117,751 I 5,668,294
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property ...at cost:
Land 64,945,186 57,035,983
Buildings 519,537,104 446,926,652
Factory, laboratory and office equipment 862,819,065 7 16,350,609
1,447,301,355 1,220,3 13,244
Less: Accumulated depreciation 612,923,505 499,175,432
834,377,850 721,137,812
Rental machines and parts 4,359,665,979 3,331,647,695
Less: Accumulated depreciation 2,095,425,215 1,749,276,507
2,264,240,764 1,582,371,188
3,098,618,614 2,303,509,000
Patents and Goodwill ... less amortization 8,018,656 11,018,656
4,660,778,65 I $ 3,744,918,460
32 The notes on pages 34 to 37 are an i\ part of this statement.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Liabilities and Capital 1966 1965
Current Liabilities:
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes ... estimated 279,052,708 296,094,920
Accounts payable and accruals 504,918,718 398,024,428
Loans payable 32,955,790 21,950,314
816,927,216 $ y 16,069,662
Deferred Income Taxes 33,903,674 28,431,841
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 28,446,006 23,419,775
Long-Term Indebtedness 458,871,518 398,849,604
Capital Stock... Par Value $5.00 Per Share 1,311,250,182 862,226,547
Authorized: 55,898,438 shares
Issued and outstanding: 54,448,200 shares at December 31,
1966; 35,224,914 shares at December 31, 1965
Retained Earnings 2,011,380,055 1,715,921,031
3,322,630,237 2,578,147,578
4,660,778,651 $ 3,744,918,460

===== PAGE 33 =====
Consolidated Statement of Source and Application
of Funds for the year ended December 31:
1966 1965
Ne/: current assets at beginning of year. 698,652,848 899,938,243
Funds provided during year:
Net earnings 526,130,192 476,902,490
Depreciation and other charges against net earnings which
did not require the current outlay of funds 732,530,987 574,047,144
Total from operations 1,258,661,179 1,050,949,634
Sale of capital stock under employee plans 75,734,472 55,829,098
Sale of capital stock under rights offering 371,556,341
Increase in long-term indebtedness 60,021,914 28,420,068
Miscellaneous 3,283,365 (3,988,440)
Total funds provided during year 1,769,257,271 1,131,210,360
Total funds 2,467,910,119 2,031,148,603
Funds applied during year:
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property.... 1,584,475,383 1,165,907,756
Less: Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized in
rental machines 70,332,846 44,179,483
1,514,142,537 1,121,728,273
Cash dividends 230,671,168 210,767,482
Total funds applied during year 1,744,813,705 1,332,495,755
Net current assets at end of year $ 723,096,414 $ 698,652,848
NoUs to
Consolidated Financial Statements
Principles of Consolidation:
The consolidated financial statements include
the accounts of International Business
Machines Corporation and its domestic and
foreign subsidiary companies.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Foreign Operations: December 31, 1966 December 31, 1963
Net assets employed in foreign operations are summarized
below together with a comparison of gross income and net
earnings from foreign operations.
Current assets $ 558,313,428 525,131,947
Current liabilities 370,866,965 287,268,181
Net current assets 187,446,463 237,863,766
Other investments and sundry assets 13,807,859 12,011,204
Plant, rental machines and other property, net. 1,000,543,835 757,181,225
Goodwill, less amortization 8,018,655 11,018,655
1,209,816,812 1,018,074,850
Deferred income taxes 13,411,691 13,595,803
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans
in certain countries 28,446,006 23,419,775
Long-term indebtedness 205,371,518 139,599,604
247,229,215 176,615,182
Net assets employed in foreign operations. $ 962,587,597 $ 841,459,668
Year 1966 Year 1965
Gross income from sales, service and rentals in foreign countries. 1,3 18,099,225 $ 1,085,505,751
Net earnings from foreign operations 174,605,772 $ 144,026,330
Foreign assets and liabilities have been ness have been converted at approximate ing during the year, except depreciation
converted to U.S. dollars at year-end exchange rates prevailing when acquired or incurred. which has been calculated at the approxi-
rates, except that plant, rental machines Income and expense items have been con- mate rates prevailing when the proper-
and other property and long-term indebted- verted at average rates of exchange prevail- ties were acquired.
Long-Term Indebtedness: December 31, 1966 December 31, 1963
International Business Machines Corporation...
payable to The Prudential Insurance Company of America:
3 V2 % promissory note, due in annual installments,
January i, 1968 to 1985 $ 103,500,000 $ 109,250,000
promissory note, due in annual installments.
May I, 1969 to 1988 100,000,000 100,000,000
3^/2% promissory notes, due December i, 1971 50,000,000 50,000,000
253,500,000 259,250,000
Subsidiaries operating in foreign countries... average interest
rate—5.9% 205,371,518 139,599,604
Consolidated long-term indebtedness $ 458,871,518 $ 398,849,604

===== PAGE 35 =====
Above: These junior high school boys are
among millions of students across the United
States who use educational materials produced
36 by Science Research Associates, Inc.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Consolidated long-term indebtedness at Employees purchased 255,104 shares in IBM received $3,319,189 for the 31,589
December 31,1966 was payable: 1966 under the two plans, for which shares purchased during 1966, which amount
$72,415,283 was paid to IBM and credited was credited to the capital stock account.
1968 $ 31,829,904 to the capital stock account. At December The 222,215 shares under option at Decem-
1969 25,632,542 31, 1966, 614,869 shares were reserved for ber 31,1966 were held by 352 executives
1970 27,386,442 sale under the 1966 Plan. at option prices ranging from $78.97 to
1971 93,552,568 Numbers of shares reflect the 50% stock $372.50 per share. These prices represent
1972 25,901,736 split effected May 3, 1966. 100% of the market price on the date of
1973-1977 126,314,466 each grant from 1957 to date, adjusted for
1978-1988 128,253,860 stock dividends and splits that occurred
$458,871,518 Stock Option Plans: after the dates on which the options were
Last April, stockholders approved the granted. The 116,203 shares available for
continuation of a Stock Option Plan for offi- future option grants were all under the
Renegotiation: cers and other key employees and author- 1966 Plan.
The Consolidated Statement of Earnings ized up to 300,000 shares of unissued capital
and Retained Earnings includes estimated stock to be reserved from time to time over
provision for renegotiation of U.S. Govern- a five-year period for purposes of the 1966
ment contracts. Stock Option Plan. To date, 150,000 shares
have been reserved by the Board of Direc-
tors. Both figures reflect the 50% stock split
Capital Stock Offering:
effected May 3, 1966. Under the 1966 Plan,
In 1966, 1,324,136 shares of capital stock as under the 1956 and 1961 Plans, options
were offered to stockholders at a subscription may be granted for the purchase of IBM's un-
price of $285 for each new share, at the rate issued capital stock at 100% of the market
of one additional share for each forty shares price on the day the option is granted.
held at the close of business on May 27, Options granted after January i, 1964
1966. The subscription offer expired on June run for a five-year term and purchases can
21, 1966, and subscriptions through the ex- only be made in installments commencing
ercise of rights totaled 99.5% of the offering. one year after the date of grant and extend-
The remaining shares were sold through the ing over a period of the next four years. In Memoriam:
underwriters, a group of investment firms. Options granted prior to January i, 1964
This equity financing, required for an- under earlier Plans have a term of ten years
ticipated capital expenditures and as work- and purchases can only be made in install-
ing capital, resulted in net proceeds to the ments commencing two years after the date
Company of $371,556,341 after payment of of grant and extending over a period of
underwriting commissions and other the next eight years.
expenses. In accordance with the Plans, the num-
ber of shares that may be purchased and the
price per share are adjusted for any stock
Stock Purchase Plan for IBM Employees:
dividends and splits effected after the option
At the April annual meeting, stockholders is granted.
adopted the IBM Employees 1966 Stock The following summary reflects the trans-
Purchase Plan and authorized up to 1,350,- actions for the Plans during 1966:
000 shares of unissued capital stock to be
Number of Shares
reserved from time to time over a five-year
period for purposes of the Plan. To date, Available
Under Option for Option
750,000 shares have been reserved by the Balance, It is with deep regret that your directors
Board of Directors. January i, 1966 224,267 173,782 report the death, on December ^i, 1^66, of
The 1966 Plan became effective on July i, Options granted • • • 33,797 (33,797) Gilbert H. Scribner, who served with
1966 following the expiration of the 1961 Options terminated. . . . ( 4,260) 635 distinction on the Board of Directors for
Plan. Under the 1966 Plan, employees on the Options exercised • . . (31,589) — over sixteen years.
annual offering date, each July i, who are
Expired under the
not participants in a Stock Option Plan, may
1961 Plan ( 174,417)
purchase IBM's unissued capital stock one -
Reserved under the
share at a time through payroll deductions
not exceeding 10% of their compensation. 1966 Plan — 150,000
Balance,
The price an employee pays for a share of
stock is equal to 85% of the market price on December 31, 1966 . . . 222,215 116,203
the annual offering date or on the date he Exercisable at
has accumulated enough money to buy the December 31, 1966 • • . 80,436
share—whichever price is lower.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Ten-Year Comparative Consolidated Statement of Operations:
1966 1965 1964
Gross income from sales, service and rentals 4,247,706,091 3,572,824,719 3,239,359,581
Net earnings before income taxes 1,054,130,192 959,902,490 897,159,766
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 528,000,000 483,000,000 466,000,000
Net earnings for the year 526,1 30,192 476,902,490 431,159,766
Per share (see note) ($9.66) ($ 9.03) ($8.20)
Cash dividends 230,671,168 210,767,482 165,964,452
Per share (see note) ($ 4-30) ($4-Oo) ($3-17)
Stock dividends and splits*:
Per cent *50% "25%
Shares issued 17,645,985 6,990,140
Shares sold 1,577,301 176,655 136,297
At end of year:
Number of shares outstanding 54,448,200 35,224,914 35,048,259
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property. $ 3,098,618,614 2,303,509,000 1,747,924,457
Long-term indebtedness $ 458,871,518 398,849,604 370,429,536
Net current assets $ 723,096,414 698,652,848 899,938,243
Number of stockholders 328,427 275,650 266,086
38 Note: all stock dividends and splits.

===== PAGE 38 =====
1963 1962 1961 i960 1959 1958 1957
2,862,732,727 2,591,268,572 2,202,465,009 1,816,882,259 1 1,613,190,005 1,417,509,220 1,202,593,650
777,828,404 652,437,641 546,494,784 438,394,058 1 380,274,438 323,773,735 238,761,528
413,573,426 347,711,296 292,375,666 233,478,553 ; 204,213,043 171,567,138 128,264,084
364,254,978 304,726,345 254,119,118 204,915,505 1 176,061,395 152,206,597 110,497,444
($6.96) ($ 5-84) ($4-89) (I 3.96) ($ 3-41) ($2.97) ($2.16)
118,039,971 82,956,805 63,299,895 54,898,842 1 37,096,865 30,764,992 25,407,174
($2.27) ($ 1.60) ($ 1.23) ($ 1.07) ($ .72) ($ .60) ($ .50)
-'^-50% 2^/2% & *50% 21/2% *IOO%
9,204,515 6,402,610 288,737 5,251,119
114,212 116,604 94,794 43,401 44,769 7,826 1,050,223
27,921,822 27,807,610 27,691,006 18,391,697 18,348,296 11,849,023 11,552,460
1,585,581,367 1,533,966,694 1,418,588,690 1,203,566,459 1,038,771,643 961,768,177 865,209,865
549,590,394 590,666,327 585,129,747 537,661,364 520,034,035 503,938,781 432,094,153
885,435,060 681,217,864 519,474,419 468,751,477 447,276,137 406,773,064 308,173,380
233,761 230,235 197,509 127,478 108,915 66,667 57,330

===== PAGE 39 =====
Board of Directors: Bruce Bromley Partner, Cravath. Swaine & Moore, attorneys at law.
Walker G. Buckner Senior Partner, Buckner & Co., investment hankers.
Paul L. Davies Senior Partner, Lehman Brothers, investment bankers.
Sherman M. Fairchild Chairman of the Executive Committee, Pairchild Camera & Instrument Corporation,
and Chairman of the Board, Fairchild Hiller Corporation.
John Clifford Folger Chairman of the Board, Folger, Nolan, Fleming & Co., Incorporated,
investment bankers.
George L. Hinman Senior Partner, Hinman. Howard & Kattell, attorneys at law.
Amory Houghton, Jr Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works.
Grayson Kirk President, Columbia University.
Louis H. LaMotte Retired Executive Vice President.
T. Vincent Learson President.
William H. Moore Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company.
Emanuel R. Piore Vice President and Chief Scientist.
Lyle M. Spencer President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Arthur K. Watson Vice Chairman of the Board, and
Chairman of the Board of IBM World Trade Corporation.
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman of the Board.
Albert L. Williams Chairman of the Executive Committee.
Executive Committee: Albert L. Williams, Chairman
Sherman M. Fairchild T. Vincent Learson
John Clifford Folger Arthur K. Watson
Louis H. LaMotte Thomas J.Watson, Jr.
Officers: Thomas J. Watson, Jr Chairman of the Board
T. Vincent Learson President
Arthur K. Watson Vice Chairman of the Board
Richard H. Bullen Vice President and Group Executive
Frank T. Cary Vice President and Group Executive
Eugene G. Fubini Vice President and Group Executive
Warren C. Hume Vice President and Group Executive
Gilbert E, Jones Vice President and Group Executive
McLain B. Smith Vice President and Group Executive
Emanuel R. Piore Vice President and Chief Scientist
James W Birkenstock Vice President
Kenneth N. Davis, Jr Vice President and Treasurer
Young R Dawkins Vice President
Lincoln L. Horn Vice President
Robert W Hubner Vice President
Paul W Knaplund Vice President
Burke Marshall Vice President and General Counsel
W Wallace McDowell Vice President
Dean R. McKay Vice President
John C. McPherson Vice President
H. Wisner Miller, Jr Vice President
Gordon M. Moodie Vice President
John R. Opel Vice President
Walter J. Pedicord Vice President
Orland M. Scott Vice President
Paul J. Rizzo Controller
Henry W Trimble, Jr Secretary
Hilary A. Faw, Jr Assistant Treasurer
George H. Ryniker Assistant Treasurer
Harry M. Sibley Assistant Treasurer
Karl W Kaufmann Assistant Controller
John H. Grady Assistant Secretary
Division and Subsidiary Chief Executives: George B. Beitzel President, Data Processing Division
Charles E. Branscomb President, Systems Development Division
Robert B. Dunlop President, Systems Manufacturing Division
Bob O. Evans President, Federal Systems Division
John W Gibson President, Components Division
Gilbert E. Jones President, IBM World Trade Corporation
Herbert R. Keith President, The Service Bureau Corporation
Frank H. McCracken President, Information Records Division
H. Wisner Miller, Jr President, Real Estate and Construction Division
Gordon M. Moodie President, Office Products Division
John M. Norton General Manager, Advanced Systems Development Division
Orland M. Scott President, Field Engineering Division
Lyle M. Spencer President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Gardiner L. Tucker Director of Research

===== PAGE 40 =====


===== PAGE 41 =====
U, U.' i < t, j^t .J. J, J. -t J-UUu U. 'X'-Ci-Cvt, -.L.-L ;.C U ^ I Z^
-tlu iX-L'i J - .W ^ -(.J-i. . - J. --
.aj. W t WW U'.* U. ,v - ^ ' . ^
ii——''vv,,''..''.... •• ••(( II..** LL II'' II**
-C ., J ^ fe i »< ».
--..At. . w a J :. f, 1.1 I" '
t - # •• fj
• t*
t!,U» -UL - C ^L —( Li.i. .C -L -M-U .LvU..Lu.L•L ^L .L. M .L -I' t tv U'.w-r-;^.* t . - t I .
l^f tfl • -f if Hi- HitHt f m m t f^ lftlt1T1T]iT;n^;i
I , • * 1 S' • * • . : ! i • t ' i M t I t : ! ; • •
.. - ssim. T.^ +-W.
g; M . ^ - I- ... „ J , , -.Vi,,. , II . , .. • ._ I I- Ull , _ . • r 1+ ( t > • I ' t'
x f c cp .4 Jt. UlU
--v.- ^ ,1. V . ^ t M,:. % t •1'-;
t if-
. <• V
Z..\ij W-U; V—': V i^'- t>. w .w .
<9>_yI..-.-'J-' -»-.• t -v. • . t.'^. vf • v.;
J L'.-.'.L I.
—' I 1
• ••r-'-'r-'«•-•-«>« v-V-r '
-.iTl,. -'-r.i-- .— ^ ^
v-V^V W V.-, V
• -r «"r- - ...V >—
t .V.^U'—U V v- .---.v- '
I rut I M I I t I t t I t I 1 I L < J. wM-'^^'- — . .i J t !
I'll.'.
1 i • I, t . u ; . , . ,
«• • - ' •• • '
J
•»• ' • —'
--•»•«« -IP m-' -r-w -m I
I tt t. J I.U-U.U.LU I.' .L.-^J W iW a>JfcW.L. 1.. ^W.
;MH..LHt U L« Hi I I 11 I ( » i Ht i t I t U ij Lt J U I I M M rj 11 ' M I Mi U. L {^ti-ii——-
: I M i . W A I s s / -* at^ifr'= M
u M. t^j.XJ.-w=J^B^T a Wa W-V.'. - •
V'i '-.Wv.'* I - r -- -.U^. '
nj u, ft J la. J a 11J J J J J J J a J J J J .u J. V - ' -• ' ""!" . I I w •
' v..
— v -^ - .-.-www
i. ^ I-' —•
pi , I • • [ t i
—• -r--—— yr
i t • Lilij'M
mj ( l-M ri H t M •« i f • ^ ti «u
1 t f l»t ; • !„.' ' • ' ; f V i i • 5 t.! J t I f ( • » ' • I • I • I . C1 < Ti m L^! C^s-^
H! I i ^ t y i W . w . . w - v ' C ' C ^ C - X ^ ^' » *' t m >' i---
IU t-t.:-' I' «
MM I • J t f '
• I - < jrLi'44 tfT'^MT "'"Trn^ " ^ T? i it^;
! f ^ ' 1 • • I ! 1 —
I i :
^ llJl"
J M -ti-L. t t ^ t Hf ... I n : •< - . t'T'r J,
^V
'!!) t A' » ' f '
( rn « > 1 'J t-rrt -
I u I} • •' I! • M t n t n i 1 n i o • i n i> <»
r rn
t n vtJ-u f . »- i — —
• I'll f. U I U XO C h^ 0_L»-U.( »'Jn.:f ^' I
Fm » rTf i"*» ' CCt- u. jrr: ^ i; ' ! I t ' 1
')I•" "»• * •'n ^»"r riTTi • > j »..-'• — I. , 1 ! M ! I 1 !
fFrZfdZ KCTi
! I i n » 1 I ; I
M M • ! < ^X! U ^'
'0 ((r|-frr f^Hnternationaj Btrdn^s m-f IT1 '
-h'fi-^rj
"iT) •"Tu'rr.'i i M . . ' i .
"1 It' I t i 1 i i » t
-r-rK~n ( O
li! n
"t '
rrn*i rt j ~n IT iTu : „ V •r.'i'M^'i'n'il' n i'T • f
-hi-ri-iH
""njcr;" "oro
44H "r ' fn n ' i • ti LJ — t' • .'.» »» ..•a. o-l^,-,
MCC'.v
• -I ••»' -in - *i 'j.: _ . .i J _ i-'.-i, L J . 1,.. i