

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents :
1 Highlights of the Year
2 Letter to Stockholders:
Management comments on the year's
financial results and the outlook for continuing
growth in IBM's business
6 More Productivity
20 Stockholder Information
21 Financial Report
40 IBM Organization
43 Progress Report on other 1981 developments
involving IBM employees and business programs
48 Directors and Officers
IBM's Operations :
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are
in the field of information-handling systems,
equipment and services to solve the increasingly
complex problems of business, government,
science, space exploration, defense, education,
medicine and many other areas of human activity.
IBM's products include data processing machines
and systems, telecommunications systems and
products, information distributors, office systems,
typewriters, copiers, educational and testing
materials, and related supplies and services. Most
products are both leased and sold through IBM's
worldwide marketing organizations.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Annual Report International Business Mpchines
for the year ended December 31,1981 Corporation
(Dollars in millions
except per share amounts)
Highlights of the year:
Gross income from sales, rentals and services. 29,070 26,213
Earnings before income taxes 5,988 5.897
U.S. Federal and non-US. income taxes 2,680
i.335-
Net earnings 3.308 3,562
Per share $ 6.10
$5-63
Cash dividends paid 2,008
Per share $ 3.44
Investment in plant, rental machines and
other property 6,845
Return on stockholders' equity 19.1%
At end of year:
Total assets 29,586 $ 26,703
Net investment in plant, rental machines and
other property 17,278 $ 15,017
Working capital $ 3.399
2,983
Long-term debt 2,669 $ 2,099
Stockholders' equity 18,161 $ 16,453
Number of employees 354.936 341,279
Number of stockholders 742,162 737,230
Cover: IBM's teclinological leadership in computer
circuit packaging is reflected in this 24 x 28-inch copper
wiring plane in the IBM 3081, the company's most
powerful system. Part of the densest circuit packaging yet
reported in the industry, the plane is one of 20 layers
in a /s-inch-thick printed circuit board that contains more
than a kilometer of wire interconnections. Each board
helps connect 225,000 logic circuits and more than 1.5
million memory bits of information. By shortening
the distance electrical signals must travel, the high-density
packaging contributes to improved internal perform-
ance of the IBM 3081. The packaging design also enhances
reliability and reduces production costs.
M.idiloi iiltl,l t ^.iiiiii.^

===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders:
John R.Opcl, President Lind Cliicf E.xccutive Officer/FrankT. Gary, Chairman of the Board
1981 was a good year for IBM. Orders and product shipments were strong, although earnings
were down because of currency translation. Major capital expenditures over the past several
years have established a foundation for long-term growth.
Worldwide net earnings for the year ended December 31, 1981, were $3,308 million,
compared with $3,562 million for 1980. Net earnings were $5.63 per share on 587.8 million
shares, the average number outstanding during the period, compared with $6.10 per share
on 583.5 million shares, the average number outstanding in 1980.
Consolidated gross income was $29,070 million, compared with $26,213 million in 1980.
Net earnings for the quarter ended December 31, 1981, were $1,081 million, or $1.83
per share, compared with $1,233 million, or $2.11 per share, for the same period in 1980. Gross
income was $8,993 million, compared with $7,805 million for the fourth quarter of 1980.
Operations outside the United States during 1981, included in consolidated results, yielded
net earnings of $1,239 million, compared with $1,902 million in 1980. Gross income from
those operations was $13,982 million, compared with $13,787 million in the prior year.
The stronger U. S. dollar, relative to other major currencies during 1981, had a severe impact
on period-to-period comparisons of financial results. While the translation of assets and

===== PAGE 5 =====
liabilities resulted in exchange gains, the translation of income and expenses of the non-U. S.
operations had a significantly adverse effect on results.
The translation of assets and liabilities recorded or denominated in currencies other than
the U. S. dollar was the principal factor in the exchange gains of $94 million and $24 million in
1981 and 1980 respectively. The fourth quarter of 1981 results include exchange losses of $4
million compared with gains of $36 million in the final quarter of 1980. These gains and losses
from translation are principally unrealized.
The effects of currency rate changes on business volumes, pricing and other operating
decisions which have an impact on income and expenses of non-U. S. operations cannot be quanti-
fied. However, disregarding these economic effects, it is estimated that if the currency rates used
to translate income and expense had remained the same as in 1980, gross income would have been
over $2 billion greater and consolidated net earnings would have been over $600 million greater.
Gross income from sales of data processing equipment for the year and the fourth quarter
increased substantially over the corresponding periods of 1980. Gross income from all sales,
including data processing equipment, increased 18.2% over 1980. Gross income from rentals and
services increased 5.7%, with services increasing 20.4% and rentals decreasing .3% over the
corresponding 1980 amounts.
Incoming orders and shipments of data processing equipment were at high levels and showed
strong growth rates during 1981, with the year-end backlog of orders somewhat higher than
in the previous year.
Large Growth Potential
World economies have an almost universal need for greater productivity as they struggle with
inflation and intensifying competition. As a consequence, we find a large and growing demand
for information products-a demand that from every indication will be long-term. The major part
of IBM's growth will continue to come from our traditional business base-the application of data
processing and office products in business, science, government and education.
Basic Business Goals
In order to take full advantage of the demand potential, we have three basic IBM goals for the 1980s:
First, it is our goal to be the product leader-to excel in technology, reliability, maintain-
ability and value. We want to be foremost in quality, providing machines and systems that are as
defect-free as they can be made.
Second, it is our goal to be the most efficient company in our industry-not only in manu-
facturing, but also in the development, marketing and service of our products.
Third, it is our goal to compete in, and grow with, the information industry in all its aspects.
Ensuring Quality
Product quality has played a key role in the company's success over the years. Today, because
of our more advanced products, our larger product volumes, and the variety of ways customers
are installing and using our systems, the quality challenge is more imposing than ever. To help
meet it, we have established a corporate function to coordinate all our quality programs
worldwide. Emphasis in every part of the business will be on doing each job right the first time.
Productivity in IBM Operations
As we have so often in the past, we are making many changes and adopting new methods
to improve our own productivity-in the laboratories and plants and throughout our marketing,
distribution, service and administration. We expect productivity gains from a realignment of our
worldwide marketing structures. The three U. S. divisions that marketed larger computers,
smaller computers and office products have been consolidated into two new divisions that sell
our full line of information systems and products. A single marketing team can now supply all of
a customer's product needs. We are making a similar realignment outside the U. S., where

===== PAGE 6 =====
we had a separate division marketing small computers and office products in 20 countries. That
activity has now been consolidated into our IBM World Trade subsidiaries.
We are also realigning U. S. plant and laboratory operations into two new groups to take
better advantage of new technology and improve long-range planning.
At the plant/laboratory locations, we continue to increase our use of advanced
technology in the manufacture, design and testing of products. Further savings are coming from
computer-controlled automation of IBM warehouses and from new tools and techniques that
simplify the installation and service of our products.
New Products
To aid customer productivity, we brought significant new products and technology to
market in 1981 across the full range of our product line. Through technical innovation, we con-
tinued to lower the cost of information processing and also offered customers a broader set
of price/performance options. Among the new product developments:
...We began shipping the industry's most advanced computer disk file, the IBM 3380, which
uses "thin film" technology to read or write data at 3 million characters a second.
...A new model of our most powerful computer, the IBM 3081, has internal speeds up to
40% faster than previous models. The logic and memory packaging in the IBM 3081 is the
densest available in the industry.
...The IBM Personal Computer can be used in many productive ways in the office or at home.
...The IBM Datamaster is the company's newest low-priced computer designed specifically for busi-
ness applications. It is easy to use and can handle text processing as well as data processing.
...Several new models of the IBM 4300 and IBM 8100 processors simplify system use and
give customers added flexibility in choosing the computing power and memory size that will best
meet their processing needs.
...The IBM Displaywriter, an office system widely installed in many countries, now has greater
file processing and communications capabilities, enabling it to handle many more office tasks.
...A new IBM voice message distribution system utilizing the IBM Series/i permits people
using telephones to record, play back, change and forward messages to one or several persons,
under computer control.
Higher-Volume Marketing
These and other IBM products are doing more and more work at lower cost, stimulating
new uses of our equipment. As a result, we are dealing with larger numbers of customers and
prospective customers. In response to that, we are introducing new marketing approaches to
make our products more readily available. Twenty-one IBM retail product centers for office
machines and small systems were opened in 1981, bringing the total to 33. Of those, 13 are
in the U. S. and 20 in other countries.
We began marketing the IBM Personal Computer through Sears, Roebuck and Co.'s
business systems stores, as well as through some 190 ComputerLand Corp. dealers in the U. S. and
Canada. We also began marketing through distributors, authorizing seven U. S. firms to sell
certain smaller IBM products, including a computer display terminal and a keyboard printer.
In addition, we expanded sales to other manufacturers, offering an IBM disk file assembly
for integration into systems marketed by the other firms.
Expansion to Meet Demand
In expanding our capacity to meet record demand and to grow with the industry, we have
completed close to 11 million square feet of new plant and laboratory buildings in 11 countries

===== PAGE 7 =====
over the past three years. Counting leased faciUties, we have added more than 22 milUon square
feet of plant and laboratory space in the past five years-one-third of our current total.
As these facilities come on line, we are realizing an increasing return from our sizable capital
spending for greater productive capacity That capacity is helping us ship products in quantities
of hundreds of thousands each year. We are currently building nearly 4 million square feet of
additional plant and laboratory space worldwide.
Justice Department Ends Lawsuit
On January 8, 1982, the United States Justice Department withdrew its 13-year-old antitrust
lawsuit against IBM. After a comprehensive review of the case, the department's Antitrust Divi-
sion concluded that the case was "without merit and should be dismissed." In withdrawing
the suit, the Justice Department in effect affirmed the rulings of many Federal courts and what
we have contended from the start: Our industry is healthy and competitive, and IBM has not
violated the antitrust laws. The case was burdensome, and while we never doubted its ultimate
outcome, we are happy that it will not have to drag on through the courts for years to come.
Our General Counsel, Nick Katzenbach, has led our legal affairs over the entire period,
and we are very indebted to him. Our deep thanks also go to the many IBM people who worked
long and hard on IBM's defense, and to Tom Barr and his Cravath, Swaine & Moore litigation
team that so ably represented the company throughout these stressful times.
In June, 1981, the United States Supreme Court let stand a lower court's directed verdict
in favor of IBM in an antitrust suit filed by the Memorex Corporation.
Since 1968, a total of 25 antitrust suits have been brought against IBM, none of which has
been substantiated in the courts. Two remain on appeal from court decisions that favored IBM.
The European Economic Community continues to seek modification of certain IBM
business practices in the Common Market area, tiowever, most of the practices involved have
already been held by U. S. courts to be legitimate competition.
The difficult period of U. S. antitrust litigation is now behind us. We are gratified that
so much opinion, in and out of the courts, has supported our conviction that IBM has achieved
its business success through fair and ethical competition.
D. R. McKay to Retire
On February 28, 1982, Dean R. McKay will retire as IBM Senior Vice President after nearly
36 years of service, more than 20 of those years as a corporate officer. Few executives have
contributed to IBM in so many varied ways. For the last several years, he has been a member of
the Board of Directors and the Corporate Office. His broad understanding of the business,
knowledge of international issues and astute judgment have made him a most valuable asset to
the company.
For the Future
In meeting the competitive tests of a changing industry, IBM's most important asset is
the tremendous resource of skill and experience represented by IBM men and women in the many
countries where we operate. We are deeply grateful for their hard work, creativity and dedi-
cation. Our people are IBM's best assurance of quality-in our products and service and in all else
we do to take advantage of the opportunities that promise so much in the years ahead.
January 26, 1982, by order of the Board of Directors
Frank T. Cary (y John R. Opel
Chairman of the Board President and Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 8 =====
W JL w X X W T y • • •
At a time when world economies are straining for answers to high inflation and lapsing output,
the demand for information products continues to outrun supply.
Why? The answer lies in the world's need for more productivity. Manufacturers seek
lower costs on the p ant floor, while improving quality and maintainir g schedules. Governments
at all levels search for ways to serve many needs while staying within limited bud'^ets.
Farmers strive for healthier crops and livestock while making optimum use of feeds, fuel
and equipment. Smr ll businessmen find they must tighten manu^ement of inventory, sales and
receivables to match increased competition.
For these and many other needs, information prof'ucts can be an important part of the
answer. They are almost infinitely adapiitble to tach user's reouirements. Th^y are availrble
at many price and performance options. Users can choose sm. 11 or larg^ files for quick stoiuge
and retrieval of information...versatile low-cost computers easy to set up and use...oJice
systems with many features that simplify and speed paperwork...powerful computers for com-
plex tasks... communications systems that let widely separated parts of an organization
operate smoothly as part of the whole.
And the cost of all this capability, per unit of work, keeps going down.
Because information products meet many needs so well, they are appearing everywhere-in the
warehouse, in the emergency room, at the sales counter, in the classroom, at the secretary's
desk, in the fire station, in the home, outside the bank and in the town hall. And no limit to
this multiplying use throughout society appears in sight.
Pictured here and on the following pages are some of the ways that IBM customers, as well as
IBM's own operations, are finding more productive ways to get their work done.
The Government of Brazil uses an IBM computing
center to process its census of 123 million pp-^-le, as well
as to study he best economic uses' e,
transportation, communications and otner national
resources.
IB IBP IPWP SBI Wi WK WB Wt^ M IW BB ' BBMi
IBM ip8i Annual Report

===== PAGE 9 =====
A large furniture manufacturer in Japan uses IBM
computer display terminals to offer customers different
color combinations of office decor. In addition,
the company has installed more than 175 IBM color or
monochrome display units for greater productivity in
purchasing, inventory, production control and
personnel, as well as office planning.
/H
IBM computer graphics are used by a large
U. S. mining corporation to evaluate the potential
of exploration opportunities.
•M.
Field surveys of animal and plant life for use in land An agricultural association in Reims, France,
development are among many government applications of uses an IBM System/38 computer to help more than 4,000
IBM computers that serve the growing population of farmers and wine producers, such as this champagne-
Australia's Northern Territory. producing family business, efficiently manage all phases of
their accounting.
The Los Angeles County Fire Department fights fires
and meets other emergencies with the use of IBM computers
for optimum dispatching of 700 vehicles and 2,200
uniformed employees from 128 fire stations.
® i"
7 IBM ip 81 Annual Report

===== PAGE 10 =====
More User Productivity,
A large Pacific Coast aircraft manufacturer has installed
25 IBM Displaywriters for more productive text editing and
administrative typing in its advanced technology, com-
puter services, legal and other departments.

===== PAGE 11 =====
A Brooklyn hospital is one of many hundreds in the
U. S. and other countries around the world that use IBM
computers for greater operational productivity. IBM
systems aid doctors and staffs in departments such as
pediatrics, pharmacy, radiology and physical therapy and
also meet many administrative needs.
A wheat cooperative serving 56,000 farmers in Alberta,
Canada, operates a network of IBM computers installed at
more than 120 grain elevators for daily inventory and
sales accounting. Farmers use the system to obtain up-to-
the-minute information on wheat prices.

===== PAGE 12 =====
The International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva,
Switzerland, uses an IBM computer to keep records that help
trace more than 500,000 "boat people." Hundreds of letters
are processed in order to help restore communication and
reunite separated families in all parts of the world.

===== PAGE 13 =====
More Productive New Products...
Business applications, such as accounts receivable
and word processing, can be run on the new IBM Personal
Computer, as well as applications covering personal
finance and video educational games for the family. Pro-
grams are available on magnetic tape or diskette (below).
New IBM computers and office machines
offer customers greater productivity across the
company's product line-from IBM's lowest-
cost system, the IBM Personal Computer, to the
most powerful computer the company has yet
developed, the IBM 3081 Model Group K.
With internal operating speeds up to
40% faster than current processors, the new IBM
3081 model provides as many as 32 million
characters of main memory and 24 channels for
the transfer of data.
The large-scale IBM 3081 processors feature
very dense packaging of circuits, shortening
the electrical paths. IBM design engineers have
eliminated an entire level of computer packaging-
the circuit card-permitting direct connection
of logic and memory chip modules to larger
circuit "boards."
Also introduced were new models of the keyboard. It can be connected through adapters Intermediate Processor Models
IBM 3033 processors, now serving as the power- to any color or black and white television set. The IBM significantly broadened its intermediate-
ful central computers for hundreds of large computer can be expanded to include its own size computer offerings during the year. Four
customer installations. Enhancing the perform- display, an 8o-character-per-second printer with new IBM 4300 processors were introduced. In-
ance of the IBM 3033 and IBM 3081 processors 12 different type styles, and storage tape cas- cluded were an entry-level IBM 4321 and a more
are more advanced versions of IBM's large-system settes and diskettes. The system can generate and powerful IBM 4331 processor. Simplified control
control programs-Multiple Virtual Storage and display charts, graphs, text and numerical infor- programming for those two systems reduces
Virtual Machine/370. mation in a wide variety of hues on a standard the data processing skills needed to install and
color television set. operate them. In addition, new and enhanced
Advanced Disk File Shipped Program packages developed for the IBM models of the more powerful IBM 4341 computer
Customers began receiving delivery of the Personal Computer by several other firms cover give customers broader flexibility in choosing
IBM 3380 disk file-high-capacity storage for large selected business, education and home appli- the price/performance options best suited to their
IBM systems. The file's "thin film" head can cations. IBM has also established a software pub- processing needs.
read and write data at 3 million characters a lishing department that will publish programs Three new IBM 8100 processor models were
second-the first device in a commercial product written for the IBM Personal Computer by IBM introduced, providing up to 60% more process-
to achieve such a rate. The IBM 3380 also employees working on their own time, as ing power and twice the memory size previously
offers the largest information capacity per disk well as programs from independent software firms available. They help users expand distributed
file yet delivered in the industry-2.5 billion and other authors. processing networks more productively.
characters.
Compared with the industry's first disk Low-Cost Business System Enhanced Displaywriter System
file, the IBM RAM AC 305 of the mid-1950s, the Another small computer introduced in IBM has significantly enhanced the low-cost
new IBM 3380 stores 6,000 times as much 1981-the IBM System/23 Datamaster-is the IBM Displaywriter system, which has been in-
information per square inch of disk surface and company's lowest-priced system developed specifi- stalled by thousands of customers in the U. S. and
retrieves data 37 times faster, at i/i50th cally for commercial use. It is designed to 36 other countries. The addition of information
the cost per character. handle a broad variety of business applications file processing plus communications pro-
for small firms or departments of large gramming support makes the IBM Displaywriter a
Personal Computer Introduced corporations. Customers may combine data multifunction text processing terminal for
The company's smallest system-the new processing-including payroll, billing and a wide range of office applications. Customers
IBM Personal Computer-is an easy-to-use system inventory-with word processing, such as indi- can merge text and arithmetic data to produce
designed for business, school and home use. It vidualized business correspondence. A basic correspondence, statistical summaries and
sells for as little as $1,565. A starter system includes Datamaster installation consists of a computer management reports.
a powerful microprocessor with a movable workstation, diskette storage and printer.
The system's BASIC language compatibility with
the larger IBM System/34 offers customers
a convenient growth path in data processing.

===== PAGE 14 =====
More Productive New Products...
Office Systems Communication the computer's disk storage, then transmitted New Analytical Instruments
Enhancements of the IBM Display writer, to be heard by one or more other persons as speci- Three high-performance analytical instru-
IBM 5520 administrative system and IBM 8100 fied by the originator. The computer reconverts ments were introduced by IBM Instruments, Inc.,
information system are part of a planned series of digital pulses into voice tones recognizable as the in 1981. A microprocessor-controlled liquid
measures to provide communications support originator's. ADS will call repeatedly until a chromatograph helps chemists separate complex
across different IBM office systems offerings. busy line is free and also permit senders to learn mixtures into component parts. It has many
Operators of the different systems will now have if and when messages are received. Through applications in research, quality control and envi-
much greater flexibility in handling tasks involv- security passwords, users can control access to ronmental analysis. A new infrared spectrometer
ing both word processing and data processing. confidential messages. is designed to analyze gases, liquids and solids
The system originated in the Research for a broad range of applications in the phar-
High-Performance Office Products Division, where prototypes have been operational maceutical, food, petrochemical, semiconductor
An improved model of the IBM 6670 infor- for several years. and biomedical fields. A new spectrometer with
mation distributor permits data to be sent and a superconducting magnet enables chemists
received at more than 1,000 characters a second. Products for Specific Needs to study the molecular structure of hydrocarbons
The IBM 6670 combines electronic commu- A variety of new IBM computer products and other compounds. It has applications
nication with high-speed laser printing for both are designed to meet the requirements of different in the chemical and petroleum industries and in
word processing and computing applications. industries. For example, the IBM 4700 banking biomedical research.
The new Model II prints multiple sets of docu- system offers higher performance than previous
ments more efficiently and simplifies use of products, compact size and user-comfort design
the machine's many type styles. for greater productivity in the processing of
The quality of IBM "Selectric" typewriters savings, loan, checking and other transactions.
was demonstrated at the 1981 Intersteno Equipment includes displays, keyboards, magnetic
Congress in Mannheim, Germany, where IBM stripe reader/encoder, printers and commu-
'Selectrics" were used by the new world cham- nication controller-all compatible with existing
pions in both speed and perfection typing. IBM teller banking products.
The gold medal championship speed was 683 A new tabletop IBM printer for use with
characters per minute, while the top perfection the IBM System/34 computer can print more than
rate was 591 characters per minute. The 10,000 graphic symbols, or ideographs, of the
silver and bronze medalists also used IBM Japanese and Chinese languages.
'Selectrics." Of the 330 contestants from 16
countries, more than 80% used IBM "Selectrics."
Phone Message Productivity
A telephone voice distribution system that Users of IBM's new voice message distribution
system employ standard touch-key telephones to give a
uses a computer to process spoken messages was
wide variety of message-handling instructions.
introduced during the year. The IBM Audio
Distribution System (ADS) enables people using a New IBM "Synergetix" furniture can be quickly
telephone in widely different time zones to adjusted to convenient positions by users of computer
record, hear, change and transmit messages con- terminals and office systems. Other adjustable units
include a desk, tabletop extensions and upholstered chairs.
veniently to one or several other persons.
The furniture is offered in a variety of colors.
The system's many easy-to-use functions can
improve productivity for managers, professionals
and others who frequently communicate by
phone. For example, ADS permits distribution of
messages to predetermined lists of people.
Or, a user may send a voice message and specify
the date and time of its delivery. Each ADS-
an IBM Series/i computer with communications
adapters and software developed by IBM-can
serve up to 1,000 designated users. The system
connects to public or private telephone networks.
Through a standard telephone handset,
the user's voice message is recorded and placed in

===== PAGE 15 =====
Many features that simplify installation and operation
by first-time computer users are built into the new
IBM System/23 Datamaster. Eighty of the small business
systems were demonstrated at this IBM seminar for
customers and prospects in New Jersey.
Left: Key members of the design team discuss new
"extended architecture" they helped develop for the
large-scale IBM 3081 computer. Their design extension
permits direct addressing of 2 billion characters
of main memory, as well as a doubling-to more than
4,000-of the number of storage and input-output
devices that can be simultaneously linked to the system.

===== PAGE 16 =====
More Productive Marketing and Service
Toll-free telephone and mail sales of IBM office
machines and supplies increased by one-third in the U. S.
during 1981. Sizable telephone/mail sales gains were
also recorded in other countries where IBM employs such
marketing techniques-Australia, Canada, the
Netherlands, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
IBM announced a realignment of its marketing
structures in the U.S. and IBM World Trade coun-
tries in 1981 to permit more productive sale
and distribution of computers and office products.
The realignment facilitates the marketing of
a full line of products to a customer by one mar-
keting team (details, page 40).
IBM also continued to broaden and expand
its marketing channels, while finding productive
new ways to meet customer service needs.
Retail product centers for IBM office machines
and small computers were opened in 8 more
U. S. cities and 10 more outside the U. S. A total of
30 stores are now operating in such cities as
Baltimore, Boston, Brussels, Buenos Aires, Chicago,
London, Los Angeles, Paris, Philadelphia, San Fran-
cisco, Stockholm, Sydney and Washington, D.C.
The product centers, which complement IBM's
sales force, provide customers with a convenient
way to see and buy a wide range of IBM products,
supplies and services. The U. S. stores, for
example, offer demonstrations of the new IBM
System/23 Datamaster and the IBM Personal
Computer, as well as IBM typewriters, copiers and
dictation equipment. The product offerings vary
in countries outside the U. S.
Small product centers in three New York
City branches of The Chase Manhattan Bank were
opened in 1981-lBM's first sales outlets in bank
branches. Staffed by IBM specialists, the small
stores offer a selection of products sold at the
larger IBM centers.
Sales through other retailers were inaugu-
rated during the year. The new IBM Personal Com-
puter is being marketed through Sears, Roebuck
and Co.'s new business system centers now
open in five U. S. cities. It is also being sold by
more than 190 ComputerLand Corp. dealers in all
parts of the U. S. and Canada.
Marketing through distributors was
also begun in 1981 with the designation of seven
U. S. firms to distribute selected IBM products.
These authorized distributors sell the products of
other manufacturers as well. They offer custom-
ers configurations of equipment to meet particular
needs, technical support and special terms and
conditions. Being marketed in this way are an IBM
computer display terminal and a multiple-use
keyboard printer. These are relatively low-priced
products of the kind that distributors market
efficiently in large volumes.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Dominant red theme and pedestal spotlighting of
product demonstrations are design features of the new
IBM retail product centers now open in the US.
Sales to other manufacturers were also ini- that reduce costs and the time required for parts
tiated in 1981. The IBM 680 disk assembly, distribution, and (6) a toll-free telephone service
which stores 64 million characters on six 8-inch that permits U.S. customers using many IBM
disks, is being sold to other manufacturers program products or system control programs to
for integration into their own system offerings. obtain software information at any hour, seven
Greater service productivity is resulting from days a week.
a variety of IBM technical advances in 1981 and
recent years. These include (i) original design of
products for increased reliability and service-
ability, (2) better service tools and techniques such IBM is installing new communication centers in some
as the diagnostic "briefcase" computer carried 30 U. S. cities to improve productivity in answering
customer equipment service calls. The computer-assisted
by IBM personnel at customer sites, (3) a central diag-
radio dispatch system uses display screens to tell
nostic computer data bank that customers can
operators quickly which customer engineer can best be
reference through their own terminals, (4) emphasis assigned to meet a particular service need.
on "customer setup," permitting computer units
or entire systems to be installed with little need for
IBM assistance, (5) highly automated warehouses

===== PAGE 18 =====
More Productive Manufacturing...
The quality of thousands of computer circuit parts is
being ensured by advanced-technology IBM test systems IBM is now producing hundreds of thousands of computer
used in both design and production. In less than a input/output products worldwide each year. The newly
minute, this computer-controlled device can test a silicon announced IBM 3232 desktop printers shown coming
wafer with more than loo logic and memory chips off the line at the company's new Charlotte, N.C., plant can
that contain thousands of transistors. print up to 450 characters a second.
IBM's substantial investment in new facilities to IBM will start operations in a new 758,000-square- Premium on Quality
meet record worldwide demand is steadily foot facility in San Jose, Calif., with advanced IBM's continuing program to ensure product
raising output as new construction comes on line. processes to increase production of the IBM 3380 quality places increasing emphasis on automatic
Being incorporated into the new buildings are "thin film head" disk file and other new high- testing, exemplified by high-technology circuit
advanced-technology processes designed to ensure capacity disk files using the same technology. test operations at East Fishkill, N.Y. More than
product quality in all phases of development Scheduled for early 1982 startup is a 50 computer-controlled systems designed
and manufacture. second IBM manufacturing site in Italy-a 303,000- by IBM engineers are currently testing more than
square-foot plant at Santa Palomba. IBM Italy's 6,500 different computer circuit parts on pro-
High Construction Rate Vimercate plant has recently been enlarged by duction lines. Emphasis is also on testing new cir-
In 1981, IBM completed 4.5 million square 342,000 square feet, or 40%. The two plants pro- cuitry in the design stage, when detecting sources
feet of plant and laboratory space companywide, duce the bulk of Europe's requirements for small of error will prevent problems in production or
bringing the total for the last three years to IBM computers and office systems, as well as later during customer use. Memory testers at the
nearly 11 million square feet in 11 countries. The retail store systems and terminals. facility can check circuits at the rate of 100
production buildup is continuing, with close Counting leased space plus new con- million per second.
to 4 million square feet of new plants and labora- struction, IBM in the past five years has expanded Other advanced IBM circuit test facilities
tories now under construction in the U. S. and its manufacturing and laboratory facilities by are in Burlington, Vt., Manassas, Va., and
five other countries. In mid-1982, for example. more than 22 million square feet. Poughkeepsie, N.Y., as well as in Essonnes, France,
and Sindelfingen, Germany.

===== PAGE 19 =====
The productivity of IBM Japan's Yasu computer plant
is enhanced by an automated materials distribution
center that supplies production lines with more than
55,000 different parts.
Automated Warehouse Productivity
IBM manufacturing plants are saving
millions of dollars annually through operation of
highly automated materials distribution ware-
houses. The computer-controlled facilities supply
production lines with tens of thousands of
different parts as needed. Six such warehouses
are now operating in the U.S., Canada, France
and Japan. Under construction are warehouses at
IBM plants in Austin, Tex.; Boca Raton, Fla.; Char-
lotte, N.C.; Endicott, N.Y.; and Tucson, Ariz.; as
well as in Berlin, Germany; Bromont and Toronto,
Canada; Fujisawa, Japan; Greenock, Scotland;
and Jarfalla, Sweden. Similar IBM automated ware-
houses are used in France, Germany and the
U.S. for field distribution of IBM products
and replacement parts. For example, a 300,000-
square-foot IBM warehouse complex nearing
completion in Mechanicsburg, Pa., will store and
retrieve more than 90,000 different IBM
maintenance parts, speeding response to some
1.7 million field requests annually.
Controlling the warehouses are a variety of
IBM computers linked to multiple display units
and other terminals. Materials-handling and con-
trol equipment includes laser scanners, auto-
matic cranes, power-driven conveyors, driverless
transport systems and optical and magnetic
label-reading devices. Typical cost savings have
ranged from 20% to 40%, compared with
non-automated installations.
Supplementary Vendor Production
As record demand stretches capacity, IBM
plants and laboratories are using vendor resources
to help meet requirements. IBM produces sub-
stantially all its own advanced electronic devices.
However, in 1981 the company purchased
some 12,000 different types of electronic com-
ponents worldwide from more than 200
outside suppliers. IBM works closely with many
suppliers on quality control measures aimed
at preventing defects during production processes.
Overall, IBM plants and laboratories
purchase more than one-quarter million different
products, parts and assemblies from nearly
100,000 suppliers.

===== PAGE 20 =====
More Productive Technology...
Quality-testing of every magnetic disk used in IBM
computers is provided by advanced IBM-designed test
machines. This highly automated equipment has
special read/write heads that can detect imperfections
as minute as a few millionths of an inch in diameter.
An IBM-designed electron-beam machine is now
interconnecting circuits on as many as 2,000 high-density
computer chips per hour.This is the fastest production
rate reported for the lithographic electron beam process.
A beam narrower than 1 /io,oooth of an inch traces
intricate circuit patterns under computer control.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Experimental IBM computer memory chip (% inch
long) can store over z88,ooo bits of information-four
times as much, in only twice the area, as the densest
chips currently manufactured by IBM.The chip's three-
dimensional features are shown by different color
light rays, directed at low angles over its surface.
The 133 electronic chips on each 3V2-inch-square
substrate in the new IBM 3081 Model Group K computer
are part of the densest circuit packaging yet reported
in the industry Each such unit contains 10,000
logic circuits and 300,000 memory bits of information.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Stockholder Information...
The Annual Report is only one of the sources of infor-
mation available to IBM stockholders and the general public.
Stockholders regularly receive the following:
The Notice of Annual Meeting and Proxy Statement, IBM U.S. Retirement Plan Information,
mailed to each stockholder in March, describes which is given to all regular U.S. employees, in-
the items of business to be voted on at the Annual cludes the principal provisions of the plan, options
Meeting. The Proxy Statement also provides available, a list of the trustees and a summary
biographies of the Board's nominees for director, report on the plan's financial status.
their IBM shareholdings, their principal affiliations
with other companies or organizations, and IBM support programs
other information about the company. for education, community service, hospitals, the
arts and other areas are summarized in a report
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, to U.S. employees.
published in June, summarizes the activities
at the Annual Meeting, including the President's IBM Operations in South Africa
report on the company, questions and answers are summarized in a report of the company's
of general interest, and the results of voting on business in that country This report contains a
items of business. statement of personnel principles and practices
to which IBM adheres in doing business in
The following additional information may be obtained South Africa.
without charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations
IBM robotic machines are being test-marketed Department, yiy Fifth Avenue, New York, N. V. 10022: IBM Annual Report translations and recordings
for general-purpose applications in light manufacturing are available. The report is translated into
and assembly.The multifunction, programmable The Form lo-K Annual Report French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette
machines are designed for interactive computer control to the Securities and Exchange Commission pro- recording in English is available for the blind.
of industrial tasks that place a premium on speed,
vides further details on IBM's business, including a
accuracy and product quality.
list of subsidiaries not contained in the Annual Service for Deaf Stockholders.
Report. Form lo-K is available in April. The IBM Stockholder Relations Department has a
service that enables deaf stockholders who have
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report access to a teletypewriter to communicate with the
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is department's New York City office. Stockholders
available in May, August and November. who wish to use the service should dial the
IBM number (212) 223-3150 between 9 a.m. and
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting. 5 p.m.. New York time, on any weekday.
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet IBM Stock Transfer.
explains how stockholders may automatically The IBM Stockholder Relations Department,
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of addi- located at 717 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022,
tional shares of IBM stock, as well as make maintains the stockholder records, transfers
optional additional investments for that purpose. stock, and can answer questions regarding stock-
holders' accounts. Stockholders wishing to
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs transfer stock to someone else or to change the
in the United States are outlined in a document name on a stock certificate should contact the
that describes programs for women, minorities, department for instructions. Stock certificates are
handicapped persons, disabled veterans and valuable and should be safeguarded, since
Vietnam-era veterans, and also reviews IBM's replacement takes time and requires payment of
affirmative action efforts in the community. a surety bond premium by the stockholder.
If a stock certificate is lost, stolen or destroyed.
A separate service processor for the large IBM 3081 IBM Business Conduct Guidelines Stockholder Relations should be notified. Registered
computer constantly monitors the system's j,i 10,000 is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide mail should be used whenever stock is mailed.
logic circuits through 26,000 sensing points. Advanced describing the ethical and business principles that
software enables the service processor to identify
the company sets for the conduct of its business. The 1982 Annual Meeting
most error conditions automatically and recommend
corrective action. The booklet was first issued in 1961. The current of stockholders will be held in the Civic
edition has been translated into 15 languages. Auditorium, Jacksonville, Florida, on Monday,
April 26th, at 10 a.m. A notice of the meet-
ing, proxy statement, and proxy voting card will
be mailed to stockholders in late March.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Contents
21 Report of Management
Report of Independent Accountants
22 Earnings
23 Management Discussion-Results of Operations
24 Financial Position
25 Management Discussion-Financial Condition
26 Funds Flow
28 Stockholders' Equity
29 Notes to Financial Statements
37 Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
3 8 Supplemental Fi nanc ial I n format ion
Report of Management Report of
Independent Accountants
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into
the financial information presented in this numerous languages, are distributed to employees
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The throughout the world, and reemphasized
accompanying financial statements have been through internal programs to assure that they are To the Stockholders
prepared in conformity with generally accepted understood and followed. and Board of Directors of International
accounting principles, applying certain estimates Price Waterhouse, independent accoun- Business Machines Corporation
and judgments as required. tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial
IBM maintains an effective system of internal statements. Their accompanying report is based In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated
accounting control. It consists, in part, of on an examination conducted in accordance with financial statements, appearing on pages 22,
organizational arrangements with clearly defined generally accepted auditing standards, including 24, 26 and 28 through 37, present fairly the finan-
lines of responsibility and delegation of authority. a review of internal accounting controls and tests of cial position of International Business Machines
We believe this system provides reasonable accounting procedures and records. Corporation and its subsidiary companies at
assurance that transactions are executed in accor- The Audit Committee of the Board of Direc- December 31, 1981 and 1980, and the results of
dance with management authorization, and that tors is composed solely of outside directors, and their operations and changes in funds for the
they are appropriately recorded, in order to permit is responsible for recommending to the Board years 1981, 1980 and 1979, in conformity with
preparation of financial statements in conformity the independent accounting firm to be retained for generally accepted accounting principles con-
with generally accepted accounting principles the coming year, subject to stockholder approval. sistently applied. Also, in our opinion, the Five-Year
and to adequately safeguard, verify and maintain The Audit Committee meets periodically and Comparison of Selected Financial Data for 1977
accountability of assets. An important element privately with the independent accountants, with through 1981 presents fairly the financial informa-
of the system is an on-going internal audit program. our internal auditors, as well as with IBM manage- tion included therein. Our examinations of
To assure the effective administration of ment, to review accounting, auditing, internal these statements were made in accordance with
internal control, we carefully select and train our accounting controls and financial reporting matters. generally accepted auditing standards and accord-
employees, develop and disseminate written ingly included such tests of the accounting
policies and procedures, provide appropriate com- records and such other auditing procedures as we
munication channels, and foster an environ- considered necessary in the circumstances.
ment conducive to the effective functioning of John R.Opel
President and Chief Executive Officer
controls. We continue to believe that it is essential
65?-
for the company to conduct its business affairs
in accordance with the highest ethical standards, January 26,1982 Price Waterhouse
as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct New York, N.Y.
Dean R Phypers
Senior Vice President, Finance & Planning

===== PAGE 24 =====
1980 1979
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)
Gross Income: Sales S 12,901 10,91 9 $ 9,473
Rentals 10,839 10,869 10,069
Services 5»330 4,4^5 3,321
$ 29,070 26,213 $ 22,863
Cost of sales 4,197 3,267
Cost of rentals 4,152 3,771 3,491
Cost of services 2,543 1,655
Selling, development and engineering, and 2,181
general and administrative expenses. . . 11,027 9,205
Interest expense 407 10,324 141
273
23>450 20,746
5,620 5,467 5,104
Other income, principally interest 368 430 _„449
Earnings before income taxes 5,988 5,897 5,5 5 3
Provision for U.S. Federal and
non-U. S. income taxes 2,680 2,3 3 5 2,542
Net Earnings s 3,308 s 3,562 $ 3,011
Per share $ 5-63 $ 6.10 S vi6
Average number of shares outstanding:
1981-587,803,373
1980-583,516,764
1979-583,373,269

===== PAGE 25 =====
Results of Operations
Advances in technology continued at a rapid The rapid fall of major foreign currencies development, in high-technology manufacturing
pace, resulting in the delivery to users of greater against the U. S. dollar in late 1980 and in processes and equipment, and through effective
productivity at lower cost. This trend has led 1981 was unprecedented in recent times (graphs cost and expense controls, IBM intends to
to substantial expansion of the customer base, with illustrating these relationships appear on page 31). achieve these objectives and continue to offer new
many new users finding utility in IBM information While a strong dollar may benefit the United products to our customers at lower cost for
processing products. High levels of orders and States economy in many ways, the abruptness and similar or improved function. New methods of
product shipments, and expanding services con- magnitude of these currency changes had an marketing and maintenance have been initiated.
tinued worldwide in 1981 in spite of a general adverse effect on IBM's consolidated financial Quality programs are expected to yield significant
downturn in the economy. results. Had currency rates remained constant year- cost savings from more reliable products that
Total gross income increased 10.9% over to-year, and if the effects of currency rate changes require less service support.
1980. Gross income from U.S. operations was on business volumes, pricing and other operating The substantial investment in additional
$15,088 million, an increase of 21.4% over 1980. decisions were disregarded, it is estimated that capacity and the development of new channels of
Gross income from non-US. operations amounted consolidated gross income for 1981 would have distribution, have positioned the company to
to $13,982 million. This increase of only 1.4% been over $2 billion greater, and net earnings over more efficiently supply the requirements of its
resulted principally from the effects of the S600 million greater. rapidly growing customer base. Economic uncer-
strengthening U.S. dollar. Net earnings before Gross profit margins on both sales and tainty will likely persist. Sharp changes in foreign
income taxes increased 1.5% over 1980. After pro- rentals have been eroded by high front-end costs currency rates may again have short-term effects.
viding for income taxes, net earnings for the year of new products, changing product mix, and But the increasing demand for IBM products
were down S254 million from 1980, a decrease major expenditures for productive capacity. and services, and the productivity they deliver,
of 7.1%. In addition, the strong surge in U. S. currency has should assure a long-range trend of steady
Sales of data processing equipment were significantly affected period-to-period margin and sustained real growth in business volumes
$9,449 million, an increase of 23.9% over 1980. comparisons. For example, non-U. S. gross income and financial performance.
Although there were substantial new rental from rentals was adversely affected by the current
machine installations during the year, as well as exchange rates, but with no favorable impact
selective price increases, worldwide data pro- on depreciation costs which are translated at his-
Gross Income: Sales
cessing rental income remained flat. U. S. data torical exchange rates. Overall margins have Rentals • Services in millions of dollars
processing equipment rentals increased by 12.6%, also been impacted by the faster growth of lower 3 5,000
while non-U S. rentals showed a period-to- margin service activities, such as maintenance and 31,500
period decline. The high level of sales of installed support services. The margins on these services
rental equipment in recent periods and the are improving. 28,000
translation effect of a stronger U. S. dollar held The strengthened U S. dollar had a beneficial 24,500
down rental income growth. Gross income from effect on selling, development, engineering and
z 1,000
maintenance, program products, and other general and administrative expense by reducing
support services continued strong throughout the the non-U. S. component of these expenses when 17,500
business, showing an increase of 20.4% over 1980. translated into dollars.
1 4,000
Gross income and earnings from office prod- The company recorded exchange gains in
ucts reflected the general weakness in the 1981 of $94 million. These gains resulted primar- 10,500
economy, as well as the shift of word processing ily from the translation of assets and liabilities
7,000
workload from stand-alone products to new recorded or denominated in currencies other than
higher-function products and systems. the U. S. dollar. This compares with an exchange 3,500
gain of S24 million for 1980. Such gains are
principally unrealized. 1977 '78 '79
The consolidated effective income tax rate in
1981 was 44.8%, compared to 39.6% in 1980.
The variance reflects higher effective tax rates on
non-U. S. earnings which resulted primarily from
the impact of currency translation, and from
adjustments made in 1980 for prior period tax
liabilities. The 1981 effective tax rate is more in
line with rates in recent years preceding 1980.
The company's goals are to continue to
be the high-quality, low-cost producer; to accelerate
real growth and achieve greater financial returns.
Through substantial investments in research and

===== PAGE 26 =====
1981 1980
(Dollars in millions)
Assets
Current Assets: Cash 454 281
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market . .. i»575 1,831
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, less allowance:
1981, $187; 1980,$195 4,382 4,562
Other accounts receivable 410 315
Inventories 2,805 2-,i93
Prepaid expenses ^Jl 643
$ 10,303 $ 9,925
Rental Machines and Parts 17,241 15,352
Less: Accumulated depreciation 7^651 6,969
9,590 8,383
Plant and Other Property 12,895 I ] ,01 8
Less: Accumulated depreciation 5.207 4,384
7,688 6,634
Deferred Charges and Other Assets 2,005 1,761
$ 29,586 $ 26,703
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities: Taxes 2,412 2,369
Loans payable 773 591
Accounts payable 872 721
Compensation and benefits 1.556 1,404
Deferred income 389 305
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 1,318 1,136
$ 7,320 $ 6,526
Deferred Investment Tax Credits 252 182
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 1,184 ',443
Long-Term Debt 2,669 2,099
Stockholders' Equity: Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 4.389 3,992
Shares authorized, 650,000,000
Issued: 1981-592,293,614; 1980-584,262,074
Retained earnings 13.772 12,491
18,161 16,483
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 30
1980-455,242 shares
18,161 16,453
$ 29,586 26,703

===== PAGE 27 =====
Financial Condition
The company has increased its investment U. S. dollar. While there are risks associated Net Earnings
substantially over the past several years to with foreign currency obligations, there are also Cash Dividends Paid in millions of dollars
take advantage of expanding market opportuni- clear advantages. Interest rates are often much
ties. In the last three years, IBM's investments in lower than comparable dollar loans, and the 3,780
capital assets and research and development exchange loss risk associated with repayment is
3,360
have totalled $24 billion. Capital expenditures in minimized by the availability of foreign source in-
1981 amounted to S6.8 billion, of which one- come in most major countries. Consequently, the z,940
third was invested in plant and equipment, with company has considerable financing flexibility
the remainder in rental machines. In addition, in many different currencies throughout the world.
the company invested S1.6 billion in research and In addition, IBM has approximately $3.2 billion of
development in 1981. unused lines of credit, mostly short-term. 1,680 _ I
Although funds for IBM's expansion continue Mindful of the high cost of borrowing and
1,260
to be generated principally from operations, the long lead-time before technological investments
the investment in rental machines, plant and equip- yield payback, management has placed increased
ment, and inventory required additional external emphasis on the effective employment of assets.
sources of capital during 1981. Management Internal measurements on managerial performance
initiated a variety of actions to maintain a strong emphasize return on invested capital, inventory
capital structure while obtaining funds at rela- turnover, cash flow, payback and other indices of •79 '80 '81
tively low cost. New long-term borrowings con- asset management.
sisted primarily of $360 million of Eurodollar Large capital investments are expected to
notes and a $168 million Swiss franc loan. The exert pressure on operational cash flow. The
company established the IBM Credit Corporation ability to assess the resulting funding require-
as a wholly owned subsidiary to finance customer ments is complicated by uncertain economic con-
installment payment agreements; it raised ditions, particularly inflation, volatile interest
funds through the employee stock purchase plan rates, and foreign currency fluctuations. In
by using authorized unissued stock and discon- addition, cash flows are substantially affected by
tinuing the purchase of treasury shares; it entered the customer's largely unpredictable decision to
into agreements with several companies to purchase or lease equipment. In this environment,
purchase their unutilized tax credits and related the company's ability to generate or obtain
deductions under the provisions of the Economic cash on a timely basis is of primary importance.
Recovery Tax Act of 1981; and it negotiated IBM's strong balance sheet position and high
currency swap agreements with the World Bank, credit rating allow management to consider a full
which effectively eliminated the foreign exchange range of financing options for future capital
risk associated with the $254 million German needs. The choices will ultimately depend upon
mark and $112 million Swiss franc loans under- the prevailing financial market and economic
taken in 1980. conditions.
Despite periodic shortages of capital, high in- To set forth cash flow information more
terest rates, and dramatic shifts in currency ex- clearly, IBM's financial statements now include a
change rates, IBM has been able to utilize its high Statement of Funds Flow, which replaces the
credit rating and acquire appropriate levels of Statement of Changes in Financial Position. Years
financing through worldwide sources. IBM has 1980 and 1979 have also been restated. The
frequently borrowed in currencies other than the Statement of Funds Flow depicts the sources of
cash and cash equivalents, how they were used,
and how much remains available.
Management feels certain that growth
prospects for IBM's business will remain strong.
National policies regarding tax relief, capital
formation, and deregulation are likely to have
substantial positive effects on industry in general.
Internal and external forecasts point to con-
tinuing high demand for information products,
and IBM is confident that it has the resources and
the people to meet the challenges of the changing
marketplace.

===== PAGE 28 =====
1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January i $ 2,112 s 3,771 $ 4,030
Provided from Operations:
Sources:
Net earnings $ 3,308 $ 3,562 $ 3,01 I
Depreciation charged to costs
and expenses 2,899 2,362 1,970
Depreciation of manufacturing
facilities capitalized in
rental machines 430 397 351
Net book value of rental machines
and other property retired or sold 1,255 1,009 779
Other (189) 90 353
7,420 6,464
7,703
Uses:
Investment in rental machines 4,610 4,334 4,212
Investment in plant and other property.... 2,258 1,779
6,845 6,592 5,991
Increase in deferred charges and
other assets 244 275 338
Net change in working capital
(excluding cash, marketable securities,
loans payable and dividend payable). . . . (151) 310 343
6,938 7,177 6,672
Net provided from operations 765 243 (208)
Provided from External Financing:
Net change in long-term debt 570 510 1,304
Net change in loans payable 182 (342) 691
Net provided from external financing . . 752 168 1,995
Provided from (used for) Employee Stock Plans 4^3 (62) (38)
4,052 4,120 5,779
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 2,023 2,008 2,008
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December j z $ 2,029 $ 2,1 12 $ 3,771
The notes on pages 29 through 36 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 29 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds
(in millions)
Capital Expenditures
During 1981, IBM's growing business,
together with the company's need to replace obso-
lete equipment, required a worldwide
$7,703 Operations investment of $6,845 million, including $4,610
million for rental machines.
Retirements, covering obsolete and
$423 Employee Stock Plans dismantled equipment, as well as rental machines
sold that previously were under lease to
customers, amounted to $3,079 million in 1981,
including $2,721 million of rental machines.
$751 New Long-Term Debt These retirements were charged against amounts
provided out of prior and current years' earnings,
or against cost of sales.
82 Net Change in Loans Payable
The major IBM facilities that were completed
or under construction throughout the world in
1981 are listed below.
Sq. Ft.
Completed Purpose (in thousands)
Summary of Uses of Funds on
millions) + Rochester, Minnesota Mfg. <& Dev. 699
t Burlington, Vermont Mfg. ir Dev. 482'
tBoeblingen, Germany Mfg. 457'
$k4,610 Rental iMachines t Austin, Texas Mfg. &Dev. 410'
fVimercate, Italy Mfg. 342
Santa Palomba, Italy Mfg. 303
t Raleigh, North Carolina Mfg. &Dev. 287"
t Manassas, Virginia Mfg. & Dev. 247
t Mainz, Germany Mfg. 232'
+ Endicott, New York Mfg. 224
$2,235 Plant and Other Property t Boca Raton, Florida Mfg. <& Dev. 202'
fEssonnes, France Mfg. 167
Charlotte, North Carolina Mfg. &Dev. 158
t Hannover, Germany Mfg. 153
tYasu, Japan Mfg. 150
Under Construction
$181 Reduction of Long-Term Debt New York, New York Mktg. 1031
$93 Other Assets (net) t San Jose, California Mfg. & Dev. 926
t Chariotte, North Carolina Mfg. & Dev. 714
$2,023 Cash Dividends
Kawasaki, Japan Mktg. 440
t Manassas, Virginia Mfg. &Dev. 425
Milan, Italy Distr. Center 424
t Portsmouth, England Adm. 365
Buenos Aires, Argentina Mktg. 347
St. Louis, Missouri Mktg. 308
London, England Mktg. 300
t Toronto, Canada Mfg. 2.77
Stuttgart, Germany Adm. (irMktg. 276
t Greenock, Scotland Mfg. 266
Herrenberg, Germany Mktg. 225
t Jarfalla, Sweden Mfg. 219
fBoca Raton, Florida Mfg. 188
t Austin, Texas Mfg. (& Dev. 186
t Burlington, Vermont Mfg. &Dev. 145
t Endicott, New York Mfg. 116
t Additions to existingfacilities.
* Excludes square footage completed in years 1979 and/or 1980.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Capital Stock Retained Earnings Treasury Stoci< Total
(Dollars in millions)
1979 Stockholders' Equity, January i, 1979 $ 3,942 $ 9,576 $ (24) 13,494
Net earnings 3,011 3,01 I
Cash dividends declared (1,506) (1,506)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(391,300 shares) 24 24
Purchases (6,357,500 shares) and sales
(6,3 J 9,289 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plan-net (69) (70)
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to
employee plans 8
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1979 3,974 I 1,01 2 (25) 14,96 I
1980 Net earnings 3,562 3,562
Cash dividends declared (2,008) (2,008)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(288,816 shares) 16 16
Purchases (7,674,300 shares) and sales
(7?597?773 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plan-net (75) (5) (80)
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to
employee plans
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1980 3,992- 12,491 (30) 16,453
1981 Net earnings 3,308 3,308
Cash dividends declared (2,023) (2,023)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(8,031,550 shares) 394 394
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plan (4) 30 26
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to
employee plans 3
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1981 $ 4,389 $ 13,772 $ 18,161

===== PAGE 31 =====
International Business Machines Corporation Notes to
and Subsidiary Companies Consolidated Financial Statements:
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation:
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business
Machines Corporation and its US. and non-US. subsidiary companies, other than IBM Credit
Corporation, a wholly owned financing subsidiary The equity method is used to account for
the investment in IBM Credit Corporation and for investments in joint ventures and
affiliated companies in which IBM has 50% or less ownership.
Translation of Non-U. S. Currency Amounts:
Assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than US. dollars are translated to US.
dollars at year-end exchange rates, except that inventories and plant, rental machines and other
property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. Income and expense
items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year, except that inven-
tories charged to cost of sales and depreciation are translated at historical rates. Exchange
gains and losses are included in earnings currently.
Gross Income:
Gross income is recognized from sales when the product is shipped or in certain cases upon
customer acceptance, from rentals in the month in which they accrue, and from services over
the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance
service and contain discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predom-
inantly monthly or for a two-year period, with some covering periods up to five years.
Depreciation:
Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their
estimated useful lives. Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years
digits method. Depreciation of plant and other property is computed using either accelerated
methods or the straight-line method.
Retirement Plans:
Current service costs are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements in
the plans are amortized generally over 10 years.
Selling Expenses:
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred.
Income Taxes:
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the
effects of timing differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain
transactions are included in taxable earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are
deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful life of the
applicable classes of property. Purchased tax credits and deductions are offset against the
purchase cost.
Inventories:
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment
sales are included in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process
applicable to equipment rentals is similarly valued and included in rental machines and parts.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Non-U. S. Operations 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
At end of year: Net assets employed
Current assets 5A30 $ 5,547 5,826
Current liabilities 4,102 3,9 J ] 3,608
Working capital 1,328 1,636 '2,218
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 7,633 6,823 5,477
Deferred charges and other assets 894 971 839
_9'l55 9,430 8,534
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 1,184 1,443 1,395
Long-term debt 496 437 294
i,68o T,88O 1,689
Net assets employed 8,175 $ 7,550 $ 6,845
Number of employees 149,794 146,973 1 46,800
For the year: Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 13,982 £ 13,787 S 12,244
Earnings before income taxes $ 2,392 $ 2.,946 $ 2,731
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U S. income taxes 1,153 i,044t 1,304
Net earnings $ 1,239 $ 1,902 S_ 1,427
Capital expenditures $ 3,274 $ 3,367 $ 2,800
t See Taxes on page 32.
Shipments of data processing equipment page 23 refers to this effect in greater detail. The S6,io8 million at December 31, 1980, and 85,529
in non-U. S. operations continued at high levels graphs on the following page further illustrate million at December 31, 1979. These earnings
and strong growth rates in 1981. Despite this the decline in value, in relation to the dollar, are indefinitely reinvested in non-US. operations.
strong performance, non-U. S. financial results of the five major foreign currencies in which IBM Accordingly, no provision has been made for
were affected even more than U. S. operations by conducts most of its non-U. S. business. taxes that might be payable upon remittance of
inflation and other factors. Adding to these Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsidia- such earnings.
conditions was the severe impact of the stronger ries included in consolidated retained earnings
U. S. dollar. The Management Discussion on amounted to $6,428 million at December 31,1981,

===== PAGE 33 =====
Foreign Currency Valued in U. S. Dollars
German mark French franc British sterHng Italian lira lapanese yen
1980 1981
Inventories December 31,1981 December 31, 1980
(Dollars in millions)
Finished goods $ 547 $ 524
Work in process 1,999 1,518
Raw materials and operating supplies 2-51
Total $ 2,805 $ 2,293
Rental Machines and Parts
Rental machines and parts are comprised of amount of $2,318 million and Si,886 million at process and field service parts totaled $3,806
capitalized machines, rental machine work in December 31, 1981 and 1980, respectively, million and $3,595 million at December 31,1981
process and field service parts. Rental machines with accumulated depreciation of $1,696 million and 1980.
include machines installed with IBM in the and $1,396 million. Rental machine work in
Plant and Other Property December 31,1981 December 31,1980
(Dollars in millions)
Land and land improvements $ 653 S 623
Buildings 5,123 4,351
Factory, laboratory and office equipment. 7,119 6,044
12,895 11,018
Less: Accumulated depreciation 5,207 4,384
Total $ 7,688 $ 6,634

===== PAGE 34 =====
Taxes 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
Earnings before U.S. Federal and non-U.S. income taxes:
U.S. operations $ 3,596 $ 2,951 $ 2,822
Non-US. operations 2,392 2,946 2,731
$ 5,988 $ 5,897 $ 5,553
Provision for U.S. Federal and non-U.S. income taxes:
U.S. operations $ 1,527 $ 1,291 $ 1,238
Non-U. S. operations 1,153 1,044 1,304
2,680 2,3 3 5 2,542
Real estate, personal property, state and local franchise (including
state income taxes of $200 million in 1981, $138 million in 1980,
and $127 million in 1979), social security and other taxes 1,587 1,480 1,3 1 5
TDtal $ 4,267 $ 3,815 $ 3,857
The components of the provision for U. S. Federal
and non-U. S. income taxes are as follows:
US.:
Current $ 994 $ 776 $ 914
Net tax effects of timing differences 49 (34) 86
Net deferred investment tax credits 70 42 30
11,,111133 784 1,030
Non-US.:
Current 1,464 1,546 1,575
Net tax effects of timing differences 103 5 (63)
1,567 ^,551 1,512
Total provision $ 2,680 $ 2,335 $ 2,542
The consolidated effective U. S. Federal and non- of the difference between the effective rate and share), resulting from changes in tax laws and
U. S. income tax rate was 44.8% in 1981, the U. S. statutory rate of 46.0%. other adjustments of prior years income tax
39.6% in 1980 and 45.8% in 1979. In 1980, the The consolidated tax provision for 1980 expenses. Of this amount, Szoy million relates to
lower effective tax rate on earnings of non- includes the effect of a reduction of prior periods non-U. S. operations.
U. S. operations accounts for 5.3 percentage points income tax liabilities of $224 million (38$ per

===== PAGE 35 =====
Long-Term Debt December 31, 1981 December 31,1980
(Dollars in millions)
U. S. Operations:
9^/2% notes due 1986 $ 500 $ 500
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund
payments 1985-2003) 500 500
10.80% notes due 1983-1986 300 300
Other (average interest rate at December 31, 1981,
in parentheses) payable in:
U.S. dollars, due 1984-2001 (13.2 %) 416 —
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (6.4%) 262 112
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 199 254
2,177 1,666
Non-U.S. Operations:
Various obligations (average interest rate
at December 31, 1981, in parentheses) payable in:
U. S. dollars, due 1983-1992 (14.5%) 182 150
French francs, due 1983-1991 (12.4%) 170 178
Other currencies, due 1983-2011 (16.8%) 144 109
496 437
2,673 2,103
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally
to the 9y2% notes and 9%% debentures 4 4
T)tal $ 2,669 $2,099
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 1981, are as
follows: 1983, $158; 1984, $289; 1985, $290; 1986, $928; 1987, $269; 1988 and beyond, $739.
Interest Cost payment of commitment fees, which generally Earnings for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981
Interest on borrowings amounted to S480 range from to ¥2%.
(Dollars in thousands)
million in 1981, $325 million in 1980 and $141
million in 1979. Of these amounts, $73 million IBM Credit Corporation Finance and other income $ 49,212.
in 1981 and $52 million in 1980 were included in IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned Expenses 3452.70
Provision for income taxes 5^075
the cost of buildings under construction, resulting unconsolidated subsidiary, finances installment
in a net earnings increase of $39 million and payment agreements relating to sales by IBM of its Net earnings $ 9,867
$31 million, respectively. Prior to 1980, all interest products in the United States. Its operations
was charged against income as incurred. commenced as of May i, 1981. IBM's investment Financial position at December 31, 1981
in the IBM Credit Corporation is accounted for Assets:
Lines of Credit by the equity method, and IBM Credit Corporation Cash and cash equivalents $ 532.
At December 31, 1981, the company had earnings are included in other income in IBM's Installment payment agreement
unused lines of credit available with a number of consolidated statement of earnings. IBM has agreed receivables-net 689,553
U. S. banks. These lines of credit permit the com- to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to have a Deferred charges and other assets.... 1,644
pany to borrow up to an aggregate of $2,000 million positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit Total Assets $ 691,729
outstanding at any time, at interest rates not to Corporation has $205 million of lines of credit
exceed the banks' prime rate. Included in these lines available, in addition to those shared with Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity:
Commercial paper $318,426
of credit is $1,875 rnillion, which is shared with the the IBM Corporation.
Due to IBM Corporation 97,162
IBM Credit Corporation. In addition, a number of The following information has been summarized
Taxes and other accruals 9,036
non-U. S. subsidiaries had available unused lines of from the financial statements of the IBM Credit
Long-term debt 162,238
credit of approximately $1,200 million. Interest Corporation. Additional information is available in
Stockholder's equity 104,867
rates on borrowings would vary from country to its 1981 Annual Report. Copies may be obtained
Total Liabilities and
country depending on local market conditions. by writing to: IBM Credit Corporation, 1200
Stockholder's Equity $ 691,729
About $160 million of such unused lines require the High Ridge Road, Stamford, Connecticut 06904.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Research and Development Stock Purchase Plan Litigation
Research and development expenses In April, 1981, stockholders approved a In January, 1982, the Department of Justice
amounted to $1,612 milhon in 1981, $1,520 new five-year Employees Stock Purchase Plan, agreed to a dismissal of the civil antitrust action
milhon in 1980 and $1,360 miUion in 1979. effective July i, 1981, which authorizes up to it had commenced against IBM in 1969.
40 million shares of capital stock for the Plan. In December, 1980, the Commission of the
Retirement Plans Employees who are not participants in a stock European Communities filed a "statement of
The company and its U, S. subsidiaries have option plan may purchase IBM's capital stock objections" seeking modification of certain IBM
trusteed, noncontributory retirement plans, through payroll deductions of up to 10% of their business practices in the Common Market
for which accrued costs are funded, covering sub- compensation. The price an employee pays for a area. The Commission may also seek to impose
stantially all regular and part-time employees. At share of stock is 85% of the average market fines. Most of the practices to which the
December 31, 1981, there were 13,538 individuals price on the date the employee has accumulated Commission has objected have been held to be
receiving benefits under the plans. Most sub- enough money to buy a share. legitimate competition in the United States.
sidiaries outside the United States have retirement Under the 1981 Plan and its predecessor IBM has denied the charges in this proceeding and
plans under which funds are deposited with 1976 Plan, employees purchased 8,284,857 shares is defending its position.
trustees, annuities are purchased under group during the year, including 455,242 treasury
contracts, or reserves are provided. shares, for which $408 million was paid to IBM.
The cost of all plans for 1981, 1980 and 1979 At December 31, 1981, 35,839,693 reserved
was $1,060 million, $1,109 million and $971 unissued shares remain available for purchase
million respectively. Unfunded or unaccrued prior under the 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan.
service costs under all plans amounted to
$516 million at December 31, 1981, and $821 mil- Stock Option Plans
lion at December 31, 1980. Updating of the The stock option plans provide for granting
actuarial assumptions, including the assumed officers and other key employees options
investment rate of return, used to value the to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the
U. S. retirement plans had the effect of reducing market price on the day of grant. Options have a
unfunded prior service costs in 1981 by approxi- maximum duration of 10 years and may be
mately $185 million. However, the effect of exercised in four annual installments, commenc-
such changes on the pension cost for 1981 was ing one year from date of grant.
not material. The following table summarizes stock option
The following table compares estimated transactions during 1981:
benefits and net assets for U. S. retirement plans
Number of Shares
calculated as prescribed by the Financial
Available for
Accounting Standards Board. The assumed rate Under Option Option
of return used in determining the actuarial Balance at
present value of accumulated benefits was '^VJia nuary i, 1981 . 12,942,483 2-,32-7,095
percent for 1981 and 4% percent for 1980. Options granted • 377,2-^3 (2,377,223)
Options terminated . . (339,446) 160,944
At December 31 1981 Options exercised . . . ( 95,2-51) —
(Dollars in millions) Balance at
Actuarial present value of December 31, 1981. . . . 14,885,009 I 10,816
accumulated benefits: Exercisable at
Vested $ 5,158 $ 5,166 December 31, 1981. . . . 10,284,165
Nonvested Z32 168
$ 5,390 $ 5>334 IBM received $5.2 million for the 95,251
Net assets available
shares purchased during 1981. The 14,885,009
for benefits $ 6,155 $
shares under option at December 31, 1981,
are at option prices ranging from $41.60 to $85.40
At December 31, 1981 and at December 31,
per share.
1980 the market value of fund assets and reserves
of non-U. S. plans exceeded or approximated the
present value of vested benefits computed in
the usual actuarial manner.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Geographic Area and Industry Segment Information
Financial information by geographic area and understanding of IBM's operations. Material inter- not be indicative of the financial results of, or
industry segment for the years 1981, 1980 dependencies and overlaps exist among IBM's investments in, the reported areas and segments
and 1979 is summarized below to provide a better operating units and, therefore, the information may were they independent organizations.
Geographic Areas 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
United States
Gross income-Customers. $ 15,088 $ 12,426 $ 10,619
Interarea transfers I>857 1,615 1,101
Total $ 16,945 $ 14,041 $ 11,720
Net earnings 2,094 1,72.5 1,612
Assets at December 31 . .. 16,022 13,737 12,631
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Gross income-Customers. $ 9,312 $ 9,932 $ 8,837
Interarea transfers ^ 491 531
Total $ 9,695 $ 10,423 $ 9,368
Net earnings 758 1,511 1,082
Assets at December 31 ... 8,987
9A99 9,573
Americas/Far East
Gross income-Customers. $ 4,670 $ 3,855 3,407
Interarea transfers 659 450 410
Total $ 5>3^9 $ 4,305 3,817
Net earnings 470 398 355
Assets at December 31 . . . 45650 3,975 3,358
Eliminations
Gross income (2,899) (2,556) (2,042)
Net earnings (14) (72) (38)
Assets (585) (582) (446)
Consolidated
Gross income $ 29,070 $ 26,213 $ 22,863
Net earnings $ 3,308 $ 3,562 $ 3,011
Assets at December 31 .. . $ 29,586 $ 26,703 $ 24,530
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, European in Europe/Middle East/Africa, and $20 million cost and service charges that relate to asset transfers
operations accounted for approximately 95% of in Americas/Far East. are capitalized and depreciated or amortized by
gross income in 1981, 1980 and 1979. Interarea transfers, consisting principally of the importing area. Interarea accounts receivable,
Net earnings in 1980 include the effect of a completed machines, sub-assemblies and parts, are the unamortized portion of service charges, and the
reduction of prior periods tax liabilities of priced at cost plus an appropriate service charge, net change during the year in unamortized service
$17 million in the United States, $187 million applied consistently throughout the world. The charges, have been eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Industry Segments 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
Information-Handling Business:
Data Processing
Gross income—Customers $ 24,073 $21,367 $18,338
Operating income 5,832 5,330 4,737
Assets at December 31 23,846 21,088 17,373
Depreciation expense 2,576 2,061 1,683
Capital expenditures 6,094 6,027
5,359
Office Products
Gross income—Customers 4,219 4,135 3,849
Operating income 263 479 566
Assets at December 31 3,495 3,377 3,316
Depreciation expense 306 287 275
Capital expenditures 714 537 608
Federal Systems
Gross income—Customers 719 647 612
Operating income 56 37 3 5
Assets at December 31 436 371 329
Depreciation expense 16 11
13
Capital expenditures 37 27 23
Other Business
Gross income—Customers 59 64 64
Operating income 2 6
3
Assets at December 31 32 36 39
Depreciation expense I I I
Capital expenditures — I I
Consolidated
Gross income—Customers $ 29,070 $26,213 $22,863
Operating income $ 6,153 $ 5,849 $ 5,344
General corporate and interest expense (533) (382) (240)
Other income, principally interest 368 430
449
Earnings before income taxes $ 5,988
$ 5,897 $ 5,553
Assets identified to segments $ 27,809 $24,872 $21,057
Assets not identified to segments, including marketable securities . . . 1,777 1,831 3,473
Total assets at December 31 $ 29,586 $26,703 $24,530
Depreciation expense $ 2,899 $ 2,362 $ 1,970
Capital expenditures $ 6,845 $ 6,592 $ 5,991
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, and related services and supplies for commercial Federal Systems—consists of specialized
are in the field of information-handling systems, and government customers. information-handling products and services for
equipment and services. How^ever, for purposes of Office Products—consists of information- United States space, defense and other agencies and,
segment reporting, IBM's information-handling handling products, systems and services such in some instances, other customers.
business has been reported as three segments: as electric and electronic typewriters, magnetic Other Business consists of educational, training
Data Processing—consists of information- media typewriters and systems, information and testing materials and services for school, home
handling products and services such as data pro- processors, document printers, copiers, and related and industrial use.
cessing machines and systems, computer supplies and services for commercial and govern- Intersegment transfers of products and services
programming, systems engineering, education ment customers. similar to those offered to unaffiliated customers are
not material.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Gross Income by Segment ft 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions)
Data Processing segment:
Equipment
Sales $ 9,449 $ 7,627 $ 6,335
Rentals 9,660 9,591 8,846
19,109 17,218 15,181
Maintenance contracts,
program products, parts and supplies
Sales 458 411 385
Rentals M 25 24
Services 4,482 3,713 2,748
4,964 4,149 3,157
24,073 21,367 18,338
Office Products segment:
Sales 2,245 2,183 2,084
Rentals 1,155 1,253 1,199
Services 819 699 566
4,219 4,135 3,849
All other segments:
Sales 749 698 669
Services 29 13 7
778 711 676
Total $ 29,070 $ 26,213 $ 22,863
ttThis information should be read in conjunction with the Industry Segments notes on pages 35 and 36. Gross income from rentals includes maintenance service on rented
equipment. Gross income from services consists of maintenance service on sold equipment, program products and other services.
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 1981 1979 1978 1977
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)
For the year: Gross income from sales.
rentals and services $ 29,070 $ 26,213 $ 22,863 $ 21,076 $ 18,133
Net earnings 3,308 3,562 3,011 3,111 2,719
Per share t 5-63 6.10 5.16 5.32 4.58
Cash dividends paid 2,023 2,008 2,008 1,685 1,488
Per share t 3-44 3-44 3-44 2.88 2.50
Investment in plant, rental
machines and other property.. 6,845 6,592 5,991 4,046 3,395
Return on stockholders'
equity 19.1% 22.7% 21.2% 23.8% 21.4'
At end of year: Total assets $ 29,586 $ 26,703 $ 24,530 $ 20,771 $ 18,978
Net investment in plant, rental
machines and other property.. 17,278 15,017 12,193 9,302 7,889
Working capital 2,983 3,399 4,406 4,511 4,864
Long-term debt 2,669 2,099 1,589 285 256
Stockholders' equity 18,161 16,453 14,961 13,494 12,618
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Information on Effects of Changing Prices
Sustained high inflation has eroded flation, the Financial Accounting Standards U. S., simply by factoring the increase in the rate
industry's abihty to fund the replacement and Board prescribed two methods for experi- of general inflation, as measured by the U. S.
expansion of productive capacity. Under mentation. The Current Cost Method uses esti- Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers
conventional accounting principles, financial mated changes in specific prices to restate the (CPI-U).
statements are prepared on the basis of historical value of inventories, rental machines, plants and The Current Cost Method better measures
costs, i.e. the actual dollars exchanged at the other property. Such estimates are based upon the impact of inflation on IBM because it reflects
time of the transaction. Financial statements latest production costs, published price indices, the positive effects of technological and other pro-
prepared in this manner, however, do not current suppliers' prices, and appraised valu- ductivity improvements. It also recognizes
adequately reflect the decline in the purchasing ations, and represent year-end costs, or costs in changes in vendor prices caused by supply and
power of those dollars and the subsequent effect at date of sale, to attain the same func- demand and other factors which cause the
effect on cash flows required for future replace- tional service potential as embodied in the com- specific prices of IBM's vendor purchases to fluc-
ment of capital assets. pany's existing assets. The Constant Dollar tuate differently than price changes resulting
In an attempt to measure the effects of in- Method restates these assets, both U.S. and non- solely from general inflation.
As Reported in
Financial Statements Restated in Average 1981 Dollars
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 1981 1981 1980 1979
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 29,070 $ 29,070 $ 28,932 $ 28,647
Cost of sales, rentals and services 12,016 11,964 11,449 10,717
Expenses and other income 11,066 11,185 11,377 11,268
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes .... 2,680 2,680 2,577 3,185
Net earnings $ 3,308 $ 3,241 $ 3,529 $ 3,477
Earnings per share $5.63 $5-51 $ 6.05 $ 5.96
Stockholders' equity (net assets) $ 18,161 $ 19,749 $ 20,193 $ 20,827
Loss from decline in purchasing power of
net monetary assets $ 62 $ 301 $ 570
Increase in general price level of inventories,
rental machines and plant and other property $ 1,982 $ 2,350 $ 2,302
Increase (decrease) in specific prices (Current Cost) (212) 504 840
Excess of increase in general price level over
increase (decrease) in specific prices $ 2,194 $ 1,846 $ 1,462
Experimentation with the Constant Dollar $665 million less, and inventories $49 million In addition, the difference between the amounts re-
Method as described above, has proven to have less. The above changes in cost represent the ported in the financial statements and the restated
little or no application to IBM's business. Under additional cash investment the company would amounts using current costs is significantly
this method, IBM's 1981 restated earnings would have to expend at current prices to acquire the influenced by changes in currency exchange rates.
be $1,899 million and stockholders' equity same service potential of existing assets. The ad- The Current Cost Method prescribes that non-U. S.
$21,694 million. ditional depreciation in 1981 on these restated inventories, rental machines and plant and other
Using the Current Cost Method the com- assets would have been $215 million. Other property, as well as the related depreciation expense
pany's 1981 financial results, when adjusted costs would have been reduced by $148 million. and other costs, be translated into U. S. dollars
for changing prices, show a decline of $67 million Therefore, had the company made this added using current exchange rates. In preparing consoli-
from reported net earnings and an increase in investment, the 1981 earnings would have been dated financial statements, the company uses
stockholders' equity of $1,588 million. The esti- $67 million less. historical exchange rates to translate these assets
mated current cost of acquiring existing plants Productivity improvements from technological and the related depreciation expense and other
and other property is $2,239 million greater than advances continued to partially offset inflationary costs. The use of different translation measure-
the depreciated acquisition costs; the current pressures and are reflected in the lower estimated ments, therefore, has a significant effect on the
production costs of rental machines are current costs of inventories and rental machines. comparability of data reported in the financial

===== PAGE 41 =====
statements and the information prepared using flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to
current costs. in a significantly reduced purchasing power loss emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation. It
When a company retains monetary assets in 1981, reflecting increased debt and cash outlays points out the importance of bringing inflation un-
or habihties such as cash or debt, gains and losses made for productive capacity and rental machines. der control and the need for further public policy
in purchasing power occur during periods of in- Although inflation-adjusted information initiatives to encourage capital investment.
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation (Constant Dollar)
The amounts shown below for the years alent purchasing power of 1981 dollars by changes in the average CPI-U from that year to
1977 to 1980 have been converted into the equiv- applying to the amounts reported the rate of year 1981.
1981 1980 1979 1978 1977
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts)
Gross income from sales, rentals
and services $ 29,070 $ 28,932 $ 28,647 $ 29,381 $ 27,214
Cash dividends paid per sharef $ 3.44 $ 3.80 $4-31 $ 4.01 $ 3-75
Market price per sharef
(at December 31) $ 56.88 $ 74.92. $ 80.67 $ 104.04 $ 102.63
Average Consumer Price Index for
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0).. 272.4 246.8 217.4 195.4 181.5
The actual market price of IBM stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape at December 31, for years 1977 to 1981 (adjusted for stock split) was
$68.38, $74.63, $64.38, $67.88 and $56.88 respectively,
t Adjusted for 1979 stock split.
Selected Quarterly Data
Per Share Stock Prices
1981 Gross Gross Net
Income Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices)
First Quarter $ 6,461 $ 3,900 $ 730 $ 1.25 $ .86 $ 71.50 $ 60.25
Second Quarter 6,895 4.047 804 1.37 .86 63-38 55.13
Third Quarter 6,721 3,875 693 1.18 .86 58.88 52.25
Fourth Quarter 8,993 5,232 1,081 1.83 .86 57.63 48.38
Total $ 29,070 $ 17,054 $ 3,308 $5.63 $3.44
1980
First Quarter $ 5,748 $ 3,611 $ 681 $1.17 $ .86 $72.00 $51.38
Second Quarter 6,181 3,813 764 1.31 .86 60.38 50.38
Third Quarter 6,479 3,981 884t i.5it .86 69.13 58.38
Fourth Quarter 7,805 4,659 i,233t 2.1lt .86 72-75 63.25
Total $26,213 $16,064 $3,562 $6.10 $3.44
t Includes the effect, $70 million {iz<t per share), and $154 million {z6't per share) in the third and fourth quarters respectively, of reductions in income tax expense
applicable to prior years.
There were 742,162 stockholders of record March 10, 1982, will be at the rate of $.86 per prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York
at December 31, 1981. During 1981, stockholders share. This dividend will be IBM's 268th consecu- Stock Exchange composite tape for the last
received $2,023 million in cash dividends. tive quarterly cash dividend. two years.
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low

===== PAGE 42 =====
A major realignment of IBM operations worldwide
was made in 1981.
All marketing and service operations in the
U.S. now report to a single group-the Information
Systems Group. All U. S. product development
Corporate and manufacturing operations now report to one
Staff
of two groups-the Information Systems and
Technology Group or the Informations Systems
and Communications Group.
The marketing, service and manufactur-
ing responsibilities of the former General Business
Information Information Information Group/International Division are being consoli-
Systems Systems and Systems andS;
dated into the IBM World Trade Americas/Far East
Group Technology Communica-i
Group . „ tions Group » and Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporations.
The current responsibilities of all principal
IBM units are shown at the right.
The new marketing and service structures
enhance IBM productivity. They permit the sale of
Data
Systems the full line of IBM products through individual
Division marketing offices that can best combine product,
system and industry specialization to meet each
customer's needs.
The restructuring of U.S. product develop-
ment and manufacturing operations into two
Federal General
groups places similar or related products under
Systems Products
Division Division common management. This enables IBM to take
greater advantage of rapid changes in technology
and to coordinate long-range product plans
more effectively.
General
Technology
Division
Other Divisions:
Real Estate &
Construction
Division
Other Subsidiaries:

===== PAGE 43 =====
To conduct its business throughout the world, General Products Division...Has worldwide Subsidiaries
IBM is now organized into the following groups, development and U.S. manufacturing respon- IBM Credit Corporation...Finances installment
divisions and wholly owned subsidiaries: sibility for storage systems, including tape payment agreements resulting from sales
units, disk products and mass storage systems, by IBM of its generally available information
Information Systems Group as well as non-impact system printers, program handling equipment to customers in the U.S.
Customer Service Division...Provides main- products and hardware-related programming. IBM Instruments, Inc. ...Has responsibility for
tenance, related support and programming General Technology Division...Has worldwide IBM's efforts in the analytical instrument field,
services within the U. S. for designated systems development and product assurance and including the marketing and servicing of
and products developed primarily by the Infor- U.S. manufacturing responsibility for logic, selected products in the U.S.
mation Systems and Communications Group. memory and special semiconductor devices Science Research Associates, Inc. ...Has world-
Federal Systems Division...Provides specialized and associated packaging. The division also wide development, publication and/or market-
information-handling and control systems procures components for IBM World Trade ing responsibility for a wide range of edu-
to the Federal government for seaborne, space- Americas/Far East Corporation and U.S. cational materials, services and microcomputer
borne, airborne and ground-based environ- operating units. software designed for use in elementary
ments. Also participates in applied research and secondary schools, colleges, businesses
and exploratory development. Information Systems and the home.
Field Engineering Division...Provides main- and Communications Group IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
tenance and related services within the U.S. Communication Products Division...Has world- ...With a territory extending across four
for all current IBM systems and products wide development and U.S. manufacturing continents, this subsidiary is responsible for
and new systems and products developed by responsibility for telecommunications systems, IBM operations in 45 countries, including
the Information Systems and Technology office systems, distribution industry systems, Australia, Brazil, Canada and Japan.
Group, as well as support for specified IBM and related programming. The division serves IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa
program offerings. The division also provides as the worldwide architectural and systems Corporation...Through its subsidiary,
maintenance marketing support and central focal point for office systems and systems net- IBM Europe, located in Paris, it is responsible
programming service for assigned products. work architecture activities in IBM. for IBM operations in 80 countries.
National Accounts Division...Has marketing and Information Products Division...Has worldwide IBM World Trade Corporation...Provides
field administration responsibility within the development and related programming, and designated support to IBM World Trade organi-
U.S. and its territories for the full standard line U.S. manufacturing responsibility for type- zational units.
of IBM products. Its assigned customers are writers, copiers, industry systems for banking
selected large accounts with complex informa- and manufacturing industries, peripheral
tion processing needs. equipment including printers, copier systems,
National Marketing Division...Has marketing diskettes, and associated supplies.
and field administration responsibility within System Products Division...Has worldwide
the U.S. and its territories for the full standard development and U.S. manufacturing respon-
line of IBM products. Its assigned customers sibility for small and intermediate-sized general
are large, medium and small accounts. purpose systems, displays and related
Systems Supplies Division...Has responsibility for programming.
manufacturing or procurement and for market-
ing within the U.S. of IBM supplies and services. Other Divisions
Real Estate and Construction Division...Manages
Information Systems the selection and acquisition of sires, the
and Technology Group design and construction of buildings, and the
Data Systems Division...Has worldwide develop- purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM
ment and associated programming responsibility operations in the U.S. The division has respon-
for large, complex systems, with primary sibility for assessing real estate projects outside
emphasis on high-performance products, plus the U.S., as well as IBM's worldwide energy
U.S. manufacturing responsibility for those and environmental programs. It also provides
systems. facility services to selected headquarters
locations.
Research Division...Brings scientific understand-
ing to bear on areas of company interest
through basic research and development of
technologies of potential long-range importance.

===== PAGE 44 =====
More Productive People...
Toshiaki Igi, Fujisawa, Japan, was a principal architect of
the IBM computer system for processing the graphic symbols
of the Japanese and Chinese written languages.
Ann Loidl, Denver, helped five oil, gas and mining
companies apply the capabilities of new IBM computers,
software and distributed processing techniques to
produce significant productivity gains in geographically
dispersed operations.
Valerie Cole, Chicago, helped an industrial equipment
manufacturer establish a worldwide IBM computer
network that links dealerships in 65 countries through
more than 2,000 IBM display terminals.
Guenter Knauft, Boeblingen, Germany, made
important contributions to the design and quality-testing
of the intermediate-scale IBM 4331 computer,
which has been installed by thousands of customers in
more than 40 countries.
Dr. Janusz Wilczynski, Yorktown Heights, N.Y., Brian Sowter, Hursley, United Kingdom, was a key
designed advanced optics for photolithography, work that contributor to the inventions which achieved high image
has significantly increased the production volumes quality in IBM's color display computer terminals.
of very dense packaging used in many IBM computers.

===== PAGE 45 =====
Defense and Space Programs in January, 1982, SBS and the international 5,000 students and placed more than 80% in jobs.
The U.S. Department of Defense has division of British Telecom announced plans The company also helps support more than 200
authorized the U.S. Navy to proceed with pro- to provide joint transatlantic services, using smaller clerical job training operations.
duction of 19 ship systems and 18 air systems satellite facilities of the International Telecommu-
for [.AMI'S, the Navy's new ship/helicopter system nications Satellite Organization (Intelsat). Equal Opportunity Programs
for which IBM is the prime contractor. Designed The services would include computer data com- Emphasis continued during the year on
for defense against submarines and detection munication, electronic mail, video telecon- worldwide IBM programs that provide equal
of surface vessels, LAMPS (Light Airborne Multi- ferencing and facsimile transmission. British opportunity in employment, training and advance-
purpose System) successfully passed a series of Telecom is the government-owned corporation ment. Of the more than 17,600 employees hired
open-sea tests in the Atlantic during 1981. responsible for all telecommunications services in the U.S. during the year, 42% were women
The system contract is cxpected to be one of the for the United Kingdom. SBS has applied to and 20% were minorities. At year-end, IBM had
largest IBM has had with the U.S. government. the U.S. Federal Communications Commission more than 2,700 women managers in the U. S.
Computers and programming developed by for authority to provide such international There were also over 2,600 minority managers,
the Federal Systems Division are playing im- common carrier services. Approval would permit and of those, about 470 were women.
portant roles in the current series of orbital flights SBS customers in the U.S. to interconnect During the United Nations' International
by NASA's Space Shuttle. The spacecraft is con- with their subsidiaries and other British Telecom Year of Disabled Persons in 1981, IBM broadened
trolled by five IBM onboard computers, customers in the United Kingdom. its installation of workplace accommodations
programmed by more than 600,000 IBM in- Following FCC approval in 1981, SBS is for the handicapped. IBM also helped sponsor the
structions. Only one-third the size of previous negotiating with the Canadian government and International Winter Special Olympics in
Apollo mission computers, each of the onboard Canadian common carriers to establish services Vermont for handicapped persons from all 50
systems has five times more memory and between Canada and the U. S., using SBS satellites. states and 16 other nations.
processes information 40 times faster. IBM has IBM has several thousand handicapped
also provided three large ground computers and New IBM Credit Corporation employees worldwide, including a number of man-
more than three million programming instruc- IBM has established a wholly owned agers. The majority have impaired hearing, sight
tions for flight control and pre-launch checkout. subsidiary, the IBM Credit Corporation, to provide or mobility. Among the workplace accommo-
IBM has been awarded a U.S. Navy contract added flexibility in company financing and a dations for them are audio typewriters and com-
for the IBM Advanced Signal Processor (ASP), a more efficient, single-management focus on the puter terminals, computer software and printers
special-purpose computer used on surface ships, financing of installment payment agreements for Braille translations, keyboard hand and
submarines and planes, including helicopters. offered by various U.S. marketing divisions. arm rests, motorized wheelchairs, reserved auto
Covering the Navy's requirements for five years, parking, modified elevators and rest rooms, ramps
the contract calls for delivery of as many as Expanded Support Programs and audio cassettes of IBM publications.
500 ASPs with a value exceeding $300 million. IBM support programs at both the national During 1981, more than 100 IBM employees
The ASP can perform 20 million multiplications and community levels have been broadened for were on social service leave in the U. S., working
a second. 1982. Included are expanded job training for the for national or community nonprofit organizations.
disadvantaged, a broader program of matching In addition, more than 40 employees were on
Satellite Business Systems grants to education, hospitals and the arts, as college and university campuses, participating in
The second satellite for the domestic U.S. well as additional support for the IBM Fund IBM's faculty loan program. Most were serving
communications system operated by Satellite for Community Service. Participation by husbands as teachers at predominantly minority colleges.
Business Systems (SBS) is undergoing final tests in and wives of employees was introduced in In 1981, the company continued to expand
space and will enter commercial service early in several areas. IBM will also conduct new training countrywide purchasing of products and services
1981. SBS is the partnership formed by sub- programs for managers of urban service organi- from minority businesses-black, Hispanic,
sidiaries of The Aetna Casualty and Surety Com- zations in skills that will help them better manage American Indian and Asian. The number of
pany, COMSAT General Corporation and IBM. their scarce resources. minority-owned suppliers in 1981 grew to more
At year-end 1981, SBS had 60 earth stations During 1982, IBM will increase from 8 to 19 than 600 companies doing over $68 million
and 7 customer networks installed, including one the number of major data and word processing worth of business with IBM. Also increasing, to
for IBM. SBS has opened marketing and field job training centers for the disadvantaged that the over $24 million, was the value of purchases
service centers throughout the U.S. and now has company helps sponsor in the U. S. The centers from more than 300 companies owned primarily
1,300 employees. The company plans to launch a are in urban areas with high unemployment and by women. IBM did over $16 million in business
third satellite on the first commercial payload are operated in cooperation with nonprofit with more than 80 suppliers that have predom-
flight of NASA's Space Shuttle in late 1982. community-based organizations. IBM lends the inantly handicapped work forces.
computing and office products equipment and
personnel needed for effective operation. Since
opening their doors in 1968, such centers
supported by IBM have graduated more than

===== PAGE 46 =====
The lo-month exhibition of the works of French
sculptor Auguste Rodin at the National Gallery of Art in
Washington, D.C., through May 2, 1982, is being
made possible by a grant from IBM. Pictured is the bronze
casting, "Gates of Hell." More than 350 of Rodin's
sculptures in bronze, marble and other media are on exhibit.
Total attendance is expected to exceed one million.
Personal Computer 'Courseware' These ideas saved the company over $60 million vation has been emphasized for many years, the
Three software programs for the new through increased productivity and resulted in energy savings per square foot from 1973 through
IBM Personal Computer developed by SRA, IBM's awards to employees exceeding $10 million. 1981 exceeded 45%.
educational publishing subsidiary, are now
available. Suited for home or school use, the "edu- More Energy Gains Better ECG Analysis
cational courseware" provides computer drill IBM improved its energy efficiency again A new IBM-designed electrocardiograph
and instruction in arithmetic for students in first in 1981 with conservation measures that brought management and analysis system helps doctors
and second grades and above. One program provides a 4.5% savings per square foot at major U. S. detect heart abnormalities. The system aids in the
timed drills to build speed and accuracy-in locations, compared with 1980. This reduction interpretation of electrocardiograms (ECGs)-
either a competitive or noncompetitive format. The brought IBM's total U.S. savings from the 1973 the graphic representations of electrical impulses
other two programs are games designed to enrich pre-conservation level to 50%. that cause the heart to beat. The computer
basic computation and problem-solving skills. In the past eight years, IBM has conserved makes thousands of high-speed measurements of
enough electricity in the U. S. to meet the ECG data and then applies interpretive rules
Suggestion Plan Savings needs of 450,000 homes for a year. Enough fuel typically used by cardiologists. It prints a concise
During 1981, IBM received more than oil has been saved to serve 250,000 homes in report for review by the physician. It can also
195,000 cost- and labor-saving ideas from employ- the northern states. help doctors identify changes in an adult
ees through the worldwide IBM Suggestion Plan. In IBM World Trade countries, where conser- patient's heart condition by comparing a new
ECG with previous analyses.

===== PAGE 47 =====
Experimental color display system developed by
IBM Italy features an enlarged screen with a very-high-
definition image. The system is being tested at IBM
Scientific Cx^nters in Madrid, Paris, Rome and Palo Alto,
Calif., for applications ranging from satellite and
medical image processing to computer circuit design, oil
exploration and publication printing.

===== PAGE 48 =====
The command and control system in the U. S. Navy's
new Trident-class submarines was integrated by the
Federal Systems Division. This integration involved about
170 principal units of equipment controlled by more
than one million computer instructions. IBM also developed
and built theTrident sonar system.
Left: Computer time and equipment contributed by
IBM Taiwan assist scientists from 10 nations at the Asian
Vegetable Research and Development Center, Tainan.
Analysis of thousands of varieties of different vegetables
is speeding development of more nutritious crops and better
farm management in the tropics.
Far left: IBM vendor reclamation of gold, palladium and
other precious metals from obsolete IBM computer circuits
produced a $25 million saving for the company in
the U. S. during 1981. Such metals find use in high-density
circuits for their superior electrical conductivity and
corrosion resistance.

===== PAGE 49 =====
Small satellite "dish" antenna for an earth station in lower
Manhattan (roof of building, center) is one of 60 now installed
in major U. S. cities by Satellite Business Systems (SBS).
A total of 25 large business organizations have contracted
with SBS for high-speed digital communications networks.
'"! iii!!!!l
[••1..J f||lllH"l"j}
1 •IllllHI'l"
grunti
htnefiafiB"
, II.. .1 -. •• •• •
1
llllll"

===== PAGE 50 =====
IBM Corporation Stephen D. Bechteljr Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction
Board of Directors: George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Harold Brown Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C.
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J. - health care products
Frank T. Gary Chairman of the Board, IBM
William T. Coleman, Jr Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.G., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France-attorneys at law
John M. Fox Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass. - waste disposal services
Patricia Roberts Harris Attorney,Washington, D.C.; former U.S. Secretary, Health and Human Services; former U.S. Secretary,
Housing and Urban Development
Garla Anderson Hills Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif. - attorneys at law
Amory Houghton, Jr Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N. Y.
John N.Irwin II Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb &C Tyler, New York, N. Y.-attorneys at law
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
Richard W. Lyman President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N. Y.
Dean R. McKay Senior Vice President, IBM
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark - owners of the Maersk Fleet
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N. Y.
J. Richard Munro President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N. Y. - publishing
John R.Opel President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM
*Dean P Phypers Senior Vice President, IBM
Paul J. Rizzo Senior Vice President, IBM
William W. Scranton Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania
Irving S. Shapiro Retired Chairman of the Board, E. 1. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del. - chemical products
Cyrus R. Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher &C Bartlett, New York, N. Y. - attorneys at law
Thomas J. Watson, Jr Chairman Emeritus, IBM
* Elected 1/2.6/82
Board Committees: Executive: Finance: Compensation: Audit:
Frank T. Gary, Chairman William W. Scranton, Chairman Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr., Chairman WilliamT. Coleman, Jr.,Chairman
Amory Houghton, Jr. George B. Beitzel James E.Burke John M. Fox
T. Vincent Learson Garla Anderson Hills Amory Houghton, Jr. Richard W. Lyman
William H.Moore John N. Irwin II Irving S. Shapiro
John R.Opel Dean R. McKay Cyrus R. Vance
Irving S. Shapiro Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. J. Richard Munro
Paul J. Rizzo
Advisory Board: G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N. Y. - attorneys at law
Gilbert E.Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N. Y.
Louis H. LaMotte Retired Executive Vice President, IBM
William McChesney Martin, Jr Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Albert L.Williams Retired President, IBM
Officers: John R.Opel President and Chief Executive Officer William W. Eggleston Vice President
Frank T. Gary Chairman of the Board Bob O. Evans Vice President
George B. Beitzel Sr. Vice President P Martin Foley Vice President
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Sr. Vice President Victor J. Goldberg Vice President
Dean R. McKay Sr. Vice President Ralph E.Gomory Vice President
tDean P Phypers Sr. Vice President John B. Jackson Vice President
Paul J. Rizzo Sr. Vice President Terry R.Lautenbach Vice President
Nicholas de B. Katzenbach Sr. Vice President & General Counsel Thomas M. Liptak Vice President
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr Sr. Vice President Edward E. Lucente Vice President
t Allen J. Krowe Vice President, Finance Sc Planning David E. McKinney Vice President
John F. Akers Vice President & Group Executive Charles E. McKittrick, Jr Vice President
Jack D. Kuehler Vice President & Group Executive Frank A. Metz, Jr Vice President
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr Vice President & Group Executive Theodore C. Papes, Jr Vice President
Arthur G.Anderson Vice President Francis G. Rodgers Vice President
C.Michael Armstrong Vice President H.Mitchell Watson, Jr Vice President
John E. Bertram Vice President John E Williams Vice President
Charles P. Biggar Vice President J. Richard Young Vice President
James A. Bitonti Vice President James J. Forese Controller
Erich Bloch Vice President John H.Grady Secretary
Lewis M.Branscomb Vice President C.Arthur Northrop Treasurer
Walton E. Burdick Vice President Wallace R. DuBois Assistant Controller
Kaspar V Cassani Vice President J. William Scruggs Assistant Controller
George H.Conrades Vice President John H.Stewart Assistant Controller
Frank J. Cummiskey Vice President Thomas C. Irwin Assistant Secretary
Wallace C. Doud Vice President David A. Finley Assistant Treasurer
Robert B. Dunlop Vice President Bruce E. Langton Assistant Treasurer
48 IBM iq8i Annual Report t Effective 1/26/81

===== PAGE 51 =====
Division and Subsidiary Arthur C;. Anderson . President, Cieneral Products Div. Thomas M. Liptak President, Customer Service Div.
Chief Executives: John E. Bertram . . . . President, Data Systems Div. E^dward E. Lucente President, Information Products Div.
Charles P. Biggar.... President, Eield Engineering Div. Jacques G. Maisonrouge Chairman, IBM World Trade Corp.
Kaspar V. (Hassani . . . Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr Chairman, IBM World Trade
Middle East/Africa Corporation Americas/ Ear East Corp.
George H.Conrades. President, National Accounts Div. Everett H. Van Hoesen President, Systems Supplies Div.
Vincent N. Cook ... President, Eederal Systems Div. H. Mitchell Watson, Jr President, System Products Div.
Edward M. Davis . . . President, General Technology Div. Cecil P. Webb President, IBM Instruments, Inc.
David A. I'inley President, IBM Oedit Corp. John E Williams President, Real Estate and
Victor J. Goldberg . . President, Communication Products Div. Construction Div.
Ralph E. Ciomory . . . Director of Research J. Richard Young President, National Marketing Div.
John E. (iuth, Jr President, Science Research Associates
IBM World Trade Nadal Antonioni General Manager, Latin America Northern Region, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation
Americas/Far East Thomas J. Bata Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization, Toronto, C^anada
Corporation Jill K. C'onway President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Board of Directors:
Morton Ehrlich Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Ela.
Thomas I loving President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y., and Editor-in-Chief, "The Connoisseur"
Ryoichi Kawai President, Komatsu, L.imited,Tokyo, Japan
Donald R. Keough . . . . President,'I'he Coca-Cxila C'ompany, Atlanta, Ga.
Terry R. Lautenbach. . . President, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM
Raymond (..(VNeill . . Vice President, Einance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/ Ear East Corporation
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. . . . Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation, and IBM Senior Vice President
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. . Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Takeo Shiina President, IBM Japan, l.imited
Ciustavo J. Vollmer. . . . President, (Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela
Ciordon R. Williamson IBM Director of Industry Relations
IBM World Trade John E. Akers Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Europe/Middle East^ ArthurCi. Anderson. . , President, General Products Division, and Vice I'resident, IBM
Africa Corporation Eernando de Asua, Jr.. , Managing Director, IBM Spain
Board of Directors:
ToreBrowaldh Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and C'hairman of the Board, IBM Sweden
Kaspar V. C^assani Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation, and IBM Vice President
Billy C^hristensen . . , Vice President and General Manager, IBM World Trade Corporation and
Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation
The Earl of Cromer . . . . Eormer Chairman of the Board, IBM United Kingdom, Limited
Joseph E. ('ullnian 3rd . . Chairman of the Executive Committee, Philip Morris, Inc., New York, N. Y.
Erank J. CAimmiskey ... Vice President, IBM
Pierre E. (iousseland . . . C;hairman, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Jacques G. .Maisonrouge C^hairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and IBM Senior Vice President
I'heodore C,'. Papes, Jr. . . Directeur Cieneral, IBM Europe S. A., and Vice President, IBM
Otto Sturzenegger President and C'hairman, C:iba-Geigy, USA, Ardsley, N. Y.
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
•Science Research C.eorge B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Associates, Inc. Patricia Albjerg (Iraham Professor and Dean-Elect, Harvard Graduate School of Education
Board of Directors: John E.Ciuth,Jr President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Wayne EI. Eloltzman . . . President, I'he Hogg Eoundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex.
H. 'Ehomas James President, Spencer Eoundation, Chicago, 111.
II'jM stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, International Business Machines (Corporation
other exchanges in the United States, and exchanges in Austria, (Corporate Headquarters Armonk, N.V. lojo^
Belgium, (Canada, England, Erance, Japan, Switzerland, IBM Stockholder Relations Department yiy Fifth Avenue, New York, N.V. 10022
the Netherlands and the Eederal Republic of Clermany. Slock Transfer Offuxs:
IBM Stockholder Relations Department yiy Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
IBM Stockholder Relations Department One IBM Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60611
Co-Transfer Anan s:
'Erust General du Canada 1100 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H^B 2G7
National Trust (Company, L.imited 21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M^C iBj
Registrars:
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York JO West Broadway, New York, N.Y. looi}
'I'he Eirst National Bank of (Chicago One First National Plaza, Chicago, III. 60670
PRINTED IN USA Montreal Trust Company 777 Dorchester Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, HjB 4A^
/5 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M^H 1B4

===== PAGE 52 =====
f
^ International
: Business Machines
Gorporation
'y' Armonk, RY
10504