

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents:
1 Financial Highlights
2 Letter to Stockholders
5 Goals for the Decade
Z3 IBM Organization
Z4 IBM and the Community
27 Financial Report
Report of Management
Report of Independent Accountants
Earnings
Management Discussion-Results of Operations
Financial Position
Management Discussion-Financial Condition
Funds Flow
Stockholders' Equity
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
Supplemental Financial Information
46 Directors and Officers
48 Stockholder Information
Cover: The IBM Personal Computer, specially equipped
with voice output, is being used to help teach some
10,000 kindergarten and first grade students to read
and write. School districts in Florida, Massachusetts,
Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Texas
and Washington, D.C., are participating in a national
evaluation of the Personal Computer-based language
arts teaching program. The six-year-old in the cover
photo is responding to picture and word cues on
the screen and instructions from the computer's voice
digitizer during an exercise in phonics.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation
for the year ended December 31,1982
Highlights of the year: (Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1982 1981'
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 34,364 $ 29,070
Earnings before income taxes $ 7,930 $ 6,260
U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes $ 3,521 $ 2,650
Net earnings $ 4,409 $ 3,610
Per share $7-39 $ 6.14
Cash dividends paid $ 2,053 $ 2,023
Per share $3.44 $3.44
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 6,685 $ 6,845
Return on stockholders' equity 23.4% 21.1'
At end of year:
Total assets $ 32,541 $ 29,107
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . $ 17,563 $ 16,797
Working capital $ 4,805 $ 2,983
Long-term debt $ 2,851 $ 2,669
Stockholders' equity $ 19,960 $ 17,676
Number of employees 364,796 354,936
Number of stockholders 725,745 742,162
* During the year ended December 31,1982, the company
adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52,
"Foreign Currency Translation." The consolidated financial
statements for 1981 and 1980 have been restated to give effect
to this accounting change.
IBM's Operations:
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are in the field
of information-handling systems, equipment and services to solve
the increasingly complex problems of business, government,
science, space exploration, defense, education, medicine and many
other areas of human activity. IBM's products include data
processing machines and systems, telecommunications systems
and products, information distributors, oflice systems, type-
writers, copiers, educational and testing materials, and related
supplies and services. Most products are both leased and sold
through IBM's worldwide marketing organizations.

===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders
IBM delivered record quantities of products these currency rate changes on business volumes
and services to its customers in 1982. As a result, and operating decisions are difficult to quantify.
revenues and earnings reached an historic high. However, it is estimated that had currency rates
The company's continuing investments in remained constant with those in 1981, gross
advanced technology and efficient production income for 1982 would have been approximately
and development facilities, along with invest- $ 1,800 million greater and net earnings would
ments in marketing and service support to have been approximately $300 million greater
our customers, were key factors in achieving than reported.
these results. The company's progress, in the face Before- and after-tax margins have con-
of a worldwide recession and a stronger U. S. tinued to improve over 1981 despite higher
dollar relative to other major currencies, is a fur- effective income tax rates, which partially offset
ther indication of the health of our business improvements resulting from both higher gross
around the world. profit margins and improved expense to gross
IBM worldwide net earnings for the year income relationships. Current-year results con-
ended December 31, 198Z, were $4,409 million, tinue to reflect major capital expenditures to
compared with $3,610 million for 1981. Net satisfy long-term requirements for IBM products
earnings were $7.39 per share, based on 596.7 and services.
million shares, the average number outstand- The 1982 results show significant growth
ing during 1982. in the prior year, net earnings for both net orders and net installations. During
were $6.14 per share on 5878 million shares. the second half, IBM experienced some softness
Worldwide gross income was $34,364 mil- in orders because of economic conditions.
lion in 1982, an increase of 18.2 percent over Shipments of advanced, large-scale processors
$29,070 million in 1981. Sales increased 30.3 per- and 3380 direct access storage devices are strong.
cent over 1981, rentals increased 2.6 percent
and services, 20.6 percent. Strong Position
In the quarter ended December 31,1982, IBM is in a good position to take advantage
net earnings were $ 1,500 million, or $2.50 per of the growing worldwide demand for informa-
share, compared with $ 1,173 million, or $ 1.99 per tion processing products. Investments in
share, for the same period of 1981. Gross in- research and development are providing a stream
come in the fourth quarter of 1982 was $11,074 of new products to meet the evolving needs of
million. It compares with $8,993 million in an expanding range of customers. Investments in
the fourth quarter of 1981. These were record plant and equipment are providing the capacity
quarterly and annual gross income and net to manufacture those products in unprece-
earnings for IBM. dented volumes—on a scale that gives us a com-
Operations outside the U. S., included in the petitive edge in the industry.
consolidated results, had net earnings of $ 1,649 Those investments have been sizable. In the
million in 1982 and $1,541 million in 1981. last five years, we have added almost 25 million
Gross income was $ 15,336 million and $ 13,982 square feet of manufacturing and laboratory
million in the respective years. space. Our investment in land, buildings and
In the fourth quarter of 1982, IBM adopted equipment during that period was more than $10
Financial Accounting Standard No. 52 (FAS No. billion. Annual research and development
52) on Foreign Currency Translation, effective expenditures, which first passed the $i billion
January 1, 1982. For consistency, 1980 and 1981 mark in 1976, exceeded $2 billion in 1982.
results have been restated. Details of this change The entire organization has been reshaped
are covered under "Accounting Change—Foreign so that we can more efficiently manufacture,
Currency Translation" on page 36. market, install and service higher business vol-
Even after adoption of FAS No. 5 2, period-to- umes. And we are realizing significant results
period comparisons continue to be affected by from productivity and quality programs initiated
the strengthening of the U. S. dollar relative to the throughout the business.
currencies of many countries. The effects of At the moment, of course, we still face

===== PAGE 5 =====
4300 series and enhanced programming to link
IBM's major office systems products, strength-
ened our mid-range and small systems.
The new IBM Scanmaster I is an important
addition to the office systems area. This commu-
nications terminal scans graphic, typed or
handwritten material, then transmits it to a cen-
tral processor for storage and distribution to
multiple locations. The terminal also can send
material directly to another Scanmaster.
Our product line reached into new business
areas in 1982 with announcements of two pro-
grammable robotic systems for industrial use,
and the IBM Instruments Computer System,
designed to improve productivity in laboratory
environments.
High Shipment Levels
The amount of computing power being
shipped continues to grow. Shipments of
our large-scale processors were strong in 1982
and there is a healthy backlog of orders. As
production levels grow, we expect shipments
of our large processors to increase again in 1983.
IBM 3380 large-system disk files are being
shipped in volume. During 1982, we more than
doubled our production rate for this product.
Shipments of the IBM Personal Computer
John R. Opel, President and Chief Executive Officer!Frank T. Cary, Chairman of the Board are well ahead of our expectations and are a
dramatic demonstration of the increase in vol-
worldwide economic uncertainties. We are ex- great technical strengths. The circuit board and ume taking place in our business. Production
amining investment decisions carefully, keeping module technologies in IBM's large-scale proc- plans for the Personal Computer have been
our options open against possible prolonged essors lead the industry. significantly expanded.
negative effects of the recession. But we Our 3380 disk file, with its thin film read/
will not compromise the foundation we have in write head, represents the state-of-the-art in disk Emphasis on Quality
place to meet future growth prospects. storage technology. As we increase volumes and reach new
users of our products and services, we are in-
Technological Leadership New Products tensifying our emphasis on quality in all aspects
Underpinning that foundation is IBM's In 1982, we made a number of announce- of the business. We have set up programs in
technological leadership. Research and devel- ments that continued our pattern of improving every operating unit to give all employees a role
opment people in IBM laboratories worldwide price/performance across the product line. in improving quality. These programs stress
continue to deliver the industry's leading prod- The IBM 3084, the new top-of-the-line defect-free work in everything we do, from test-
ucts and processes on every front important to processor, was added to our large-scale, ing a product to writing a memo. Quality pro-
our future. advanced-technology series. The 3084 and four grams for our suppliers throughout the world
We have developed and are producing in additional new processors extended our family ensure their commitment to meeting the same
volume, on production lines of our own design, of large systems, allowing users of smaller high standards we set for ourselves.
many of the most advanced, most reliable semi- processors in the series to move up to larger And we have established an additional qual-
conductor chips in the industry. processors in an orderly, efficient way. ity guideline that makes it clear that any new
Packaging—the assembly and interconnec- New hardware and software offerings, product we ship must be superior in quality to the
tion of these chips in a machine—is one of IBM's including a more powerful processor for the one it replaces, as well as to competitive products.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Safeguarding IBM Property Business Goals
During 1982, we found it necessary to take IBM's Strategy is aimed at taking full advan-
legal action to halt the theft or misappropriation tage of the promising potential we see for the
of IBM proprietary information. In one case, information industry in the 1980s and beyond.
two major Japanese companies and a number of At the core of that strategy are three primary
individuals were indicted by a Federal grand jury business goals:
in California. IBM filed a related civil suit. An- We are firmly committed to profitable
other case involved the misappropriation of IBM growth. We are expanding our traditional busi-
trade secrets by three former IBM employees. As ness and investing in a variety of new entre-
a result of our civil lawsuits, we were successful preneurial opportunities with high, long-term
in recovering our property and the defendants potential.
were prohibited from making any use of it. We intend to be the product leaders,
Actions like these are necessary if we are to stay in the forefront of the industry in tech-
to protect the business and the interests of our nology, reliability, quality and value across our
stockholders and employees. Our investments entire product line.
in research and development and the innovative We are concentrating on efficiency in every
ideas of our employees are IBM's stake in the aspect of our work. We want to be not only
future. We will do everything appropriate to safe- the low-cost producer of the highest quality
guard those assets. products in the industry, but also the low-cost
developer, seller and servicer.
Addressing Future Opportunities Our progress toward meeting our business
By the end of the 1980s, the information goals, detailed in this annual report, demon-
processing industry is expected to grow to more strates that IBM is well prepared to meet the
than $i trillion. Not only will the industry as competitive tests of our changing industry— that
we know it become much larger, it will also our strategy for the 80s is working.
expand in a number of new directions. IBM's IBM employees in every area of the business
intention is to address business opportunities have responded with significant contributions
across the information-handling spectrum. to our ambitious goals. They continue to be
Through our traditional structure, we IBM's greatest asset. Their dedicated efforts have
market large and medium systems, small com- always been the key to our success.
puters for business and personal use, displays,
storage devices, word processing products, soft- January Z5, 1983, by order of the Board of Directors
ware and service. And we have widened our
scope to focus on other promising growth areas,
such as robotics, telecommunications and John R.Opel
network services.
We also are adapting the ways we do
business—giving our customers more options
President and Chief Executive Officer
and ensuring that we stay competitive.We are
continuing to expand our marketing channels- Frank T. Gary
selling through IBM Product Centers, telephone Chairman of the Board
marketing and outside retailers. At the same
Frank T C;irv ^
time, we are offering more flexible pricing terms
and conditions, such as volume procurement
agreements and term lease plans.
This i!^-square-inch read-only memory chip used in
IBM's most powerful processors represents the first
large-scale production use of electron-beam tools to
create specialized bit patterns on high-performance
chips. The advanced technique allows faster design
and manufacturing turnaround.

===== PAGE 7 =====
S for the de^craaddee ..-^

===== PAGE 8 =====
Growth
'...expanding our traditional business and investing
in a variety of new entrepreneurial opportuni-
ties with high, long-term potential."
A key to the healthy growth that continues to
characterize IBM's business is the company's
ability to provide more information processing
power for less money In 1982, users of IBM's
large processors could run a mix of typical data
processing instructions in one second at a cost of
about seven cents. Those same instructions
would have taken more than six minutes to exe-
cute and cost more than $14 in 1955.
IBM continues to make significant in-
vestments in research and development in order
to further reduce the cost of information proc-
essing and to make new applications possible.
Investments in new facilities and equipment
provide the capacity necessary to meet expand-
ing demand and position the company for
profitable growth.
Volume Shipments
In 1982, record levels of large-scale com-
puting systems were shipped from IBM plants in
Kingston, N.Y., Montpellier, France, and Yasu,
Japan. Production levels increased for these
systems and delivery schedules were shortened.
For example, first customer deliveries of the
3083, a new addition to IBM's large processor
series, were made ahead of schedule. Shipments
of large systems are expected to increase again
in 1983.
Customer demand for IBM's advanced
disk storage devices was very strong throughout
the year. New shipment levels were reached for the
3380, which stores up to 2.5 billion characters
of information—the equivalent of 11 sets of the
30-volume Encyclopaedia Britannica, plus four
copies of the Manhattan telephone directory
This storage device uses thin film read/write
head technology, pioneered by IBM, to transfer
data at speeds up to three million characters
per second.
The IBM Personal Computer became the
most popular IBM processor during 1982.
Even greater shipment levels of the Personal
Computer are expected as production capacity
High volumes of iBM^s advanced disk
storage files are shipped from the company's San Jose,
Calif, Berlin, Germany, and Fujisawa, Japan,
plants to meet growing customer demand.

===== PAGE 9 =====
expands, the number of marketing outlets
increases and users find new applications for
business, education and the home.
IBM also began deliveries of the new 4700
finance system, a family of compact computer
devices for teller and administrative operations
in banks. The 4700 ofi^ers improved perform-
ance, supports more terminals and applications
and provides more storage capacity than
IBM's 3600 finance system. The systems are
compatible, enabling users to "mix and match"
devices for flexibility
Shipments of two new models of the 3890
document processor are scheduled for the first
quarter, 1983. These devices minimize check-
handling tasks in financial institutions by simul-
taneously microfilming and sorting magnetic
ink-encoded documents.
Research and Development
IBM's investments in research and devel-
opment will provide the advanced technologies
and highly automated processes necessary
to meet the growing customer demand for high-
performance products.
In 1982, the company invested almost $2.1
billion in research and development. This brings
IBM's five-year investment to nearly $8 billion.
Research and development efforts have
produced achievements such as an experimental
Vs-inch-square chip with a storage capacity of
z88,ooo bits of data, the highest information
capacity yet reported. Another innovation,
an experimental 'A-inch 72,000-bit memory
chip, operates 12 times faster than an IBM
72,000-bit chip announced in 1980.
An IBM-developed experimental ceramic
chip carrier makes it possible to put the com-
puter logic power of an IBM System/370 Model
138 computer in a package that can be held in
the palm of a hand.
The number of patents issued to IBM is an-
other measure of the results of research and
development investments, as well as the inven-
tiveness and creativity of IBM employees. More
IBM point-of-sale systems produced at the company's than 450 U. S. patents were granted IBM in 1982,
Santa Palomba, Italy, plant are prepared for shipment. bringing to 2,155 the number of new ideas and
The jOS,ooo-square-foot facility is the newest of IBM's techniques patented by IBM in the last five years.
IJ manufacturing plants in Europe.
Exploring Future Applications
In addition to developing advanced
technologies, IBM's efforts also are aimed at
finding better ways to develop products and

===== PAGE 10 =====
3.5 million square feet of new plant and labora-
tory space were completed at 11 sites in five
countries. An additional 4.8 million square feet
are under construction worldwide.
Expansion projects under way at a number
of IBM locations include a 758,000-square-
foot addition to the San Jose, Calif., manufactur-
ing facility, which will significantly increase
IBM's capacity to produce disk storage devices.
A ioo,ooo-square-foot facility under con-
struction in Boeblingen, Germany, will be used
to further develop IBM computer software.
Among additions which recently became fully
operational are a 6oo,ooo-square-foot facility to
A mixture of neon and argon gasglovnng between
expand printed circuit manufacturing capacity two thin glass plates creates sharp pictures, graphs and
at the Austin, Tex., site and a ]45,ooo-square- characters in a new IBM display screen, now being
foot building at the Burlington, Vt., site for semi- evaluated for a variety of applications.
conductor manufacturing support.
In 1982, IBM-owned and leased manufac-
turing and laboratory space was increased
by 8.3 percent to a total of almost 74 million
square feet.
Federal Systems Division
The IBM Federal Systems Division ex-
panded the specialized information-handling
equipment and services it provides to U. S. gov-
Using a new technique called Scanning Tunneling
ernment agencies. New projects include the
Microscopy, developed at IBM's Zurich Research Labora-
design and integration of flight instrumentation
tory, scientists there have been able to ''map'" surface
for the U. S. Air Force's new search and rescue
variations that tneasure less than the volume of a
helicopter. The division also received a con-
single atom. The diamond-shaped pattern indicated
here is formed by the topmost atoms of a silicon surface. tract from the U.S. Navy for initial work on ad-
This significant breakthrough will lead to a better vanced sonar and submarine control systems.
understanding of the structure of surfaces, crucial to IBM computer hardware and software played a
future advances in computer technology. key role in the three successful flights of the
techniques to meet specific needs. Company-
wide, 14 scientific centers are exploring
advanced applications for IBM technology and
developing new uses for existing products.
IBM also is working with some 150 colleges
and universities worldwide on research projects
to explore advanced applications. A major
project was recently announced by IBM and
Carnegie-Mellon University This joint effort was
set up to develop software technology for pro- The IBM ^/oo finance system, adapted in Japan
fessional workstations and a network to give stu- to print and display Kanji characters, is improving
dents and faculty access to the university's productivity at some 180 branch locations of a large
Japanese bank.
data processing resources from the home, office
and laboratory.
Expanding Capacity
IBM's expansion program to prepare for
even greater business volumes in the years ahead
included investments of more than $2.4 billion
in new plant and equipment in 1982. More than

===== PAGE 11 =====
Space Shuttle Columbia in 1982. On-board
equipment, as well as programming used in mis-
sion control in Houston, Tex., and test and
launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., were
developed by this IBM division.
Satellite Business Systems
Satellite Business Systems, a partnership
formed by Aetna Life & Casualty, COMSAT
General Corporation and IBM, launched its third
communications satellite in 1982. The new
satellite expands the data and voice transmission
capacity of Satellite Business Systems by 50
percent. IBM uses SBS satellite communications
services to handle more than 160,000 calls
within the IBM internal telephone network each
business day
During the year, this business venture
began offering expanded low-cost, long distance
telephone services to business and residential
users. In addition, agreements were signed to
provide advanced telecommunications services
to the United Kingdom and Italy
Supplier Investment
Under an agreement jointly announced by
IBM and Intel Corporation in December 1982,
IBM will purchase a minority interest in Intel, an
important semiconductor supplier to IBM. This
investment will strengthen this major semicon-
ductor manufacturer's research, development
and production capacity While IBM supplies most
of its semiconductor needs within the company,
IBM expects to continue making significant pur-
chases from other manufacturers, as well as from
Intel. The planned purchase of 12 percent of
The third satellite deployed by Satellite Business Intel is an investment and IBM will not partici-
Systems, a partnership owned by Aetna, COMSAT pate in the day-to-day operations of Intel.
General and IBM, clears the cargo bay of the Space
Shuttle Columbia. IBM's Federal Systems Division
Wider Business Scope
supported Columbia's three missions in 1^82.
IBM is expanding its business interests into
a number of high-potential growth areas, such as
telecommunications, industrial automation and
network services. Seven Independent Business
Units—"businesses within the business" —
have been established to develop and market
specialized products and services.
Three new Independent Business Units
established in 1982 are:
• IBM Information Network, operating coast-
to-coast data communications as well as
remote computing services facilities linking
users to its Tampa, Fla., data processing center.
• Information Systems Services, providing
technical, management and consulting services
and developing customized software to meet
specific needs of data processing customers.

===== PAGE 12 =====
ms^ a®r «ar om. ju^s ,
•Telecommunications Carrier Products, with European Business Units handle advanced At the IBM Information Network's education center
worldwide design, development, marketing and manufacturing systems and telecommunica- in Tampa, Fla., customers learn to use software
service responsibility for products and applica- tions carrier products, satellite communications and color graphics to help solve business problems.
The new Independent Business Unit offers network
tions such as directory assistance systems. and network development.
management services as well as a variety of remote
Other Independent Business Units are: In addition, IBM is exploring other entre-
computing productivity tools and services.
• Biomedical Systems, which develops, manu- preneurial opportunities in areas such as educa-
factures and markets specialized biomedical tion and graphics.
products, such as blood-processing and electro-
cardiograph equipment. Future Growth
• IBM instruments. Inc., which markets and The information processing industry con-
services instruments and equipment used in re- tinues growing at a healthy rate, and the amount
search and development in industry, education of computing power IBM is able to provide per
and government. dollar continues growing as well. IBM employees
• Industrial Automation, responsible for and customers have translated these gains
advanced manufacturing devices, such as in price and performance into new applications.
IBM's robotic systems. Pinpoint landings of the space shuttle, the
•Science Research Associates, Inc., which convenience of banking through automatic
develops and markets educational and testing tellers and faster and more accurate design and
materials and services, including microcom- manufacturing techniques are now common-
puter software. place. Continued improvements in information
processing will generate an expanding number of
uses for a growing array of products and services.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Product Leadership
'...to stay in the forefront of the industry
in technology, reliability, quality and value
across our entire product line."
IBM expanded its traditional product line and
moved into new business areas in 1982 with an-
nouncements that ranged from large-scale
processors to programmable robotic systems.
New offerings brought further price/
performance improvements across the product
line and greater communications capabilities
among systems. Orderly, cost-effective ways for
users to add function and capacity as their needs
change characterized the year's announcements.
Large Systems
The power and range of large systems
were extended with the announcement of the
IBM 3084, the company's most powerful proc-
essor, and four new models in the large-scale,
advanced-technology processor series.
The IBM 3084 offers the speed and capacity
to meet the growing needs of users of IBM's
large-scale processors. It has up to 64 million
characters of main storage, twice that of IBM's
previous top-of-the-line processor. It also has 48
channels to transfer data to and from peripheral
equipment, such as storage devices and terminals.
IBM also announced the 3081 Model
Group G and three new 3083 models. These
processors offer users a range of performance
options and provide up to 32 million characters
of main storage and as many as 24 channels.
IBM's large systems line is based on highly
reliable, advanced-technology thermal conduc-
tion modules and high-performance circuit
boards.These elements are the building blocks
for the widest span of performance and capac-
ity options in the company's history, giving
customers a convenient, cost-effective way to
add power as their needs expand.
Multiple Virtual Storage/Extended Archi-
tecture (MVS/XA), IBM's advanced, large-system
control programming that enables users to take
full advantage of the speed and capacity of these
IBM J081 andjoSj computers, hundreds of remote
processors and more than 10,000 terminals help a major
insurance company provide faster, more complete service
to thousands of customers each day. This center near
Atlanta is one of the company's three data centers serving
4SJ000 home office, field office and agency users.

===== PAGE 14 =====
processors, is scheduled for general availability
by the end of the first quarter, 1983.
IBM Personal Computer
The IBM Personal Computer was enhanced
with the introduction of new hardware options
and programming. Maximum main storage was
doubled to more than half a million characters of
information. Diskette storage, used to keep data
readily available for processing, was increased to
640,000 characters, twice the previous maximum.
For business and education applications,
enhanced communications capabilities enable
users to link the Personal Computer to other
devices. A new printer and 16-color display which
m
can be used to depict charts and graphs were
also introduced.
The number and variety of Personal
Computer programs were also significantly
expanded with the addition of inventory control,
general ledger and time management applications,
as well as programs for home and leisure use.
Early in 1983, IBM began marketing
the Personal Computer in selected countries in
Europe, the Middle East and Asia.
Office Systems and Products
IBM significantly expanded its office systems
offerings with a new communications terminal
and enhanced programming for linking systems.
The new IBM Scanmaster I communications
terminal digitizes images of graphic, hand-
written or typed material and sends it to an IBM
computer for storage or distribution within an
office systems network. The terminal offers office
systems users a way to add image filing to the
text and data handling capabilities of the
Display writer and other IBM office workstations.
Scanmaster 1 also can transmit directly to
another Scanmaster, sending material at the rate
of less than one minute per page.
Office systems communications capability
was further enhanced by a new version of IBM's
Distributed Ofiice Support System (i)isoss)
programming. Scanmaster I, Displaywriter and
the IBM 5520 Administrative System can
be connected through DISOSS, which already
supported the IBM 8100 Information System.
New licensed programs enable Display-
writer users to develop and run data processing
applications. A higher-capacity, 66-line Display-
writer screen that makes text editing more
convenient was announced.
A leather goods manufacturer in Italy produces
handcrafted products for worldwide distribution with
the help of System/j8 computers to monitor shop floor
activities and handle inventory control.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Also introduced were Electronic 85 and main storage and three channels, is designed for The IBM Scanmaster I is shown in development tests in
65 typewriters. The Electronic 85 can store up to engineering, scientific and commercial users a special chamber at IBM's Fujisawa Laboratory near
15,500 characters to simplify repetitive typing who do not require the speed and capacity of Tokyo. The new office system terminal transmits images
of graphic, handwritten or typed material to a central
tasks. The Electronic 65 has a storage capacity of the larger models. Also, the main storage of the
processor for storage or distribution within an office
7,400 characters and can be upgraded on-site to 4331 Group II was doubled tofourmillion
systems network.
the Electronic 85. characters and new communications options
A new top-of-the-line copier, the Series 111 were announced for the 4321.
Copier/Duplicator Model 60, copies up to 70 The new System738 Model 7 general pur-
pages per minute and allows users to add pose computer has up to four million characters
features, such as automatic document feed and of main storage, double the previous maximum.
copy reduction. System/38-based office application software
improves productivity by making it easier to
Mid-Range and Small Systems write and store documents, keep track of
IBM's 4300 series of mid-range processors personal appointments and generate charts.
was expanded with new and enhanced models. New System734 software includes program-
The top-of-the-line 4341 Group 12 offers up to ming that makes it easier to create, maintain
16 million characters of main storage and six and update data files, write data entry programs
data transfer channels. The entry-level 4341 and generate formatted reports. System734
Group 9, with up to four million characters of Einancial Planning and Modeling System soft-
ware simplifies the development of financial
forecasting and planning models.

===== PAGE 16 =====
A specialist at IBM's Advanced Customer Education The performance options available with
Center near Washington, D.C., monitors a IBM's flexible Series/i small computer were
nationwide IBM network in which hundreds of products expanded with the introduction of a mid-range
are interconnected using the company's Systems
processor and new control programming that
Network Architecture, the world's most widely used
enables users to link up to i6 processors. This
telecommunications architecture for linking
programming also improves response time and
information processing equipment.
offers features that improve serviceability.
Printers, Terminals
The new 3800 Printing Subsystem Model 3
merges electrophotographic and laser tech-
nologies and is the fastest printer in IBM's prod-
uct line. It produces text and graphics with finer
lines and better character resolution than earlier
models and can operate with a variety of large-
scale IBM processors.
Multiple exposure photography captures the motion
of an advanced IBM robotic system during a printer com-
ponent assembly operation at the Austin, Tex., facility.
IBM's new robotic systems are used throughout the
company to perform a variety of manufacturing tasks.

===== PAGE 17 =====
A new, low-cost model of the IBM 3262
printer attaches to a variety of mid-range
processors. New color and monochrome termi-
nals and a compact printer for use with the
System738 and System734 give customers added
peripheral equipment options.
Robotic Systems
IBM entered a new business area in 1982
when it began marketing two industrial robotic
systems. The advanced IBM 7565 Manufacturing
System can be programmed for intricate opera-
tions, such as automatic assembly and electronic
parts insertion.The IBM 7535 Manufacturing
System can perform repetitive tasks, such
as assembling, packing and loading parts. The
robotic systems can be programmed with an
advanced IBM-developed programming language.
Scientific, Drafting Systems
IBM Instruments, Inc., an IBM subsidiary, in-
troduced the IBM Instruments Computer System,
which provides scientists and technicians with
a modular, bench-top computer to control
laboratory instruments and to collect, store and
analyze data. Also announced were a new chro-
matograph for use with this system, and a series
of spectrometers for biomedical, environmental,
clinical and industrial substance analysis.
IBM also announced its first stand-alone
drafting product, the 7361 Fastdraft system.
It consists of a small processor, up to two graphics
displays, terminal console, large-format color
plotter and specialized software.
Meeting Users' Needs
IBM's leading-edge products are addressing
a rapidly expanding number of uses and users —
from international corporations moving infor-
mation through multiple distributed processing
networks to first graders learning phonics with
the aid of the Personal Computer.
The products announced by IBM in 1982
reflect the creativity and technological contri-
butions of employees worldwide and underscore
the company's commitment to remain in the
vanguard of the industry.
Laser beams in the new IBM j800 Printing Subsystem
Model the company's fastest printer, scan across the
print drum to create text and graphics at speeds up
to 20,0^0 lines per minute. The paths of the beams are
altered millions of times per second and are reflected
from an 18-sided mirror spinning at thousands of
revolutions per minute.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Efficiency
to be not only the low-cost producer of the
highest quality products in the industry, but also
the low-cost developer, seller and servicer."
SINGAPORE
Several years ago, IBM embarked on a full-scale
drive to become the most efficient producer of
information products in the industry.
In 1982, the results of a major reorgani-
zation and hundreds of efficiency measures in-
m
troduced throughout IBM helped move
greater numbers of products through the or-
ganization smoothly and cost effectively
Along with programs to support high-
volume, low-cost production, IBM employees in
every operating unit are putting a special em-
phasis on quality. This effort stresses that doing
a job right the first time—whether building
a terminal, typing a letter, making a sales call or
servicing equipment—contributes directly to
the company's success.
Marketing Channels
Expanded marketing channels are provid-
ing products and services to more businesses and
users than ever before. As product volumes in-
crease, these channels are effectively complement-
ing IBM's traditional marketing activities and
reducing marketing costs.
A total of 89 IBM Product Centers are
selling office equipment, small computers, termi-
nals and supplies in major cities worldwide.
In the U. S., the IBM Personal Computer can
be purchased in IBM Product Centers, in more
than 370 Sears and ComputerLand stores and in
235 independent retail outlets designated as
authorized Personal Computer dealers. Volume
sales of the Personal Computer are handled
by IBM marketing representatives as well.
In many countries where IBM does busi-
ness, customers may order supplies and selected
products through catalogs or by toll-free tele-
phone calls to IBM Direct centers.
IBM also is selling selected products and
subassemblies through authorized distributors
and to other manufacturers.
IBM Product Centers, such as this one in Singapore,
provide a cost-effective way to sell IBM products and
reach more customers.

===== PAGE 19 =====
f/'-,'/ I't'
A convenient repair and exchange service for IBM
products, such as the IBM Personal Computer and the
^yoo finance system, is offered at more than loo service
centers in the U.S. Repair center service for selected
products is available worldwide.
An IBM-designed laser scanning system automatically
verifies circuit patterns on ceramic sheets used in IBM's
large-computer chip carriers. Installed in IBM plants in
Sindelfingen, Germany, and East Fishkill, N.Y.,
the system makes Sj million decisions in five seconds.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Service Efficiencies
Customers may also choose from a variety
of service options. The Customer Service
Division is now operating more than JOG Service/
Exchange Centers to efficiently provide IBM
service for selected products. The centers offer
quick turnaround and low service costs to cus-
tomers who bring in product components.
Through another service option recently intro-
duced in many U. S., Canadian and Japanese
cities, customers also may make arrangements
for an IBM courier service to pick up and deliver
selected product components.
The Field Engineering Division's remote
service program, which provides customers with
technical assistance over the telephone, has
proved to be a cost-effective way to help users
get faster problem resolution. About 85 percent
of customer requests for software assistance
are resolved without the need for an on-site
service call.
Also, thousands of modems, control units
and displays are installed by customers without
assistance from service personnel. For example,
about 97 percent of the IBM 3279 color displays
and 3278 and 8775 displays shipped each
month are being installed this way.
Administration
A new supply management system is now
being used by IBM's Americas/Far East Cor-
poration to coordinate orders and deliveries of
equipment and system components from IBM
plants around the world. With this adminis-
trative tool, marketing representatives can give
customers committed delivery schedules within
four days, a process that once took several A new, automated materials distribution center
weeks. Better scheduling and tracking of ship- at IBM's Greenock, Scotland, facility speeds parts to
ments also reduce, by more than half, the time an adjoining manufacturing plant, which supplies
terminals and controllers to Europe, the Middle East
between equipment arrival in a country and in-
and Africa.
stallation in the customer's office.
Development, Manufacturing
Advanced computer-based tools and
processes designed by IBM engineers are reduc-
ing turnaround time for developing, manufac- An IBM marketing representative in San Francisco
uses a regional information network to perform such
turing and testing complex circuit components.
tasks as business planning, scheduling meetings and
A computer-based system that is operating
electronically distributing documents. Similar advanced
in IBM's Burlington, Vt., facility can reduce
office and information systems used throughout
design costs in some applications by as much as
IBM improve employee efficiency in every aspect of
90 percent. The system automatically designs IBM's business.
computer logic chips with more than 7,000
circuits that contain some 30,000 transistors.
The Data Systems Division uses a computer
application to convert mechanical designs into
three-dimensional drawings, enabling engineers
to view and position largc-scale processor com-
ponents. This application helps optimize the

===== PAGE 21 =====
use of space in IBM's large systems, critical to
the high-performance levels of these processors.
IBM's Engineering Design System enables
engineers and researchers in zy locations world-
wide to share information on current circuitry
designs and keep pace with rapidly changing
technology. The system also is used as an
advanced design tool for tasks such as custom-
izing circuits and testing designs against
performance criteria.
Focus on Quality
During the year, activities in every oper-
ating unit focused attention on the necessity to
design and produce products that are less
expensive to build, easier to install and require
little maintenance.
At the new IBM Quality Institute and
through other companywide educational pro-
grams, managers explore the topic of quality and
the process of improving operations. Divisions
set targets reflecting IBM'S objectives to deliver
defect-free products and services and ensure
quality leadership.
In addition, more than 2,000 quality circles
have been formed companywide to foster
employee participation in improving quality and
efficiency
Suggestion Program
IBM encourages employees to look beyond
their own specific job responsibilities for ways to
improve the company's operations. The com-
pany's suggestion plan provides cash awards that
are tied to dollar savings resulting from inno-
vations not directly related to an employee's job
responsibilities.
In 1982, more than $12 million was
awarded to 30,000 employees companywide for
suggestions representing a savings of more
'i.'r.
than $60 million.
The efforts and ideas IBM employees bring
to their jobs continue to be the company's
most important asset in the drive for efficiency . a:
Delivery schedules ofproducts, such as this disk file for a
Canadian bank, are improved due to an order entry and
inventory control system tied to IBM manufacturing
facilities worldwide.

===== PAGE 22 =====
To conduct its business throughout the world,
IBM is organized into the following groups, divisions
and wholly owned subsidiaries:
Information Systems Group Information Systems and Technology Group Other Divisions
Customer Service Division Data Systems Division Real Estate and Construction Division
Provides maintenance, related support and pro- Has worldwide development and associated Manages the selection and acquisition of sites,
gramming services within the U S. and its ter- programming responsibility for large, complex the design and construction of buildings and the
ritories for designated systems and products systems, with primary emphasis on high- purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM opera-
developed primarily by the Information Systems performance products, plus U. S. manufacturing tions in the U. S. The division has responsibility
and Communications Group. responsibility for those systems. for assessing real estate projects outside the
U. S., as well as for IBM's worldwide energy and
Federal Systems Division General Products Division
environmental programs. It also provides facility
Provides specialized information-handling and Has worldwide development and U. S. manufac-
services to selected headquarters locations.
control systems to the Federal government for turing responsibility for storage systems, includ-
seaborne, spaceborne, airborne and ground- ing tape units, disk products and mass storage Research Division
based environments. Also participates in applied systems, program products and product-related Brings scientific understanding to bear on
research and exploratory development. programming. areas of company interest through basic research
and development of technologies of potential
Field Engineering Division General Technology Division
long-range importance.
Provides maintenance and related services with- Has worldwide development and product assur-
in the US. and its territories for all current IBM ance and U.S. manufacturing responsibility
Subsidiaries
systems and products and designated new for logic, memory and special semiconductor
IBM Credit Corporation
systems and products developed primarily by the devices and associated packaging. The division
Offers term leases and finances installment pay-
Information Systems and Technology Group, also procures components for the IBM World
ment agreements on IBM information-handling
as well as support for specified IBM program offer- Trade Americas/Far East Corporation and U. S.
equipment in the U. S.
ings. Has overall responsibility for the distribu- operating units.
tion of all hardware and software products and IBM Instruvients, Inc.
related publications. The division also provides Information Systems Has responsibility for IBM's efforts in the ana-
maintenance, marketing support and central and Communications Group lytical instruments field, including marketing
programming service for assigned products. Communication Products Division and servicing selected products in the U. S.
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
Nat lonal Accounts Division Science Research Associates, Inc.
facturing responsibility for telecommunications
Has marketing and field administration Has worldwide development, publication and/or
systems, office systems, display products,
responsibility within the U.S. and its territories marketing responsibility for a wide range of
distribution industry systems and related pro-
for the full standard line of IBM products, its educational and testing materials, services and
gramming. The division serves as the worldwide
assigned customers are selected large accounts microcomputer software designed for use
architectural and systems focal point for office
with complex information processing needs. in elementary and secondary schools, colleges,
systems and Systems Network Architecture
businesses and the home.
National Marketing Division activities.
Has marketing and field administration IBM World Trade Americas I Far East Corporation
Information Products Division
responsibility within the U.S. and its territories With a territory extending across four conti-
Has worldwide development and related
for the full standard line of IBM products. nents, this subsidiary is responsible for IBM
programming and U. S. manufacturing responsi-
Its assigned customers are large, medium and operations in 46 countries, including Australia,
bility for typewriters, copiers and systems
small accounts. Brazil, Canada and Japan.
for banking and manufacturing industries, and
Systems Supplies Division for peripheral equipment, including printers, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/
Has responsibility for formulating worldwide copier systems, keyboards, diskettes and Africa Corporation
business strategy for information processing associated supplies. Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe, located
supplies and accessories; for manufacturing or in Paris, it is responsible for IBM operations in
System Products Division
procurement, and marketing within the U. S. and 85 countries.
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
its territories of IBM supplies and services.
facturing responsibility for small and inter- IBM World Trade Corporation
mediate-sized general purpose systems, robotic Provides designated support to IBM World Trade
systems and related programming. Its respon- organizational units.
sibility for the IBM Personal Computer also
includes U.S. marketing through retail channels.

===== PAGE 23 =====
IBM has had a long-standing practice of support- Called the IBM Europe institute, this seminar
ing social, educational and cultural programs. was the first of a series of meetings at which infor-
In 1982, IBM contributions of cash grants, equip- mation on advanced technology and applica-
ment and other resources reached a record of tions was presented to leading members of the
$80 million worldwide. European scientific community
IBM also sponsors a number of.educational
Educational Contributions exhibitions in museums throughout the world.
IBM support for colleges and universities in Among major exhibitions is "Calculating to
many parts of the world concentrates on areas Computing...the Dawn of the Information Age,"
where the needs of education and the long-term which opened in 1982 at the Museum of Science
interests of the company coincide. and Industry in Chicago. This comprehensive
In 1982, IBM announced a program to display on innovations in computing is on long-
provide $50 million in cash and equipment to term loan. During 1982, IBM also supported the
help selected universities develop and update National Science Museum in Tokyo and spon-
manufacturing systems engineering courses. sored the opening of the Museum of Technology
Of the total, $10 million in cash grants will be in Winterthur, Switzerland.
shared by five or six universities over the next
four years to implement or improve curricula at Faculty Loan
the master's degree level. IBM also will make More than 60 IBM employees participated Young scientists at the Asian Institute of Technology
available up to 20 computer-aided design and in the Faculty Loan Program in 1982, most of near Bangkok, Thailand, study ways to help solve
manufacturing systems. them teaching at colleges with predominantly such world challenges as food production, housing and
Matching cash grants of S6 million were minority enrollments. These company-paid energy. IBM helps support this international center,
which has graduated 2,000 students from some
made to more than 1,300 universities in 1982. leaves are for one academic year. Since 1971,
20 Asian countries.
Contributions to colleges and universities by em- more than 370 employees have taught at nearly
ployees, retirees and their spouses are matched 100 institutions.
by IBM on a 2 to 1 basis. Since 1959, employee During the same period, more than 500
gifts and company matching grants have totaled U. S. employees were granted social service leaves
nearly $50 million. to work for national or community nonprofit
In 1982, 196 fellowships for graduate work organizations. In 1982, more than 100 employees
were awarded worldwide in such fields as en- were granted leaves.
gineering, information systems and computer
science. The company also sponsored several Job Training
hundred scholarships for minority students in IBM placed special emphasis during the year
the U.S. on job training. The company now provides sup-
IBM is working with universities outside the port to 21 major job training centers for the
U S. on a number of projects, such as upgrading socially and economically disadvantaged in the
business management curricula in Australia, the U.S. The centers—13 of them opened in 1982 —
Philippines and Indonesia, and developing a are operated in connection with nonprofit,
prototype system for alcohol fuel production community-based organizations in urban areas.
in Brazil. Instructors and equipment are provided for
A four-week seminar for postgraduate level courses in programming, computer operation,
researchers and university professors was data entry and word processing. The job place-
sponsored by IBM in Courchevel, France, in 1982. ment rate is more than 80 percent for the
6,000 students graduated from these training
programs since the first center was opened in
1968. Additional centers will be opened in 1983.
Some 200 smaller community job training
centers teaching typing and data entry skills also

===== PAGE 24 =====
Students at an IBM-sponsored job training center
in Houston, one of zj major centers opened in ipSz,
attend a class in the new facility's computer room.
receive IBM assistance. More than 150,000 stu-
dents have completed courses at these centers in
the past 14 years.
Since the mid-1970s, IBM has helped estab-
lish 22 job training centers for the physically
disabled. More than 850 handicapped persons
have been trained at these centers as entry-level
programmers.
Community Programs
As part of its expanded public responsi-
bility efforts in 1982, IBM introduced a
training seminar for executives of nonprofit or-
ganizations. The five-day program, designed to
enhance skills in planning, finance and manage-
ment, will continue through the third quarter
of 1983. More than 860 representatives of
organizations such as the National Urban
League, the American Red Cross and many small
community groups attended the Community
Executive Program-'82.
IBM supports employee involvement in
after-hours volunteer work for nonprofit
organizations through the IBM Fund for Com-
munity Service. This program aids specific
projects in which an IBM employee, retiree or
spouse has a continuing mvolvement. In 1982,
grants amounting to about $2 million were pro- Of the nearly 15,000 persons hired in the Cultural Activities
vided to assist about 1,000 projects. U.S. in 1982, 40 percent were women and 19 Direct grants from the company are made
Worldwide, IBM supports a wide variety of percent were minorities. At year-end, IBM had each year to museums, performing arts com-
projects, such as helping provide Braille text- approximately 3,000 women managers and panies, public television and other cultural
books for schools in Mexico and eyeglasses for 2,600 minority managers. organizations.
needy children in Thailand. In Belgium, IBM Several thousand handicapped persons are Cultural institutions received added
aids university-level, handicapped computer pro- employed by IBM worldwide. Among workplace financial support in 1982 from IBM employees,
gramming students by providing computer accommodations for them are "talking" termi- retirees and their spouses under the company's
output in Braille, special equipment and job nals, Braille translations and audio cassettes new Matching Grants to the Arts Program.
placement assistance. for the blind and typewriter-assisted telephones IBM's support of the arts on television in-
for the deaf. cluded worldwide distribution of "Picasso:
Affirmative Action within IBM The company continued to expand pur- A Painter's Diary," which was translated into
IBM is actively engaged in affirmative action chasing of products and services from minority- nine languages and shown in 30 countries. "Ian
programs to hire and provide advancement owned businesses in the U. S. The number of McKellen Acting Shakespeare" was shown on
opportunities for women, minorities and the minority-owned suppliers grew in 1982 to 700 U. S. public television, and complementary class-
physically handicapped. companies doing more than $79 million worth room materials were mailed to 25,000 schools.
of business with IBM. Purchases from 400 com- The program also will be distributed worldwide
panies owned primarily by women increased during 1983.
to more than $40 million. Purchases from 80
companies owned by suppliers who employ large
numbers of handicapped workers totaled more
than $16 million.

===== PAGE 25 =====
'Thomas Eakins: Artist of Philadelphia" one of the
major art exhibits supported by IBM in ip82, is viewed
by visitors at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston.
In Memoriam
Albert L.Williams, a member of the IBM
Advisory Board and former president of the
IBM Corporation, died on December 30, 1982.
In recognition of the key role he played in
the success of the company, John R. Opel, IBM
president and chief executive officer, said,
"Many of the fine things about IBM that we take
for granted today are based on his wisdom.
We shall miss him."
A1 Williams joined IBM as a salesman in
1936 and, after holding a number of sales and
management positions, became controller
of the company in 1942. He served in various
executive capacities before becoming president
in 1961. Following his retirement as president
in April 1966, he served as chairman of the
executive and finance committees. He retired
from the Board of Directors in 1981.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity standards, as set forth in the IBM Business
of the financial information presented in this Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The lated into numerous languages, are distributed
accompanying financial statements have been to employees throughout the world, and
prepared in conformity with generally accepted reemphasized through internal programs to
accounting principles, applying certain esti- assure that they are understood and followed.
mates and judgments as required. Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
IBM maintains an effective system of tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, statements. Their accompanying report is
of organizational arrangements with clearly based on an examination conducted in accor-
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of dance with generally accepted auditing stan-
authority. We believe this system provides dards, including a review of internal accounting
reasonable assurance that transactions are controls and tests of accounting procedures
executed in accordance with management au- and records.
thorization, and that they are appropriately The Audit Committee of the Board of
recorded, in order to permit preparation of Directors is composed solely of outside directors,
financial statements in conformity with generally and is responsible for recommending to
accepted accounting principles and to the Board the independent accounting firm to
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain be retained for the coming year, subject to
accountability of assets. An important element stockholder approval. The Audit Committee
of the system is an ongoing internal audit meets periodically and privately with the
program. independent accountants, with our internal
To assure the effective administration of auditors, as well as with IBM management, to
internal control, we carefully select and train review accounting, auditing, internal account-
our employees, develop and disseminate written ing controls and financial reporting matters.
policies and procedures, provide appropriate
communication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of John R.Opel President and Chief Executive Officer
controls. We continue to believe that it is
essential for the company to conduct its business
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical Allen J. Krowe Vice President, Finance & Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors February 8, 1983
of International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated accounting for foreign currency translation
financial statements, appearing on pages 28, as described on page 36. Our examinations of
30, 32 and 34 through 42, present fairly these statements were made in accordance
the financial position of International Business with generally accepted auditing standards and
Machines Corporation and its subsidiary accordingly included such tests of the account-
companies at December 31,1982 and 1981, and ing records and such other auditing procedures
the results of their operations and changes as we considered necessary in the circumstances.
in funds for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 1982, in conformity with
generally accepted accounting principles applied
Price Waterhouse
on a consistent basis after restatement for the 153 East 53rd Street
change, with which we concur, in the method of New "fork, N.Y. 10022

===== PAGE 27 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1982 1981* 1980'
Gross Income:
Sales $ 16,815 $ 12,901 $ 10,919
Rentals 11,121 10,839 10,869
Services 6,428 5,330 4,425
$ 34,364 $ 29,070 $ 26,213
Cost of sales 6,682 5,162 4,238
Cost of rentals 3»959 4,041 3,841
Cost of services 3»047 2,534 2,187
Selling, general and administrative expenses 9,578 8,583 8,094
Research, development and engineering expenses 3,042 2,451 2,287
Interest expense 454 407 273
26,762 23,178 20,920
7,602 5,892 5,293
Other income, principally interest 328 368 430
Earnings before income taxes 7,930 6,260 5,723
Provision for U.S. Federal and
non-US. income taxes 3,52.1 2,650 2,326
Net Earnings $ 4,409 $ 3,610 $ 3,397
Per share $ 7-39 $ 6.14 $ 5.82
Average number of shares outstanding:
1982-596,688,50 I
1981-587,803,373
1980-583,5 16,764
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36.
The notes on pages 35 through 42 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Results of Operations
The results of operations for the current gin improved to 60.2 percent. The ongoing effectively and accurately portrayed using local
year were outstanding, as reported in the Letter investment in efficient production facilities has currency under FAS No. 52.
to Stockholders. allowed the company to continue to offer IBM management is committed to three
Gross income totaled $34.4 billion, an competitive products while offsetting inflation goals for the Eighties: profitable growth, product
increase of 18.2 percent over 1981. Gross income and producing a modest margin improvement. leadership and efficiency. In 1982 the company
from U.S. operations increased by 26.1 percent The gross profit margin on rentals improved made major strides in achieving these goals. The
while gross income from non-U. S. operations in- by 1.7 percent. This improvement was largely company will continue to invest in research and
creased by 9.7 percent. due to price changes on short term rentals, lower development, engineering, in high technology
Net earnings for the year were $4.4 billion, parts and maintenance costs, and reflects quality manufacturing, in efficient development and
up 22.1 percent over 1981. Net earnings from U.S. improvements and better productivity in our production facilities, and in improved marketing
operations increased by 33.4 percent over 1981 worldwide service organization. and service while exercising prudent cost and
and from non-U. S. operations by 7.0 percent. The advance of technology continues to be expense control.
Gross income from sales increased by 30.3 a dominant force in this industry. Investments During this past year, IBM has positioned
percent over 1981. In 1982, the percent of gross in research and development, which continued itself for continued growth. IBM's advanced
income derived from sales amounted to 48.9 at high levels in 1982, amounted to $2.1 billion, technology large-scale processors and the family
percent, compared to 44.4 percent in the prior an increase of 27.4 percent over 1981. Addi- of high-performance direct access storage devices
year. Purchase of equipment previously on rent tionally in 1982, expenditures for product were exceptionally well received this past year.
grew by 29.2 percent, and purchase of newly related engineering amounted to $1 billion, an These high technology products contributed
manufactured equipment grew by 36.0 percent. increase of 17.9 percent over the prior year. significantly to the excellent incoming order flow
In the U. S., purchase of equipment previously on A continued commitment to the development across our worldwide operations. Reflecting
rent grew by 50.3 percent, compared to a modest of new products and services is essential to the effects of the recession, the company experi-
non-U. S. growth of 6.9 percent. The increase maintain the health of the business. enced a softening in orders for mid-range
in the proportion of gross income from the pur- Selling, general and administrative expense systems in the third and fourth quarters of 1982.
chase of products reflects a trend in customers' as a percent of gross income was 30.9 percent Orders for office systems and low-end processors,
choice of the method of acquisition toward in 1980, 29.5 percent in 1981, and 27.9 percent in including the Personal Computer, remained
outright purchase or sales type leases. Accord- 1982. This favorable trend is due primarily to strong throughout the year. Despite continuing
ingly, we saw a modest growth of 2.6 percent ongoing productivity improvements. End user economic uncertainty, management believes the
in rental revenue over 1981. marketing and field administration organizations economic pace will quicken in 1983, and expects
Gross income from services showed a sig- were restructured early in 1982 into full product the company to continue the trend of sustained
ficant increase of 20.6 percent in 1982. Main- line, customer service functions. This allowed growth and profitability.
tenance gross income, which is approximately more effective customer coverage and the consol-
IBM Consolidated Gross Income: (In millions)
60 percent of the total service gross income, idation of administrative functions. Further, $36,000
grew at 17.8 percent, while program product we were able to simplify product offerings and
gross income, the other major element, grew at select the most cost effective marketing channels.
45.3 percent. The effective tax rate in 1982 increased
Although the implementation of a new by 2.1 percentage points to 44.4 percent.
accounting standard on foreign currency trans- This increase was due to non-U. S. operations
lation has lessened the effects of currency where the effective tax rate increased by
changes on earnings, the financial results con- 6.7 percentage points, primarily the result of
tinue to reflect the adverse impact of the nonrecurring 1981 adjustments and increased
continued strengthening of the U. S. dollar tax rates in certain countries.
against other currencies. Had currency rates The consolidated financial statements for
remained constant year to year, and if the effects the years 1981 and 1980 have been restated to
of currency rate changes on business volumes, give effect to the change in accounting principle
pricing and other operating decisions were in connection with the adoption in 1982 of
disregarded, it is estimated that gross income Financial Accounting Standard No. 52 (FAS No.
and net earnings from non-U. S. operations 52). Non-U. S. subsidiaries, accounting for approx-
would have grown about 20 percent over 1981. imately 85 percent of the company's non-U. S.
1978 '79 '80 '81 1982.
During 1982, gross profit increased 19.3 gross income, operate in a local currency environ-
percent to $20.7 billion and the gross profit mar- ment. The results of these operations are more I Sales WM Rentals •• Services

===== PAGE 29 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1982 1981*
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash $ 405 454
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market. . . . ^>895 1,575
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, less allowance:
1982, $216; 1981, $187 4^976 4,382
Other accounts receivable 457 410
Inventories 3»492 2,803
Prepaid expenses z^ 685
$ 13,014 $ 10,309
Rental Machines and Parts 16,527 16,599
Less: Accumulated depreciation 7>4io
7,347
9»ii7 9,252
Plant and Other Property 14,240
12,702
Less: Accumulated depreciation 5»794 5,157
8,446 7,545
Deferred Charges and Other Assets 1,964 2,001
$ 32»54i $ 29,107
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes 2,854 2,412
Loans payable 529 773
Accounts payable 983 872
Compensation and benefits 1,959 1,556
Deferred income 402 390
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 1,482 1,323
8,209 7,326
Deferred Investment Tax Credits 323 252
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 1,198 1,184
LongTerm Debt 2,851 2,669
Stockholders' Equity:
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 5,008 4,389
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1982-602,406,128; 1981-592,293,624
Retained earnings 16,259 13,909
Translation adjustments (1,307) (622)
19,960 17,676
$ 32,541 $ 29,107
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Financial Condition
IBM has maintained its strong financial rates. This resulted in a reduction in the Credit Corporation announced a new term lease
condition while continuing to invest signifi- reported book value of net assets in the current program which provides IBM customers with
cantly in research and development, technology period of $685 million. The cumulative effect is more financing options at competitive prices,
and modern production facilities. Expenditures reflected in the equity section of the Statement terms and conditions. These financing leases are
for research and development and product of Financial Position as translation adjustments. outright sales for accounting purposes and
related engineering exceeded $ 11 billion over the If the U. S. dollar continues to strengthen, financing through the IBM Credit Corporation
past five years. During the same period the com- reported net asset values will be further reduced. improves cash flow to IBM. Management expects
pany invested over $io billion in land, buildings, Should the dollar weaken in relation to non-U. S. these financing leases to become an increas-
and machinery and equipment (see graph currencies, net assets will increase. The change ingly attractive means for customers to acquire
on page 33 depicting this investment). These in net asset values is unrealized. There is no IBM products.
investments have provided the company with change in the productive capabilities of any of Despite periodic shortages of capital, high
the technology, capacity for growth, and the these assets. They continue to serve the needs of interest rates, and dramatic shifts in currency
highly automated facilities to allow us to IBM's business activities in those countries exchange rates, IBM has been able to utilize
compete effectively. affected. its strong credit rating to acquire appropriate
Funds from operations in 1982 grew 24.2 It is management's view that the translation levels of financing through worldwide sources.
percent to $9.7 billion. This source of funds, adjustment account has significance in a situa- IBM has frequently borrowed in currencies other
which was $1.9 billion greater than the prior tion where liquidation of the net assets may than the U. S. dollar. While there are risks
year, was sufficient to meet the company's capital be anticipated. This is not the case with IBM's associated with foreign currency obligations,
investment and operational needs, provide for operations and, accordingly, the company be- there are also clear advantages. Interest rates
dividends, and at the same time reduce external lieves this translation account is not meaningful have been much lower than comparable dollar
financing requirements. Employee stock plans when evaluating current operations and should loans and the exchange loss risk associated with
and the dividend reinvestment plan provided an be considered only over the longer term of repayment is minimized by the availability of
additional $613 million in funds. the company's expected continuing operations. positive cash flow from operations in most major
Conservation of capital continues to be a The principal effect on IBM's reported countries. Consequently, the company has
major focus in the management of IBM. Manage- equity, under FAS NO. 52, given the dramatic considerable financial flexibility in many different
ment is mindful of the risks inherent in high strengthening of the dollar during the past three currencies throughout the world. IBM has approx-
technology, the growing scope and quality of years, comes from translating rental machines, imately $3.4 billion of unused lines of credit,
competition, and uncertain economic condi- plant and other property recorded in non-U. S. mostly short term.
tions. The continuing large capital requirements currencies to U. S. dollars. The cumulative The company's strong financial position,
of the company have brought added focus on translation adjustment at December 31,1982 as exhibited by its significantly increased working
asset management. Throughout the business, amounts to $1.3 billion. Offsetting this adjust- capital, its low total debt to equity ratio of
operating measurements and unit performance ment of net assets is the cumulative positive I to 6 and the available sources of capital around
objectives emphasize return on invested capital, effect on reported earnings, for 1982 and the two the world, are expected to provide IBM sufficient
asset turnover, cash flow and related indicators. prior years, amounting to $586 million. Thus, financial flexibility for the future.
A major educational program was undertaken the effect on equity of implementing FAS No. 52
this year at all management levels to center atten- is a reduction of $721 million at year-end 1982.
tion on these critical indices. The company invested $4.3 billion in rental
IBM's consolidated financial statements machines and parts in J982 down from $4.6
have been restated to reflect the adoption of billion in the prior year. Rental machine assets
FAS No. 52. For those non-U. S. subsidiaries have been and will continue to be a significant
where IBM operates primarily in local currencies, cash requirement for the company. However,
FAS No. 52 requires that all assets and liabilities a growing portion of IBM's products is being
are translated to U S. dollars at year-end exchange purchased or acquired by customers under sales
type leases. This trend is likely to continue.
Another dimension to the company's
financial flexibility was added with the establish-
ment of the IBM Credit Corporation and its
own associated capital sources. It was established
in 1981 to finance installment payment agree-
ments with U. S. customers. In 1982 the IBM

===== PAGE 31 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1982 1981* 1980*
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January 1 $ 2,029 $ 2,112 $ 3,771
Provided from Operations:
Sources:
Net earnings $ 4,409 $ 3,610 $ 3,397
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 3.143 2,753 2,489
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities
capitalized in rental machines 419 424 406
Net book value of rental machines and
other property retired or sold 1,642 1,212 1,007
Other 85 (189) 90
9,698 7,810 7,389
Uses:
Investment in rental machines 4.^54 4,610 4,334
Investment in plant and other property 2,431 2,235 2,258
6,685 6,845 6,592
Increase (decrease) in deferred charges and other assets.... (37) 280 242
Net change in working capital
(excluding cash, marketable securities
and loans payable) 307 (133) 273
6,955 6,992 7,107
Translation effects 30 (53) (39)
Net provided from operations 2,773 765 243
Provided from External Financing:
Net change in long-term debt 182 570 510
Net change in loans payable (244) 182 (342)
Net provided from external financing (62) 752 168
Provided from (used for) Employee and Stockholder Plans 613 423 (62)
5,353 4,052 4,120
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 2,053 2,023 2,008
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December j 7 $ 3,300 $ 2,029 $ 2,112
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36.
The notes on pages 35 through 42 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions)
$9,728 Operationst $4,Z54 Rental Machines
,431 Plant and Other Property
$613 Stock Plans
$480 New Long-Term Debt
$298 Reduction of Long-Term Debt
$244 Net Change in Loans Payable
$270 Other Assets (net)
$2,053 Cash Dividends
flncludes Effects of Translation
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property
Over the past five years, the company has Investment (Additions)
invested over $10 billion in land, buildings, and in Plant and Other Property (In millions)
machinery and equipment to meet customer
demands, maintain technological leadership and
improve productivity. These recent additions
represent approximately two-thirds of the gross
asset value of plant and other property as of the
end of December, 1982. Since 1980, investments
exceeded $2 billion in each year. Continuous
upgrading of our facilities is essential to achieve
our objectives. Large investments will continue
to be required in future years.
1978 '79 '80 '81 1981
I Annual •• Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 33 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
for the year ended December 31:
Translation
(Dollars in millions) Capital Stock Retained Earnings Adjustments Treasury Stock Total
1980* Stockholders' Equity, January i, 1980 $ 3»974 $ 11,012 $ 642 $(25) $ 15,603
Net earnings 3>397 3,397
Cash dividends declared (2,008) (2,008)
Capital stock issued under employee
plans (288,816 shares) 16 16
Purchases (7,674,300 shares) and sales
(7,597,773 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plan-net (75) (5) (80)
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 7 2
Translation adjustments (352) (352)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1980 12,326 290 (30) 16,578
1981* Net earnings 3,610 3,610
Cash dividends declared (2,023) (2,023)
Capital stock issued under employee
plans (8,031,550 shares) 394 394
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plan (4) 30 26
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 3 3
Translation adjustments (912) (912)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1981 .... 4>389 13,909 (622) 17,676
1982 Net earnings 4,409 4,409
Cash dividends declared (2,053) (2,053)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholder plans (10,112,504 shares).... 602 602
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans (6) (6)
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 17 17
Translation adjustments (685) (685)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1982 $ 5,008 $ 16,259 $(1,307) $ — $ 19,960
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36.
The notes on pages 35 through 42
are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements:
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines
of Consolidation: Corporation and its U.S. and non-US. subsidiary companies, other than the IBM Credit
Corporation, a wholly owned financing subsidiary The equity method is used to account for the
investment in IBM Credit Corporation and for investments in joint ventures and affiliated
companies in which IBM has 50 percent or less ownership.
Translation of For consolidation purposes, the financial statements of non-U, S. subsidiary companies are trans-
Non- U. S. Currency lated to U. S. dollars in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting
Amounts: Standards (SFAS) NO. 52, "Foreign Currency Translation." This Statement was adopted by the com-
pany in 1982, and consolidated financial statements for the years 1981 and 1980 have been restated.
Gross Income: Gross income is recognized from sales when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon
customer acceptance, from rentals in the month in which they accrue, and from services over the
contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and
contain discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly
monthly or for a two-year period, with some covering periods up to five years.
Depreciation: Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated
useful lives. Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits
method. Depreciation of plant and other property is computed using either accelerated methods
or the straight-line method.
Retirement Plans: Current service costs are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements
in the plans are amortized generally over 10 years.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the
effects of timing differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain
transactions are included in taxable earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and
amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable
classes of property Purchased tax credits and deductions are offset against the purchase cost.
Inventories: Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment
sales are included in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process applicable
to equipment rentals is similarly valued and included in rental machines and parts.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Accounting Change—Foreign Currency Translation
The company adopted Statement of exchange rates. Income and expense items are prevailing when acquired. Inventories charged
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) NO. 52, translated at average rates of exchange prevailing to cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured
'Foreign Currency Translation," in the fourth during the year. Translation adjustments are . at historical rates. Gains and losses which result
quarter of 1982, effective January i, 1982. accumulated in a separate component of stock- from remeasurement are included in earnings.
The consolidated financial statements for the holders' equity The effects of this accounting change
years 1981 and 1980 have been restated to give The remaining 15% of the company's on net earnings and earnings per share are an
effect to this change in accounting principle. non-U. S. gross income is derived from subsid- increase of $449 million and $.75 in 1982, an
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a iaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars increase of $302 million and $.51 in 1981 and
local currency environment account for approxi- or whose economic environment is highly a decrease of $165 million and $.28 in 1980.
mately 85% of the company's non-U. S. gross inflationary In accordance with SFAS No. 5 2, Aggregate transaction gains (losses)
income. In applying SFAS NO. 52 to financial state- inventories and plant, rental machines and other included in earnings are $(7) million in 1982,
ments of these subsidiaries, assets and liabil- property, applicable to these operations, are $78 million in 1981 and $(i8) million in 1980.
ities are translated to U. S. dollars at year-end remeasured in U. S. dollars at approximate rates
Non-U. S. Operations (Dollars in millions) 1982 1981 1980
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 6,299 $ 5^436 $ 5.531
Current liabilities 4,240 4,108 3.914
Working capital 2,059 1,328 1,617
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 6,740 7,006
Deferred charges and other assets 887 890 931
9,686 9.370 9.554
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 1,198 1,184 1.443
Long-term debt 480 496 437
1,678 1,680 1,880
Net assets employed $ 8,008 $ 7,690 $ 7,674
Number of employees 150,444 149.794 146.973
For the year:
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ I5»336 $ 13,982 $ 13,787
Earnings before income taxes $ 3,226 $ 2,664 $ 2,772
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes i>577 1,123 i.035t
Net earnings $ 1,649 $ 1,541 $ 1.737
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 2,682 $ 3.274 $ 3.367
tSee Taxes on page 38.
For the years 1982 and 1981, non-U. S. financial further illustrate the decline in value, in rela- 1982, $6,565 million at December 31,1981, and
results were severely impacted by the strength of tion to the dollar, of the five major foreign $5,943 million at December 31,1980. These
the U. S. dollar relative to the currencies of many currencies in which IBM conducts most of its earnings are indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S.
countries around the world. The Management non-U. S. business. operations. Accordingly, no provision has been
Discussion on page 29 refers to this effect in Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid- made for taxes that might be payable upon
greater detail. The graphs on the following page iaries included in consolidated retained earnings remittance of such earnings.
amounted to $7,538 million at December 31,

===== PAGE 36 =====
Percent Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar
German mark French franc British sterUng Italian lira Japanese yen
30% 30% 30%
1980 1981 198Z 1980 1981 1982 1980 1981 1982,
Base-as of January i, 1980
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1982 December 31,1981
Finished goods $ 615 $ 544
Work in process 2,613 i»995
Raw materials and operating supplies 264 264
Total $ 3,492 $ 2,803
Rental Machines and Parts
Rental machines and parts are comprised amount of $2,794 million and $2,245 million process and field service parts totaled $3,676
of capitalized machines, rental machine work at December 31,1982 and 1981, respectively, million and $3,733 million at December 31,1982
in process and field service parts. Rental machines with accumulated depreciation of $1,952 million and 1981, respectively
include machines installed with IBM in the and $1,667 million. Rental machine work in
Plant and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1982 December 31,1981
Land and land improvements $ 688 $ 671
Buildings 5,586 5,082
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 7,966 6,949
14,240 12,702
Less: Accumulated depreciation 5»794 5»i57
Total $ 8,446 $ 7»545

===== PAGE 37 =====
Taxes (Dollars in millions) 1982 1981 1980
Earnings before U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes:
U. S. operations 4,704 $ 3,596 $ 2,951
Non-U. S. operations 3,226 2,664 2,77^
7»930 $ 6,260 $ 5,723
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U S. income taxes:
U. S. operations 1,944 $ 1,527 $ 1,291
Non-U. S. operations 1.577 1,035
2,650 2,326
Real estate, personal property, state and local franchise
(including state income taxes of $292 million in 1982, $200 million in 1981,
and $138 million in 1980), Social Security and other taxes 1,587 1,480
Total 5,^63 $ 4,237 $ 3,806
The components of the provision for U. S. Federal and
non-U S. income taxes are as follov^s:
U.S.:
Current ' 1.378 $ 994 $ 776
Net tax effects of timing differences 212 49 (34)
Net deferred investment tax credits 71 70 42
1,661 1,113 784
Non-US.:
Current 1,829 1,464 1,546
Net tax effects of timing differences 31 73 (4)
1,860 1,537 1,54^
Total provision $ 2,650 $ 2,326
The consolidated effective U S. Federal and of the difference between the effective rate and ($.38 per share), resulting from changes in tax
non-U. S. income tax rate was 44.4% in 1982, the U. S. statutory rate of 46.0%. laws and other adjustments of prior years income
42.3% in 1981 and 40.6% in 1980. In 1980, the The consolidated tax provision for 1980 tax expenses. Of this amount, $207 million
lower effective tax rate on earnings of non-U. S. includes the effect of a reduction of prior relates to non-U. S. operations.
operations accounts for 4.2 percentage points periods income tax liabilities of $224 million

===== PAGE 38 =====
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31,1982 December 31,1981
U.S. Operations:
9V2% notes due 1986 S 500 $ 500
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments 1985-2003) 500 500
10.80% notes due 1983-1986 300 300
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1982, in parentheses) payable in :
U. S. dollars, due 1984-2012(12.9%) 678 416
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (6.4%) 251 262
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 206 199
2,435 2,177
Non-U. S. Operations:
Various obligations (average interest rate at December 31,1982, in parentheses) payable in:
U.S. dollars, due 1983-1992 (12.1%) 172 234
French francs, due 1983-1992 (12.3%) 125 179
Japanese yen, due 1983-2012 (8.4%) 128 II
Other currencies, due 1983-1993 (16.8%) 136 163
561 587
2,996 2,764
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 9V2% notes and debentures 3 4
2,993 2,760
Less: Current maturities 142 91
Total S 2,851 $ 2,669
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on long-term
debt outstanding at December 31, 198Z, are as follows:
1983, $142; 1984,5265; 1985, $411; 1986,5890; 1987,5274; 1988 and beyond, 51,014.
Interest Cost Lines of Credit addition, a number of non-U. S. subsidiaries had
Interest on borrowings amounted to At December 31,1982, the company had available unused lines of credit of approximately
S514 million in 1982, S480 million in 1981 and available unused lines of credit with a number 51,400 million. Interest rates on borrowings
5325 million in 1980. Of these amounts, of U. S. banks. These lines of credit permit the would vary from country to country depending
S6o million in 1982,573 million in 1981 and 552 company to borrow up to an aggregate of 52,000 on local market conditions.
million in 1980 were included in the cost of million outstanding at any time, at interest rates
buildings under construction, resulting in a net not to exceed the banks' prime rate. Included
earnings increase of S3 2 million, S39 million, in these lines of credit is 51,875 million, which is
and 531 million, respectively. shared with the IBM Credit Corporation. In

===== PAGE 39 =====
IBM Credit Corporation Additional information is available in its 1982 Research and Development
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned Annual Report. Copies may be obtained by writ- Research and development expenses
unconsolidated subsidiary, finances install- ing to: IBM Stockholder Relations Department, amounted to $2,053 million in 1982, $1,612
ment payment agreements (iPAs) relating to 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. million in 1981 and $1,520 million in 1980.
sales by IBM of its products in the United States,
and effective July 22,1982, offers term lease Earnings for the year ended December 31,1982 Retirement Plans
financing to IBM customers for periods of three, and for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981 The company and its subsidiaries have
four and five years at fixed rates. Some of the retirement plans covering substantially all
(Dollars in thousands) 1982 1981
leases are to be effected through partnerships employees. The company and its U. S. subsidiaries
Finance and other
with unrelated third parties. Its operations have trusteed, noncontributory plans for
income :S 125,704 $ 49,212
commenced May I, 1981. IBM's investment in which costs are generally funded when accrued.
Expenses 91,286 34,270
the IBM Credit Corporation is accounted Provision for Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under which
for by the equity method and earnings are in- income taxes 3,144 5,075 funds are deposited with trustees, annuities are
cluded in other income iniBM's consoli- Net earnings :S 31,2.74 $ 9,867 purchased under group contracts, or reserves are
dated statement of earnings, IBM has agreed to provided. The total cost of all plans for 1982,
cause the IBM Credit Corporation to have a Financial position 1981 and 1980 was $1,187 million, $1,060 million
positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit Cor- at December 31: 1982 1981 and $1,109 rnillion, respectively. Amendments
poration has $205 million of lines of credit Assets: providing for increased retirement benefits were
available, in addition to those shared with the Cash and cash adopted by the U. S. and certain non-U. S.
IBM Corporation. IBM Credit Corporation equivalents :5 730 $ 532 plans in 1982. These amendments accounted for
finances operations through public and private Installment payment approximately $99 million of the 1982 cost.
agreement receiv-
debt arrangements and retained earnings. A comparison of the estimated accumu-
ables-net 951,438 689,553
IBM Credit Corporation purchased $590 million lated benefits, net assets, and number of individ-
Net investment in
and $866 million of iPAs from IBM in 1982 uals receiving benefits is presented below for
financing leases. . . 65,504 —
and 1981, respectively, and $67 million of IBM Note receivable- the U. S. retirement plans:
products for term lease customers in 1982. affiliated company. 35,000 —
The following information has been sum- Deferred charges At December 31
marized from the consolidated financial and other assets . . 6,697 1,644 (Dollars in millions) 1981
statements of the IBM Credit Corporation. Total Assets ;i 1,059,369 $691,729 Actuarial present value of
accumulated benefits:
Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity: Vested $ 6,748 $ 5,158
Short-term debt .... !6 207,576 $ 318,426 Nonvested 238 232
Due to IBM $ 6,986 $ 5,390
Corporation 143,984 97,162 Net assets available
Taxes and other for benefits $ 8,390 $ 6,155
accruals 53,975 9,036 Number of individuals
Long-term debt .... 508,120 162,238 receiving benefits 1 5,400 13,538
Stockholder's equity . 145,714 104,867
Total Liabilities and
The assumed rate of return used in deter-
Stockholder's Equity JE 1,059,369 $ 691,729
mining the actuarial present value of accumulated
benefits was 5V2% for both years. This rate repre-
sents the current estimate of the long-term

===== PAGE 40 =====
rate of return expected to be earned over the Stock Option Plans Litigation
life of the plans. Assumed future salary increases The stock option plans provide for grant- In December, 1980, the Commission of the
were not considered in the determination ing officers and other key employees options European Communities filed a "statement of
of the actuarial present value of accumulated to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the objections" seeking modification of certain IBM
benefits in accordance with the requirements of market price on the day of grant. Options business practices in the Common Market
the Financial Accounting Standards Board. have a maximum duration of 10 years and may area. The Commission may also seek to impose
At December 31, 1982, and December 31, be exercised in up to four annual installments, fines. Most of the practices to which the
1981, it is estimated that the market value of commencing one year from date of grant. Commission has objected have been held to be
fund assets and reserves of individual non-U. S. The plan provides, subject to executive com- legitimate competition in the United States.
plans exceeded or approximated the actuarially pensation committee approval, that payment IBM has denied the charges in the proceeding
calculated present value of vested benefits. upon exercise may be made using IBM stock and is defending its position.
as well as cash.
Stock Purchase Plan The following table summarizes stock
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan option transactions during 1982:
enables employees who are not participants
in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital Number of Shares
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% Available
Under Option for Option
of their compensation. The price an employee
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average Balance at
January i, 1982. . . . 14,885,009 110,816
market price on the date the employee has accu-
Options granted 2.,565,457 (2,565,457)
mulated enough money to buy a share. During
Options terminated . . (773,099) 84,035
1982, employees purchased 7,239,303 shares, Options exercised . . . (2,399,422) —
including 391,743 treasury shares, for which Expired under
$416 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, the 1978 plan — (162,782)
1982, 28,600,364 reserved unissued shares Reserved under
remain available for purchase under the Plan. the 1982 plan — 9,500,000
Balance at
December 31,1982 . 14,2.77,945 6,966,612
Exercisable at
December 31,1982 . 9,436,546
Options for 2,399,422 shares were exer-
cised during 1982 at an average option price of
$62.89 per share. The 14,277,945 shares under
option at December 31,1982, are at option
prices ranging from $41.60 to $85.40 per share.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Segment Information
IBM operates primarily in the single industry Financial information by geographic area therefore, the information may not be indicative
segment encompassing information-handling for the years 1982, 1981 and 1980 is summarized of the financial results of, or investments in,
systems, equipment and services. This segment below to provide a better understanding of IBM's the reported areas were they independent
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross operations. Material interdependencies and organizations.
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and,
Geographic Areas (Dollars in millions) 1982 1981 1980
United States
Gross income-Customers $ 19,028 $ 15,088 $ 12,426
Interarea transfers I>875 I>857 1,615
Total $ 20,903 $ 16,945 $ 14,041
Net earnings 2,766 2,094 1,7^5
Assets at December 31 19,028 16,022 13,737
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Gross income-Customers $ 10,260 $ 9,312 $ 9,932
Interarea transfers 337 383 491
Total $ io>597 $ 9,695 $ 10,423
Net earnings 1.196 1,074 1,360
Assets at December 31 9.197 8,981 9,608
Americas/Far East
Gross income-Customers $ 5,076 $ 4,670 $ 3,855
Interarea transfers 651 659 450
Total $ 5>7^7 S 5>3^9 s 4,305
Net earnings 450 478 388
Assets at December 31 4,9^5 4,694 4,054
Eliminations
Gross income $ (2,863) $ (2,899) $ (2,556)
Net earnings (3) (36) (76)
Assets (609) (590) (568)
Consolidated
Gross income $ 34,364 $ 29,070 $ 26,213
Net earnings $ 4>409 $ 3,610 $ 3,397
Assets at December 31 $ 3V54I $ 29,107 $ 26,831
As described on page 36, the company adopted area. The remaining 15% of the company's non- million in Americas/Far East.
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) U S. gross income is derived from subsidiaries and Interarea transfers, consisting principally of
No. 52, Foreign Currency Translation, in the branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose completed machines, subassemblies and parts,
fourth quarter of 1982, effective January i, 1982. economic environment is highly inflationary, are priced at cost plus an appropriate service
For the years 1981 and 1980, the geographic area predominantly the Americas/Far East area. charge, applied consistently throughout the world.
information for the Europe/Middle East/Africa In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, The cost and service charges that relate to asset
and the Americas/Far East areas has been European operations accounted for approximately transfers are capitalized and depreciated or
restated accordingly 95% of gross income in 1982, 1981 and 1980. amortized by the importing area. Interarea
The impact resulting from the restatement of Net earnings in 1980 include the effect of a accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
assets and liabilities for those subsidiaries which reduction of prior periods tax liabilities of service chaises, and the net change during the
operate in a local currency environment is pri- $17 million in the United States, $187 million year in unamortized service charges, have been
marily afl^ecting the Europe/Middle East /Africa in Europe/Middle East/Africa and $20 eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1982 1981* 1980* 1979 1978
For the year:
Gross income from sales.
rentals and services $ 34^364 $ 29,070 $ 26,213 S 22,863 $ 21,076
Net earnings 4,409 3,610 3.397 3,011 3,111
Per sharet 7-39 6.14 5.82 5.16 5.32
Cash dividends paid 2.053 2,023 2,008 2,008 1,685
Per sharet 3-44 3-44 3-44 3-44 2.88
Investment in plant, rental
machines and other property 6,685 6,845 6.592 5.991 4,046
Return on stockholders' equity 23.4% 21.1% 21.1% 21.2% 23.8'
At end of year:
Total assets $ 32>54i $ 29,107 $ 26,831 $ 24,530 $ 20,771
Net investment in plant, rental
machines and other property 17.563 16,797 15,200 12,193 9,302
Working capital 4.805 2,983 3.381 4,406 4.511
Long-term debt 2,851 2,669 2,099 1,589 285
Stockholders' equity 19,960 17,676 16,578 14,961 13.494
*Restated.
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split.
Selected Quarterly Data
Per Share Stock Prices
Gross Gross Net
Earnings Dividends High Low
(Dol lars i n m i 11 ion s except per share and stock prices) I ncome Profit Earn i ngs
1982 *First Quarter $ 7,066 $ 4,293 $ 789 $1.33 .86 $ 64.75 $ 55-63
*Second Quarter 8,053 4y9^3 I5O76 I.81 .86 66.13 57-50
*Third Quarter 8,171 4,870 IJ044 1-75 .86 77-63 59-38
Fourth Quarter ii,oy4 6,590 i)500 MO .86 98.00 73-25
Total $ 34,364 $ 20,676 $ 4,409 $7.39 3-44
1981 *First Quarter $ 6,461 $ 3,925 $ 746 $1.28 $ .86 71.50 $ 60.25
*Second Quarter 6,895 4jI05 855 1-45 .86 63.38 55-13
*Third Quarter 6,721 3>99° 836 1.42 .86 58.88 52-25
*Fourth Quarter 8,993 5,313 1,173 1-99 .86 57-63 48.38
* Total $ 29,070 $ 17,333 $ 3,610 $ 6.14 S 3.44
There were 725,745 stockholders of record March 10, 1983, will be at the rate of $.86 per prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York
at December 31, 1982. During 1982, stock- share. This dividend will be IBM's 272nd con- Stock Exchange composite tape for the last
holders received $2,053 million in cash dividends, secutive quarterly cash dividend. two years.
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low
* Restated.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices
The cumulative effect of persistent inflation the implications of changing prices on the In order to provide useful trend data,
in recent years has eroded industry's abihty to company's operations. information for each of the years presented is
fund the replacement and expansion of pro- The following data reflect the effects on restated in 1982 dollars of purchasing power, as
ductive capacity. Traditional financial statements earnings and stockholders' equity resulting measured by movement of the Consumer Price
may not adequately reflect the effects of chang- from using estimated changes in specific Index for all Urban Consumers (CPi-u). In addi-
ing prices and declines in purchasing power on prices to restate the value of inventories and tion, because the company adopted Statement
cash flows required to replace capital assets other properties at currently prevailing prices of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52,
and provide opportunities for future growth. (current cost). The estimates are based upon 'Foreign Currency Translation," in 1982 and
Therefore, supplemental information, which has latest production costs, published price restated its financial statements for 1981 and 1980,
been prepared in accordance with standards indices, current suppliers' prices, and appraised the changes in current cost amounts which
established by the Financial Accounting valuations. Cost of sales and depreciation result from translation are separately identified
Standards Board, is presented to assist users expense are restated to reflect the change in the for each of the years 1982, 1981 and 1980.
of financial statements in understanding related asset values.
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost)
As Reported in
Financial Statements In Average 1982 Dollars
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1982 1982 1981* 1980* 1979
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 34,364 $ 34,364 $ 30,852 $ 30,706 $30,403
Cost of sales, rentals and services 13,688 13,778 12,697 12,151 1 ',374
Expenses and other income 12,746 12,888 11,878 12,142 I ',959
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes . 3,521 3,521 2,812 2,725 3,380
Net earnings $ 4,409 $ 4,177 $ 3,465 $ 3,688 $ 3,690
Earnings per share $7-39 $ 7.00 $ 5.89 $6.32 $6.33
Stockholders' equity (net assets) $ 19,960 $ 22,676 $ 20,960 $ 21,431 $22,104
Loss from decline in purchasing power of
net monetary assets $ I $ 66 $ 319 $ 605
Translation adjustments $ (685) $ (777) $ (1,057) $ (266)
Change in specific prices—
net of general inflation $ (307) $ (1,232) $ (1,683) $ (1,552;
•"Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36.

===== PAGE 44 =====
IBM's 1982 financial results, when adjusted nological advances continue to partially offset the dollar in the world economy.
for changing prices, show a reduction of $232 inflationary pressures, as is evidenced by the rel- In dollars of average 1982 purchasing
million from reported net earnings and an in- atively small increase (2%) in the cost of rental power, the increase in current costs that might
crease in stockholders' equity of $2,716 million. machine assets when adjusted for changing prices. have been expected from general inflation
The estimated current cost of acquiring exist- Companies which retain monetary assets or exceeded IBM's specific price level changes by
ing plants and other property is $2,560 million liabilities such as cash or debt incur gains and $307 million. Management views this positively,
greater than depreciated original costs. The losses in purchasing power during periods of in- in that technology and productivity improve-
rental machine asset base would increase by $ 181 flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted ments substantially offset inflation. Similar pat-
million if valued at current production costs in a negligible purchasing power loss in 1982. terns are reflected in the prior years.
while other inventories would be reduced by $37 The effects of translation on the changes in Although inflation-adjusted information
million. The additional depreciation in 1982 on specific prices of IBM's net assets have been is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to
the restated rental machines, plant and other estimated without any attempt to adjust the data emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation.
property would have been $264 million while for general rate of inflation differences among It points out the importance of bringing inflation
other costs would have been reduced by $32 various countries. The translation adjustments under control and the need for further public
million. Accordingly, 1982 earnings would have reflect the decline in the valuation of assets de- policy initiatives to encourage capital investment.
been reduced by the above mentioned $232 nominated in currencies other than the
million. Productivity improvements from tech- U.S. dollar caused by the relative strength of
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation
The amounts shown below for the years alent purchasing power of 1982 dollars by changes in the average CPI-U from that year to
1978 to 1981 have been converted into the equiv- applying to the amounts reported the rate of year 1982.
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1982 1981 1980 1979 1978
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 34^364 $ 30,852 $ 30,706 $ 30,403 $ 31,182
Earnings per sharet $7-39 $ 6.52 $ 6.82 $6.86 $7-87
Cash dividends paid per sharef $ 3.44 $ 3.65 $4.03 $4-57 $ 4.26
Market price per sharef (at December 31) $ 96.25 $ 60.37 $79.51 $ 85.61 S I 10.42
Average Consumer Price Index for
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 289.1 272.4 246.8 217.4 195.4
The actual market price of IBM stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape at December 31, for years 1978 to 1981 (adjusted for stock split)
was $74.63, $64.38, $6788, $56.88 and $96.25, respectively.
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split.

===== PAGE 45 =====
IBM Corporation Stephen D. Bechteljr. Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction Board Committees:
Board of Directors: George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM Executive:
Harold Brown Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, Frank T. Gary, Chairman
The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C. Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N. J.-health care products Amory Houghton, Jr.
Frank T. Gary Chairman of the Board, IBM T. Vincent Learson
William T. Coleman, Jr. Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France- Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller
attorneys at law William H. Moore
John M. Fox Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services John R.Opel
Patricia Roberts Harris Attorney,Washington, D.C.; former U.S. Secretary, Health and Human Services; Irving S. Shapiro
former U.S. Secretary, Housing and Urban Development Thomas J. Watson, Jr.
Carla Anderson Hills Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.G., and Los Angeles, Calif-attorneys at law Retirement Plans:
Amory Houghton, Jr. Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.-glass products William W. Scranton, Chairman
John N. Irwin II Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law George B. Beitzel
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach . . . Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM Harold Brown
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM Carla Anderson Hills
Richard W. Lyman President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. John N.Irwin II
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller . . . Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet J. Richard Munro
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. Dean P Phypers
J. Richard Munro President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing Paul J. Rizzo
John R. Opel President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Compensation:
Dean P Phypers Senior Vice President, IBM Cyrus R.Vance, Chairman
Paul J. Rizzo Senior Vice President, IBM Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
William W. Scranton Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania James E. Burke
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance Patricia Roberts Harris
Committee, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products Amory Houghton, Jr.
Cyrus R.Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law Irving S. Shapiro
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman Emeritus, IBM Audit:
William T. Coleman, Jr., Chairman
John M. Fox
Richard W. Lyman
Advisory Board: G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y.
Louis H. LaMotte Retired Executive Vice President, IBM
William McChesney Martin, Jr. Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Officers: President and Chief Executive Officer R Martin Foley
Chairman of the Board Victor J. Goldberg
Senior Vice President Ralph E. Gomory , . Vice President
Senior Vice President John B. Jackson . . Vice President
Senior Vice President •PaulJ.Kofmehl
Senior Vice President Terry R. Lautenbach , , Vice President
Senior Vice President & Group Executive Thomas M. Liptak . . Vice President
Senior Vice President Edward E. Lucente
Senior Vice President & General Counsel •Victor R. Macdonald , , Vice President
Senior Vice President & Group Executive •James F. Manning . . Vice President
Senior Vice President David E. McKinney
Senior Vice President & Group Executive Charles E.McKittrick, Jr.. . , , Vice President
Vice President, Finance & Planning Frank A.Metz,Jr. . . Vice President
Vice President Theodore C. Rapes, Jr. . . . .
Vice President Francis G. Rodgers , . Vice President
Vice President Stephen B. Schwartz . . Vice President
Vice President H.Mitchell Watson, Jr
Vice President John F. Williams . . Vice President
Vice President J. Richard "Vbung
Vice President JamesJ. Forese
Vice President John H. Grady , , Secretary
Vice President C. Arthur Northrop . . Treasurer
Vice President Robert E. Bonchick
Vice President J. William Scruggs
Vice President John H.Stewart . . Assistant Controller
Vice President Thomas C. Irwin
Vice President David A. Finley
Vice President Bruce E. Langton . Assistant Treasurer
Vice President
•Elected 1/25/83

===== PAGE 46 =====
Division and Subsidiary Arthur G. Anderson. President, General Products Division Thomas M. Liptak President, Customer Service Division
Chief Executives: John E. Bertram President, Data Systems Division Edward E. Lucente President, Information Products Division
Charles R Biggar President, Field Engineering Division Jacques G. Maisonrouge Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation
KasparV Cassani Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ Ralph A. PfeifFer, Jr. Chairman, IBM World Trade
Middle East/Africa Corporation Americas / Far East Corporation
George H.Conrades. President, National Accounts Division Everett H. Van Hoesen President, Systems Supplies Division
Vincent N.Cook President, Federal Systems Division H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. President, System Products Division
Edward M. Davis ... President, General Technology Division Cecil R Webb President, IBM Instruments, Inc.
David A. Finley President, IBM Credit Corporation John F. Williams President, Real Estate and
Victor J. Goldberg... President, Communication Products Division Construction Division
Ralph L Gomory ... Director of Research J. Richard Young President, National Marketing Division
John E. Guthjr. , President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
IBM Vferld Trade Thomas J. Bata Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization, Toronto, Canada
Americas/Far East Jill K.Conway , President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Corporation Morton Ehrlich . Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla.
Board of Directors: Howard G. Figueroa.. , Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Ralph E. Gomory , Director of Research and Vice President, IBM
Thomas Moving , President, Hoving Associates, Inc., New "fcrk, N. Y, and Editor-in-Chief, "The Connoisseur"
Ryoichi Kawai , Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan
Donald R. Keough President, The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga.
Robeli J. Libero , President, IBM Brazil
*David E. McKinney .. , President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM
Raymond G. O'Neill . . Vice President, Finance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/ Far East Corporation
Ralph A.PfeifferJr.... . Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr , Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Takeo Shiina , President, IBM Japan, Limited
Paulo D. Villares Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. Vollmer.... President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela
IBM W)rld Trade John RAkers , Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Europe/Middle East/ Arthur G. Anderson. , President, General Products Division, and Vice President, IBM
Africa Corporation Tore Browaldh , Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden,
Board of Directors: and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden
KasparV Cassani , Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation,
and Senior Vice President, IBM
The Earl of Cromer Former Chairman of the Board, IBM United Kingdom, Limited
Frank J. Cummiskey Retired IBM Vice President
William W Eggleston... Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM
Pierre L. Gousseland Chairman, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Gilbert E.Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
PaulJ. Kofmehl Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM
Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Jacques Lemonnier President-Directeur General, IBM France
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
Otto Sturzenegger President and Chairman, Ciba-Geigy, USA, Ardsley, N. Y
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
Science Research Joseph H. Allen Retired Associate Dean, School of Business Education, University of Connecticut
Associates, Inc. George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Board of Directors: i'atricia Albjet^ Graham Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education
John E. Guth, Jr. President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Wayne H. Holtzman President,The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex.
H.Thomas James President, Spencer Foundation, Chicago, 111.
"Elected 1/31/83

===== PAGE 47 =====
The 1983 Annual Meeting IBM Business Conduct Guidelines IBM Stock Transfer
of stockholders will be held in the John B. Hynes is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations
Veterans Auditorium, Boston, Mass., on Monday, describing the ethical and business principles Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York,
April 25th, at 10 a.m. that the company sets for the conduct of its N. Y. 10022. The department maintains stock-
business. holder records and can answer questions
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement and regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders
Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each stock- IBM Equal Opportunity Programs wishing to transfer stock or to change the name
holder in March. The Proxy Statement describes in the United States are outlined in a document on a stock certificate should contact the
the items of business to be voted on at the that describes programs for women, minorities, department for instructions.
Annual Meeting and provides biographies of the handicapped persons, disabled veterans and Stock certificates are valuable and should
Board's nominees for director, their principal Vietnam-era veterans, and also reviews IBM'S be safeguarded, since replacement takes time
affiliations with other companies or organiza- affirmative action efforts in the community and requires payment of a surety bond premium
tions, as well as other information about by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost,
the company. IBM U. S. Retirement Plan Information, stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations
which is given to all regular U. S. employees, should be notified. Registered mail should be
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, includes the principal provisions of the plan, used whenever stock is mailed.
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes options available, a list of the trustees and a
IBM Stock is Traded
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including summary report on the plan's financial status.
on the New York Stock Exchange, other
the President's report on the company, questions
exchanges in the United States and exchanges
and answers of general interest and the results IBM Company Citizenship
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, France,
of voting on items of business. booklet describes support programs for edu-
Japan, Switzerland, the Netherlands and
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts
Germany.
and other areas.
Stock Transfer Offices:
IBM Stockholder Relations Department
The following information may be obtained without IBM Operations in South Africa
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Department, are summarized in a report of the company's
IBM Stockholder Relations Department
Spo Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022: business in that country. This report describes
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611
the personnel principles and practices to which
The Form IO-K Annual Report IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa. Co-Transfer Agents:
to the Securities and Exchange Commission Trust General du Canada
provides further details on IBM's business, includ- IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings iioo University Street, Montreal, Quebec,
ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the are available. The report is translated into Canada H3B 2G7
Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April. French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette National Trust Company, Limited
recording in English is available for the blind. 21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario,
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report Canada M5C 1B3
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is A Service for Deaf Stockholders
Registrars:
available in May, August and November. provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York
Department enables deaf stockholders who have
30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10015
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting access to a teletypewriter to communicate with
The First National Bank of Chicago
the department's New York City office. Stock-
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet holders who wish to use the service should dial
Montreal Trust Company
explains how stockholders may automatically (21Z) 407-4552 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m..
777 Dorchester Boulevard West,
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of Eastern time, on any weekday.
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 4A5
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario,
optional additional investments for that purpose.
Canada M5H 1B4
International Business Machines Corporation
Corporate Headquarters
Armonk, N.Y. 10504

===== PAGE 48 =====
H
V-" ^'^t-iwsj V- •• mat h'm*^'- s>»-wm ksm xtw w-if.cvjt jsw^sBnarggai ••••»» •
_
kwmiM'-'.kKimmmmmm^mmmttmmmmmmmmM
.rj-aissKcaaiSiiwm
4^-story office buildmgat jpo Madison
Avenue, New York City, is slated for full occupancy this
year. The Stockholder Relations Department is
now headquartered here, and marketing, service and
adm inistrative persomiel are moving in from
IBM offices throughout Manhattan. The garden plaza
{foreground) is open to the public.
G5051982-00 PRINTED IN USA

===== PAGE 49 =====
^i/s ' International
p f - Business Machines
Corporation
Armonk,N.Y.
10504