

===== PAGE 1 =====
V
1
s
WW>w- ••'- Un
........
m^Z/MMIm . • •• •,

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents:
1 Financial Highlights
2 Letter to Stockholders
5 Expanding Opportunities
16 1983 in Review
25 Financial Report
Report of Management
Report of Independent Accountants
Earnings
Management Discussion -Results of Operations
Financial Position
Management Discussion-Financial Condition
Funds Flow
Stocklwlders' Equity
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
Supplemental Financial Information
45 IBM Organization
46 Directors and Officers
48 Stockholder Information
IBM's operations:
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are
in the field of information-handling systems,
equipment and services to solve the increasingly
complex problems of business, government, science,
space exploration, defense, education, medicine
and many other areas of human activity. IBM's
products include data processing machines and
systems, telecommunications systems and products,
information distributors, office systems, typewriters,
copiers, educational and testing materials, and
related supplies and services. Most products are both
leased and sold through IBM's worldwide marketing
organizations. Selected products are distributed
through authorized dealers and remarketers.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
for the year ended December 31, 1983
Highlights of the year: (Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1983 1982
Gross income from sales, rentals and services . . .. $ 40,180 34,364
Earnings before income taxes $ 9,940 8,222
Income taxes $ 4>455 3,813
Net earnings $ 5,485 4,409
Per share
$ 9.04 $7-39
Cash dividends paid
$ 2,251 2,053
Per share $3.71 $3.44
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 4,930 6,685
Return on stockholders' equity 25.4% 23.4%
At end of year:
Total assets $ 37,^43 $ 3^,541
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . $ 16,142 $ 17,563
Working capital $ 7.763 $ 4,805
Long-term debt $ 2,674 $ 2,851
Stockholders' equity $ 23,219 $ 19,960
Number of employees 369,545 364,796
Number of stockholders 769,979 72.5,745
Cover:
Micropositioners capable of precision to 2o-millionths of an
inch are monitored by an IBM researcher as they travel above
fine copper loires on a circuit board used in IBM's large-scale
computers. Shoivn here as part of an experimental system,
these positioners sigyiificantly extend the precision possible ivith
automated manufacturing ayid test systems. Scientists at IBM's
Manufacturing Research Center, part of the Thomasf. Watson
Research Center, Yorktoxon Heights, N. Y., are working with
engineers from IBM plants worldwide to develop advanced
technologies for high-quality, loiu-cost production.

===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders
1983 was a record year for IBM in revenues, Worldwide gross income was $40,180
earnings and return on stockholders' equity. million in 1983, up 16.9 percent from $34,364
We had faced 1983 with some concern about the million in 1982. Product purchases were up
worldwide economy. However, our customers 38.4 percent, rentals were down 17.0 percent
again expressed confidence in our product and services were up 19.4 percent over 1982.
offerings. As a result, the trends established in In the quarter ended December 31, net
1982 gained momentum in 1983 and shipments earnings were $1,863 million, or $3.06 per
of IBM products and delivery of services con- share, compared with $1,500 million, or $2.50
tinued at high levels. per share, for the same period of 1982. Gross
In addition, significant increases in the income for the fourth quarter of 1983 was
purchased content of new shipments, increases $12,897 million, compared to $11,074 million
in the purchase of installed rental equipment in the fourth quarter of 1982.
and improved before- and after-tax margins Operations outside the U. S. during 1983,
resulted in Z4.4 percent growth in 1983 net included in consolidated results, produced
earnings. Reflecting the strength of the IBM net earnings of $2,164 million in 1983 and
product line, order activity continued to grow $1,649 million in 1982. Gross income from
and customers installed our products at a rate these operations was $17,053 million, compared
well ahead of 1982 s brisk pace. This overall with $15,336 million in the prior year.
business performance is consistent with our Our product line is strong throughout
strategic objectives and the trends established and we continue to see strong demand for it
are expected to continue into 1984. worldwide.
Worldwide net earnings for the year
ended December 31,1983, were $5,485 million, Long-term strategy pays off
compared with $4,409 million for 1982. Net The groundwork for our positive results
earnings were $9.04 per share on 606.8 million the past two years was established back in
shares, the average number outstanding during the mid-1970s when, with a program of sizable
1983, compared with $7.39 per share on 596.7 investments in plant, equipment, research
million shares the year before. After-tax and development, we began to prepare for the
margins increased to 13.7 percent in 1983 from great opportunities we saw ahead. Since
12.8 percent in 1982. then, we have reshaped our organization as
Earnings before income taxes were necessary to adapt to a changing environment
$9,940 million in 1983, an increase of 20.9 per- marked by the significant growth of our
cent over $8,222 million in 1982. Pre-tax industry. Our strategy has focused on ensuring
margins improved to 24.7 percent from 23.9 our full participation in that growth.
percent in 1982. Central to IBM's strategy are four
key business goals—growth, product leader-
ship, efficiency and profitability. To attain these
goals in today's highly competitive environ-
ment, we have placed increased emphasis
on innovative programs in the design, manufac-
ture and distribution of our products and
services. These programs have started to pro-
duce results. We are moving higher volumes of
products through our organization and into
our customers' offices, at the same time main-
taining effective cost control and high quality.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Greater efficiency
We continue to make measurable progress
toward our third goal—to be the most efficient
company in the industry. It is this goal that
has prompted programs aimed at achieving
maximum productivity in every area of our
business. In manufacturing, for example, more
standardization and coordination among
our plants are helping us control costs while
we increase production. The introduction of
many new ways to market and service our
products has allowed us to reach more custom-
ers economically. Cost savings from these
more efficient ways of doing business are trans-
John F. Akers, president, John R. Opel, chairman of the board and chief executive officer, lated into lower product and service prices
and Paid J. Rizzo, vice chairman
for our customers.
Appropriately, extensive use by IBM em-
Growing with the industry Product leadership ployees of our own products and services is
IBM is far from alone in its confidence in We worked toward our goal of product an important aspect of our efficiency. The num-
the continued growth of information process- leadership in 1983 by introducing an array ber of workstations in use within IBM, for ex-
ing. Interest in the industry has never been of new products. Our versatile new work- ample, is approaching the number of employees.
greater nor competition more intense. If indus- stations—the IBM 3270 Personal Computer
try forecasts hold true, there is plenty of and the IBM Personal Computer XT/370 Profitability
opportunity, not only for the manufacturers of —can be used as stand-alone Personal Com- Inherent in all three goals is our fourth
quality information processing products, but puters or as terminals linked to larger comput- goal of profitability. While we work toward
also for the myriad new businesses springing ers and data bases. The very affordable PCjr our growth, product leadership and efficiency
up to provide a wide range of related products and the powerful Personal Computer XT extend targets, we are emphasizing the creative manage-
and services. our Personal Computer line to offer a full range ment and utilization of our assets. Those efforts
We have said that our first goal is to grow of options for home, school and business uses. are earning a good return on our investments.
with the industry, in 1983, we matched—and New 4300, System/38, Series/1 and 8100
in some areas exceeded—industry growth. models continue the trend toward more speed, Special attention to quality
Although much attention is focused on the capacity, flexibility and improved price/per- During 1983, we made good progress in
growth in small computers, large systems still formance.The low-cost, easy-to-use System/36 quality improvement efforts which have been
account for a substantial portion of IBM offers data and word processing, business color under way for some time at every IBM location.
revenue. Last year, our installations of large- graphics and office management functions. As a result of enthusiastic response from
scale, advanced-technology systems reached Software offerings ranged from advanced our employees, we are delivering a high percen-
record levels. Shipments of our 3380 large- programs for controlling IBM's largest computers tage of products that are free of even the
system disk file, the industry leader in disk to dozens of programs for the Personal Com- smallest defect. Individuals, departments and
storage technology, also increased significantly. puter. Other new software allows IBM office entire locations continue to set new records for
In addition to our traditional product systems and workstations to be integrated via the number of consecutive months they have
and service offerings, we continue to explore a networks serving multiple locations. attained completely error-free performances.
number of areas, such as industrial automa- We will give special attention to quality
tion, graphics systems and telecommunications, improvement activities into the foreseeable
which we believe have high growth potential. future as quality is the key to achieving
our goals and maintaining our edge in a very
competitive world marketplace.

===== PAGE 6 =====
Frank T. Gary relinquishes chairman's post Optimistic outlook
In February 1983, Frank Gary relin- The following pages review some of the
quished the post of chairman of the board ways we have adapted operations within IBM
after leading the company through some of its in order to remain competitive in our dynamic
most challenging years. He served as chairman industry, and to ensure our participation in
and chief executive officer from 1973 to 1981 the expanding opportunities we see ahead. The
and then as chairman until last year. During credit for implementing and managing these
that decade, IBM's gross income multiplied programs in an outstanding manner goes to
3.5 times, from less than $10 billion to more IBM employees. These talented people continue
than $34 billion. At the top of the list of Frank's to be the corporation's greatest asset. Because
contributions is the growth strategy he defined of their fine efforts, we have an organization
w^ith excellent foresight in the mid-1970s that is geared to combine business experience,
to prepare us so successfully for the 80s. Invest- technological leadership and a renewed com-
ments made then in physical plant, research, mitment to quality with the entrepreneurial
development, education and training are pro- approach necessary in today's competitive
viding the foundation we need to capitalize on and growing industry.
the great opportunities of this decade. We are
indebted to Frank Gary for the wisdom and
January 31, 1984, by order of the Board of Directors
skill with which he led the company. We are
fortunate that he continues to serve as a mem-
ber of the Board of Directors and as
John R. Opel
chairman of the board's Executive Gommittee.
Chairman of the Board
Corporate management structure
During 1983, we announced the formation
of a Gorporate Management Board with two
committees—the Policy Gommittee and the
Business Operations Gommittee—to replace
our former structure. This change distributes
decision-making authority more broadly
throughout senior management. It also helps us
capitalize on future growth opportunities and
form business ventures and operating units
more easily.
Paul Rizzo, elected vice chairman
of the board last year, and John Akers, elected
IBM president, serve with me on the Policy
Gommittee, which is responsible for major
policy issues, establishing corporate goals and
making major technology, capital investment,
financing and manufacturing capacity
decisions.The Business Operations Gommittee,
made up of 10 senior corporate officers, is
Through advanced manufacturing techniques
responsible for the day-to-day operations of
for high-volume production, memory chips now can
the business.
be fabricated on silicon wafers that are five inches
in diameter and yield about twice as many chips as
earlier three-inch wafers.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Expanding Opportunities
^ i ll
Uu J
t mi !
I
a IK-11 i.'
^likJcrHl'
11
M l -, 'VhlJ
Ni Is3»s- II > 1
a I II
H'i'ini:
•si
i! '.Tjfl-nHlhl
.ill jWfSi ii
l l - S S S B i li laji
f i i M I II ^ •f|l
i B i i H i" {1>J I
t'l ^ • fi?
•ftu-u-
f ir-wm^
iVi^i-
l!K I|8 , 1 , III
I'lira
tV i''' .! $ * pI '
' khm I ,
-""LiSii^l m^ ^fivlibtui
It ir
j l L J L ^ I ' f t l n dl
rM ' L „ ..
^ J M
111 Llfiiili
iilf M ^^'r
iil'Hii ' ''t
1 t MIM I II ?!'

===== PAGE 8 =====
iff
VKMM

===== PAGE 9 =====
Ensuring a leading role in industry growth
Over the past ten years, worldwide revenue for the information
processing industry has grown by some 15 percent annually—from
an estimated $55 billion in 1973 to about $230 billion in 1983.
The high demand for information-related products and services is
expected to continue and produce an annual revenue likely to exceed
the $i trillion mark by 1993. Helping sustain this growth are the
technology and cost improvements IBM has delivered with regularity
and success over the years. These improvements continue to
provide more function, allow lower prices and generate new uses for
information-handling systems.
Today's dynamic and diverse marketplace demands innovations in
the ways products are developed, manufactured, marketed and
serviced. Cost-effective marketing channels to reach an ever-wider
range of customers are essential. Ways to produce higher volumes,
keep costs low and maintain quality are of critical importance.
Programs introduced throughout IBM both respond to and influence
the growth of the industry. In 1983, these programs produced the
increased volumes and improved costs IBM needs to continue its
leading role. Quality emphasis activities improved an already fine
record to help maintain this important IBM competitive edge.
Examples from across the company provide an update on some
of the ways IBM has tuned its business to capitalize on expanding
As low-cost computing encour- opportunities in the information processing industry.
ages neiv uses for information
systems, IBM is reaching this New equipment, processes speed production
diversified marketplace through
In Bordeaux, France, IBM robotic systems assemble components for
expanded methods of distribution
IBM's large-scale computers. In Poughkeepsie, N.Y., hundreds of
that include dealers and remar-
thousands of circuit-board connections are tested automatically in a
keters. This application, integrat-
few hours. At the Fujisawa plant in Japan, components used in the
ing the IBM Personal Computer
3380 disk storage units are tested, in part, using automated systems.
ivith specialized timing equip-
mentfor swim meet and team New equipment and processes are helping speed production,
management, was developed by a improve quality and keep costs low in virtually every one of IBM's 42
Colorado firm that is one of manufacturing plants in 15 countries. IBM has spent some $11 billion
IBM's Value Added Dealers. The
firm purchases IBM Personal
Computers in volume, adds
specialized hardware and pro-
gramming then remarkets
the system to schools and clubs.

===== PAGE 10 =====
on land, buildings and equipment in the last five years to accommodate
growth and boost productivity. Such investments will continue in
the years ahead. At the Lexington, Ky., plant, for example, a three-year,
$350 million program under way to automate the flow of products
through the facility is expected to increase productivity by 30 percent
a year over the next five years.
Managing higher production levels
Advanced equipment and processes and new facilities are supported
by programs to manage increasing product volumes. More products
are being manufactured to meet predetermined demand forecasts, for
example. This allows parts to be ordered more efficiently, and reduces
inventory and related support costs. Once assembled, products are
shipped to distribution centers, ready for customer delivery
To help coordinate worldwide manufacturing operations, IBM has
established more than 40 production management centers, each with
responsibility for developing manufacturing processes in a particular
product area. The aim is to design a process once and then use it
wherever a given product is manufactured. The centers also provide a
strong and early link to development sites to ensure that new products
can be manufactured to IBM quality standards at competitive costs.
Design for automation is another concept helping to keep production
costs low. The new IBM 3178 display was developed using this approach.
Early in the 3178 design cycle, manufacturing planners worked with
product designers to ensure that the use of automated systems was
maximized. As a result, many of the 3178 s parts are designed so they
can be assembled using robotic systems. Production costs have been
An IBM engineer in the Raleigh,
minimized, and the displays are being shipped in record numbers.
N.C., facility completes the
installation of a robotic system on
Emphasis on quality produces results
a highly automated line for
Providing more value for every dollar customers spend on IBM assembling the new IBM
products—providing the best products available—is the objective of display. A leading example of low-
IBM's quality efforts. Companywide, people are being asked to think cost, high-volume, high-quality
more critically about the jobs they are doing and how those jobs production, the facility makes
are done, and then find and implement more effective ways to work. extensive use of automation for
every task, from assembling to
testing to packaging the product.
Since ic)-/6, the plant has doubled its
manufacturing population, tripled
its space and delivered a tenfold
increase in production.

===== PAGE 11 =====
$
r-
i M
'
A J'
" iliiiintiifr^--
K '^jniif
J.'.'. > • . p.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Results already can be seen. Large-scale, advanced-technology
processors, for example, are the most reliable in the company's his-
tory, and customer satisfaction is higher with these computers than
with any large-scale systems in the past. In Greenock, Scotland,
the time required to get terminals on the way to customers has been
reduced from a week to two days. In Boulder, Col., employees im-
proved shipping procedures and, as a result, 99.5 percent of products
delivered to customers are free of even the slightest shipping damage.
IBM's reputation for superior service also is being enhanced through
quality improvement programs. In the U. S., the entire process
of providing service—from taking a customer call through problem
resolution—was studied and measured. As a result, more inclusive
preventive maintenance procedures were introduced and service
improved. Just as quality standards are being raised by IBM employees,
IBM suppliers have accepted the objective of delivering defect-free
parts and services. Quality seminars and related activities for suppliers
have resulted in a continuing improvement in purchased materials.
Flexible sales programs meet diverse needs
Cost-effective and flexible sales programs help marketing
representatives tailor offerings to meet the needs of a rapidly
expanding range of customers. Special bids and volume discount
plans offer customers a reduced price in exchange for quantity
orders. These orders reduce the cost of marketing and also provide
cost-saving planning information for use in manufacturing. As a This advanced IBM-designed tool
further boost to volume sales, IBM is selling through, as well as to, a in use in IBM plants in Sindelfingen,
number of large customers. Through the multiples marketing Germany, and East Fishkill, N.Y,
program, IBM helps firms such as insurance companies sell IBM punches 1,440 precisely placed holes
computing equipment to their affiliates. the diameter of an eyelash in a
second, then automatically inspects
For convenience and flexibility, customers in the U. S. can finance
its own work. Ceramic substrates
purchases through the IBM Credit Corporation. In many other
on which chips are mounted are
countries where IBM does business, purchases can be financed
processed seven times faster with the
computer-controlled auto punch
tool. As many as 40,000 holes
in each of up to ^^ sheets in a chip
carrier are punched with great
accuracy to ensure integrity of elec-
trical connections. The chip carriers
are used in IBM's large-scale
computers and in the newest mid-
range computer, the 4381.

===== PAGE 13 =====
f I
\U
m.

===== PAGE 14 =====
through similar organizations. In customer centers companywide,
IBM marketing and support professionals are demonstrating
IBM products and services, and helping new information processing
customers plan installations and applications. Classes geared
toward applications for a given industry show many different users
at one time how IBM can help solve specific problems.
Reaching more customers efficiently
Complementing IBM's traditional marketing force are a number of
additional distribution channels which efficiently deliver more of the
company's high-volume products to customers than ever before.
In the U. S., a new division, the National Distribution Division, was
formed in 1983 to handle the marketing of selected products through
channels such as IBM Product Centers, direct mail and dealers.
Worldwide, some 126 Product Centers are IBM's own retail outlets for
Personal Computers, typewriters and other selected products. An
increasing number of retail stores and independent dealers are selling
IBM products as well, providing more links in the company's
distribution network. IBM also is informing thousands of potential
customers of its products through direct mail campaigns. Customers
use catalogs and toll-free telephone numbers to simplify ordering
everything from typewriters to Displaywriter and Personal Computer
software to supplies and office furniture. In the U. S. alone, there are
some 10,000 customer calls each day.
IBM also is working with remarketers—firms that add their software
Seminars and product briefings
or specialized hardware to IBM products to create "value added"
for a variety of low-cost products
systems and equipment for specific industries. The added value may
are held at conveniently located
include, for example, a software package to handle hotel reservations
customer centers such as this one
or one for hospital inventory control. These firms purchase IBM
in a Tokyo business district.
products such as the System/36, Series/1 or Personal Computer in
The centers, established company-
quantity, add their software and/or hardware, and sell the combined
uuide, are among IBM programs
systems to their customers.
to reduce marketing costs and
reach more potential customers.
Classes for authorized dealers
and local direct mail campaigns
also are handled by these
centers. Here, the new IBM
a small business computer
•with Japanese language (Kanji)
capability, is demonstrated
for customers.

===== PAGE 15 =====
i
a t
nmJL
ftrftri'T^^irtftiViiif'ftf T^^m t11
I
\
7 ^^
m

===== PAGE 16 =====
f®
mm

===== PAGE 17 =====
Products, services for new business areas
While additional marketing channels are helping IBM reach more
customers than ever before, organizations called Independent
Business Units have been created within the company to help IBM
participate in high-potential growth areas. These units are given
the latitude and resources necessary to shorten the time required to
bring new products or services to the marketplace.
Independent Business Units are expanding IBM's remote computing
offerings and introducing high-technology products for the office,
home, shop floor, classroom and laboratory. In Japan and Europe,
these units are tailoring standard IBM products to meet country-by-
country requirements or, where necessary, developing specialized
products for use in telecommunications, industry and finance.
Innovations to support higher volumes
More efficient systems and procedures are helping support IBM's
high-volume requirements. The Distribution Support System, for
example, links manufacturing plants, distribution points and branch
office support professionals. It is used to track shipments, enter and
fill orders, and for inventory control and invoicing. At branch offices,
marketing representatives use terminals connected to a regional
information network to reduce the time needed to prepare complex
volume sales presentations. Variables such as prices, quantity
discounts and financing options are entered into the system, and mar-
keting proposals tailored to each customer situation are generated.
Telecommunications equipment In the area of customer service, new systems and expanded programs
users at TELECOM in Geneva, are helping contain costs and maintain quality. Service representatives
Switzerland, saw the largest are using hand-held terminals to transmit information to centralized
display of IBM telecommunications support locations, which reduces paperwork and speeds parts order-
products ever assembled. IBM, ing. Service repair centers give users of certain high-volume, low-cost
among 600 exhibitors from 30 IBM products attractively priced repair options, which offer savings
countries participating in the show, of 50 to 75 percent compared with on-site service. Users of mid-range
has established Independent and large-scale computers can take advantage of remote software
Business Units in Europe and the support. In the U. S., almost 9 of every 10 calls for assistance are resolved
U. S. to develop and market over the telephone by IBM software support specialists.
products in the high-potential
groivth area of telecommunications.
Included in the demonstrations
ivas IBM's Directory Assistance
System to help telephone companies
cut costs and improve service.

===== PAGE 18 =====
1983 in Review
year marked by expanded support of job
training, community service and cultural pro-
grams. Support for education at all levels—
from grammar school through postdoctoral
programs—received special emphasis
during 1983.
Advanced-technology systems
From initial customer shipments of the most IBM began deliveries of the 3084, the
powerful processor in the company's history most powerful computer in the company's his-
to announcement of a Personal Computer tory, and continued high-volume shipments of
priced under $1,000, IBM extended the per- the advanced 3380 disk storage unit.
formance range and flexibility of its industry- The IBM 3084 is designed to meet the
leading information-handling products growth needs of IBM's largest customers and
in 1983. New telecommunications products provides up to 96 million characters of main
and small systems tailored to meet expanding memory. Like the 3081, which provides up to
customer requirements also were announced, 48 million characters of main memory, and the A customer engineer performs final installation
as were products specifically designed 3083, the entry level processor in IBM's large- tests on an IBM large-scale computer These computers
are being installed, on average, in about one-third
for use in manufacturing, finance, research, scale, advanced-technology series, the 3084 is
the time required fiist a few years ago.
education and government. based on highly reliable circuit packaging
While 1983 was a year of new products technology, including Thermal Conduction
offering customers wider options and more Modules and high-performance circuit boards.
computing power for less money, it also was a IBM also began customer shipments of small-scale IBM computers were expanded as
Multiple Virtual Storage/Extended Architec- new 4300, System/38, 8100 and Series/l
ture control programming. This software is models were added. In addition, System/}6, a
designed to increase the information-handling versatile, easy-to-use computer for small
# capacity of IBM's large-scale computers. businesses or departments in larger organiza-
Worldwide demand for IBM 3380 disk tions, was introduced.
storage units continued to build, and deliveries The IBM 4381, the most powerful com-
again increased. The 3380 can store up to puter in the 4300 series, provides up to 16
2.5 billion characters of information and is million characters of main memory and inter-
designed to work with a range of large IBM nal performance as much as three times that
computers. It uses IBM-developed thin film previously available with processors in this
read /write heads to transfer data at a rate group. Also announced was the 4361, which
of up to 3 million characters per second. provides improved price and performance
for customers installing a 4300 computer for
Mid-range and small processors the first time or adding remote computers
The speed, capacity and performance in distributed networks.
options available to users of mid-range and The System/36 offers up to i million
characters of main memory and 800 million
A technician at IBM's San Jose, Calif, plant characters of integrated disk storage. This
adjusts an assembly used in IBM's advanced capacity, up to four times the maximum main
disk storage unit.
memory and three times the disk storage of
the System/34, gives users the flexibility of
Logic circuits housed in this advanced packaging
automating many data and word processing
7nodule provide the computing power far the
tasks, office management functions and
new IBM4^81 processor. The air-cooled modules
measure about inches square by 1.4 inches high. business graphics applications. The System/36
can run many application programs written
for the System/34 and is an attractive growth
option for users of this system who require
additional computing power.
The new System/38 Model 8 provides up
to 8 million characters of main memory.
The Model 6 offers up to 4 million characters.
Both models significantly improve the price/

===== PAGE 19 =====
performance of this computer line. New
programming gives System/38 users greater
flexibility in linking these computers to other
types of IBM systems in computer networks.
Four new IBM 3370 direct access storage
unit models offering improved performance
and expanded capacity were announced.
These units are for use with the 4300 series
and System/38 computers.
Users of distributed information systems
can select from a wider range of IBM 8100
processors. The new IBM 8150 distributed in-
formation system, the highest-performance
computer in this series, provides up to
6 million characters of main memory, a three-
fold increase compared with the 8140.
It also provides a twofold increase in internal The IBM 81^0 distributed information system
performance and can support more than contcnns advanced logic chips, some with more than
80 terminals, twice the previous maximum. 4,400 circuits. It is the first machine in the industry
to use custom bipolar chips of this density.
The performance and capacity options
available to users of the modular IBM Series/l
also were expanded, and new programming
enabling users to control these small computers IBM Personal Computer
from a central processor was announced. IBM significantly expanded its Personal
The new Series/1 offers performance up to Computer line, adding a low-cost model for the
10 percent greater than that of earlier models. home or classroom and powerful units that
The maximum main memory of this versatile am be used as stand-alone computers or
computer also was doubled to i million as workstations linked to central processors.
characters. Other new Series/l computers inte- IBM PCjr, the most affordable computer in
grate disk storage, power supplies and proc- the company's history, can be used as an
essors in highly compact, economical units. educational tool, to prepare letters or reports,
and manage personal or household finances.
With available options, it can be linked to com- IBM introduced the PCjr, the lowest-priced computer
puter information networks to obtain stock in the company's history. A new division.. Entry
prices, weather reports and other information. Systems, was foryned to manage IBM's growing line of
personal-use computers.
It also am be used to send and receive letters,
memos and other documents. Programs
to acquaint users with the PCjr and materials
to help them write computer programs are
included with the system. PCjr can run many
software packages written for other IBM
Personal Computer models. Several programs
from IBM's subsidiary, Science Research
Associates, Inc., help customers learn how to
use computers quickly and easily.
The IBM Personal Computer XT is a pow-
erful personal computing system that provides
more than 10 million characters of disk storage.
The new System/36 is being manufactured at IBM An optional expansion unit increases the max-
plants in Rochester, Minn., Guadalajara, Mexico, imum storage of this computer to nearly 22
and Santa Pcdomba, Italy.
million characters, the equivalent of 11,000
double-spaced typewritten pages.This storage
capacity allows users to maintain lengthy
customer lists, files and records, and process a
range of business reports and forecasts.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Two programming languages, APL and
Logo, increase the range of uses for the IBM Per-
sonal Computer. APL works with an optional,
specialized chip that increases the speed at
which the Personal Computer processes certain
mathematical functions. Logo can be used to
develop problem-solving skills or learn mathe-
matical concepts.
Two workstations based on the IBM Per-
sonal Computer are designed to improve pro-
ductivity of business professionals. The IBM
3Z70 Personal Computer features a display
screen that am be divided into as many
as seven separate viewing areas. This enables
users to run Personal Computer applications in
one area and display information from as many
as four host computers while using the remain- IBM's major office systems are linked easily
ing areas to record notes or for calculations. and effectively xoith nexv IBM program products.
The second workstation, the IBM Personal
Computer XT/370, is a desk-top unit with the
processing power of earlier, large-scale language word processing system or terminal
computers and the versatility to be used as a linked to many types of IBM computers.
stand-alone computer or terminal linked to In Taiwan, IBM announced a modified IBM
larger processors. 5550 with Chinese language capability
IBM Japan announced the 5550 Multi-
station, a small, high-performance computer Display terminals
with Japanese language capability. This ver- The IBM 3270 display series was expanded
satile system can be used as a personal business and users given a wider range of choices to
computer and supports many of the application meet requirements for data entry and analysis,
programs available on the IBM Personal programming, and other professional and
Computer. It also can be used as a Japanese office tasks.
The compact, lightweight IBM 3178
IBM began marketing the Personal Computer in provides many of the functions of the 3278
eleven countries in the Far East in 198^. Here, Model 2, the company's most widely used
a Hong Kong boutique uses modified PCs as part
display, at a significantly lower price. This new
of the sUrre's check- out system.
display was developed at IBM's Fujisawa
Development Laboratory in Japan.
New attachment features allow IBM 3278
and 3279 displays to be used as IBM Personal
Computers, giving these widely used terminals
added data processing capabilities and flexibility.
Also announced was the IBM 3290,
which uses state-of-the-art gas panel technol-
ogy and can display almost 10,000 characters
on a distort ion-free, high-resolution screen.
Designed for uses such as program develop-
ment and data communications, the 3290 can
display letters, numbers or graphs simultane-
This detail of the IBM ^290 display screen shoius ously. Its screen can be divided into four sepa-
dot pa ttern created by glowing neon-argon gas rate areas to view data from various computers.
to produce high - resolution, flicher-free images.
Four new IBM 3274 control unit models,
used for directing communications between a
host computer and displays or printers, provide
improved price/performance.

===== PAGE 21 =====
The new IBM 5080 can display high-
resolution color graphics to help scientists and
engineers with a range of manufacturing and
design tasks. More than a million points on
the display's 19-inch screen can be used to
create and show details of machine or vehicle
parts, circuit designs or stress analysis models.
The IBM 5080 can use many existing com-
puter-aided design, manufacturing and simu-
lation programs without alteration.
Office productivity
IBM extended the capabilities of its office
systems offerings to improve the productivity of
end users and enable customers to plan and
More than 4,000 hiies are available to create
implement more efficient networks linking
high-resolution, computer-generated images on the
multiple locations within an enterprise.
IBM 5(><S'o graphics system.
Letters, memos or other documents can
be exchanged electronically among IBM System/
370-based computers using new Distributed Data base programming
Office Support System programming and IBM Database 2 and two related programs
extensions to IBM's Systems Network Architec- offer large manufacturing, insurance, financial
ture. These software products also allow the or public utility organizations easier access to
IBM 8100 distributed information system and data for strategic planning or day-to-day
55ZO administrative system to be integrated decision making. These software products
into the networks and support a variety allow users to establish relational data bases in
of IBM workstations, including Displaywriter which data can be rearranged easily. Organizing
and selected IBM 3270 displays. New cus- information in this way simplifies the task of
tomer self-education courses on network fun- working with large amounts of information,
damentals were offered by Science Research and permits managers, economists, scientists or
Associates, Inc. engineers to explore the many combinations
The versatility of the Displaywriter system and interrelationships of data and test the The print head of the IBM 42^0 printer contains
32 tiny electrodes which form letters or other images
also was enhanced with extended data pro- efi-ects of decisions.
by removing an cdumimim coating from a special
cessing and business graphics capabilities.
paper to create "camera-ready" masters for printing.
Also announced were communications Printers and storage units The printer was developed in the Boeblingen,
features that allow the Electronic Typewriter 95 The IBM 4250 printer, based on advanced, Germany, laboratorM
and 85 to be linked to a variety of display ter- electro-erosion technology, produces high-
minals, word processing systems and computers. resolution, camera-ready masters for computer-
based printing applications. Electrodes in its
print head create 360,000 individually address-
able picture elements per square inch to form
crisp, clear numbers, letters or graphics. The
4250 joins a series of IBM products that can be
integrated into a computer-based document
processing and publishing system.
A new IBM 3268 serial printer model
makes a range of graphics applications possible
for users of a variety of IBM computers and
Engineers at IBM's Fujisaiua laboratory iri
Japan are ivorking to develop advanced image
workstations that will make it easier to
create, modify, store and transmit text, data and
draivings via computer netivorks.

===== PAGE 22 =====
display systems. The new model prints in four
colors and operates at a maximum speed of
340 characters per second, more than two-and-
a-half times the rate of the previous compa-
rable printer.
The compact IBM 3430 magnetic tape
subsystem is designed for use with mid-range
computers such as the System/38 and
4300 series. It can read and record more than
300,000 characters of information each
second and store up to 6,250 characters per
inch of tape.
Finance systems
The IBM 4730 personal banking machine
can dispense exact change, cash paychecks
and accept check deposits without deposit slips The IBM4j^o banking machine can dispense exact
or envelopes. Designed to reduce the number change and bills in five denominations, giving users
added self-service banking convenience. It also can
and type of forms needed to complete many
be used to authorize or cash checks, providing a cost-
routine transactions, the 4730 also provides
effective -way for supermarkets and other stores to
new self-service banking features such as
offer these customer services.
cashing Social Security or other "third party"
checks, hi addition, this new automated teller
machine can be used to transfer money new printer models can be used to prepare
between accounts and make payments and letters, receipts and checks or print a variety of
withdrawals. In supermarkets and other stores, business forms, including passbooks.
it can authorize personal checks for accep-
tance at check-out counters. Plant, laboratory systems
A new administrative terminal and a IBM s line of industrial automation prod-
forms/passbook printer to handle a range of ucts was expanded with the introduction of the
'back-office" and teller tasks expand the 7540 Manufacturing System for use in a range
4700 finance communication system. The of assembly and material-handling tasks. This
new robotic system is controlled by a micro-
processor that can store up to five applioition
programs, enabling users to change quickly
New evaluation techniques introduced by this
from one task to another. It also features data
component procurement center in Bordeaux,
communications capabilities that allow mul-
France, and a counterpart center in Poughkeepsie,
tiple robotic systems to be linked to a host
N.Y., helped reduce costs and raise quality
levels of purclmsed components. computer for online control and data collection.
To help improve productivity in research
The compact IBM tape subsystem, developed and clinical laboratories, IBM Instruments,
at IBM's Tiicson facility, gives users of mid-range Inc., announced an automated sample-handling
IBM computers ynajiy of the performance and
device for use with the LC/934 Liquid Chro-
reliability features previously available only with
matography System. These machines, when
larger tape units.
used with the System 9000 computer, provide a
highly automated system for both standard
and complex laboratory analysis. This IBM sub-
sidiary also announced a multicolor plotter
that can be used to prepare precise technical
charts or business graphs.
Image processor
IBM began shipments of the 7350 image
processing system, a specialized system
that can be used by scientists, engineers and

===== PAGE 23 =====
technicians to display detailed pictures created
from large amounts of geological, medical or
other research data. In mineral exploration, for
example, the 7350 could be used by geologists
to depict subterranean formations based on
seismic data. Users of the 7350 can display
color images made up of some 32,000 hues,
4,000 of which can be displayed at any one
time. The ii^M 7350 has a 19-inch viewing
screen and can be used with a variety of inter-
mediate and large-scale IBM computers.
Controlling networks
New communications devices help users
establish and operate computer networks
and make it easier to change configurations to
accommodate growth. The IBM 3715 can IBM communicatims controllers and
link up to eight computers, and allows data to rack- mounted modems undergo systems test at tlie
La Gaiide development laboratory in France.
be transmitted over as many as 256 lines
The extensive test, a mwly inaugurated quality I B M t At
concurrently. Key elements of the controller are
measure, siynulates a customer network environment.
based on microprocessors and are designed to
make the job of adding new terminals to a
network or rearranging data transmission pat- commercial customers, the minimum down
terns easier. The 3725's internal performance payment for financing most equipment
is up to 3.5 times that of an IBM 3705-11, a was reduced from 25 percent to 10 percent,
previously announced communications device. and the maximum financing term was length-
A microprocessor-based IBM modem ened to five years. Two new lease options for
allows products such as terminals or control- state and local governments were offered.
lers to be linked to computers or networks Wholly owned subsidiaries similar to IBM
via voice-quality telephone lines. The new 3868 Credit Corporation also have been formed in
features extended diagnostic capabilities six other countries, including Canada, France
that help operators identify and isolate trans- and the United Kingdom. To meet Japanese
mission errors and speed repair. customers' requirements for term leases and IBM was one of 60 companies to display equipment at
flexible financing, IBM Japan formed a joint the first international scientific and computer
Financing options venture with Morgan Guaranty International exhibition held in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone,
a trade zone established by the People's Republic of
In the U.S., IBM Credit Corporation Finance Corporation and Orient Leasing
China to promote economic development.
added more than 100 machine types to the list Company, Ltd. to establish Computer Systems
of IBM products that can be financed through Leasing, Ltd.
this wholly owned subsidiary. Also, for
Independent Business Units
At the end of 1983, there were 11 Inde-
pendent Business Units operating in the U. S.
These units were: Academic Information
Systems, Biomedical Systems, Financial
Services, General Products, Graphics Systems
Programs, Industrial Automation, Informa-
tion Services, IBM Instruments, Inc., Low-End
Storage, Science Research Associates, Inc.
and Telecommunications Carrier Products.
European Independent Business Units are
Motor assemblies used in IBM's 3380 disk storage
units are tested automaticcdly idth a robotic system
installed at tJie suggestion of an employee quality
circle at the Fujisawa plant injapari.

===== PAGE 24 =====
providing products and services tailored to the
needs of individual countries in such fields as
telecommunications, manufacturing, academic
information systems and information net-
works. In addition, Independent Business Units
in Japan are responsible for developing and
introducing products that meet the unique
needs of the Japanese marketplace.
Lawsuit settled
Agreements reached with Hitachi, Ltd.
and with National Semiconductor Corporation
and its subsidiary. National Advanced Systems,
bring to an end existing civil litigation between
IBM and those companies. The corporations
and several individuals were named in a civil suit
filed by IBM in 1982 in connection with the A U.S. Navy helicopter eciuipped with advanced
theft of confidential IBM documents and mate- electronic detection, processing and transmission
systems developed by IBM's Federal Systems
rials. The agreements call for the companies to
Division is tested in a specicd chamber in the
refrain from using or disclosing IBM proprietary
division's Oiuego, N.Y., facility.
information, give IBM the right to inspect each
company's new products for a period of five
years to ensure compliance, compensate IBM some 15 government agencies during the year.
for its expenses, and establish a system for resolv- The projects included working on a global
IBM researchers have developed, fabricated and ing any future disputes by arbitration. Three navigation system and an advanced air traffic
tested an experimental Field Effect Transistor (FET) individuals remain defendants in this action. control system. In addition, this division is the
memory chip that can store viore than 64,000 bits
prime contractor for the U. S. Navy's L.AM I'S
of data and can read or write information at speeds
Federal Systems Division (Light Airborne Multipurpose System) MK ill,
of about 20 nanoseconds—billionths of a second.
The Federal Systems Division, which sup- a system in which equipment aboard hch-
The chip operates at speeds about twice that of the
fastest such chips now in use. plies specialized information-handling equip- copters and ships is linked to provide improved
ment and services to the U.S. government, was submarine-detection capabilities. The first
involved in more than 25 major projects for production LAM PS system was delivered to the
Navy in September, a month ahead of schedule.
Felephone customers in Munich, Germany, Investing in the future
get much faster responses to information requests
IBM continued investing in new tech-
since the installation in of IBM's Directory
nologies and advanced processes, and expand-
Assistance System. The government-oiuned
ing its manufacturing and development facili-
telephone company plans to extend the service
throughout Germany. ties to prepare for growth in the years ahead.
During the year, IBM spent $3.6 billion on
research, development and engineering, bring-
ing the company's five-year investment to
$13.4 billion.
The company invested $2.6 billion
in new plant and more efiicient equipment in
1983. More than 1.7 million square feet of
plant and laboratory space were completed
during the year. An additional 3.5 million
square feet were under construction.
Major projects completed during 1983
included a programming and administration
facility in Kingston, N.Y., manufacturing
facilities in Charlotte, N.C., and Rochester,
Minn., and manufacturing support centers in
Don Mills, Canada, and Jarfalla, Sweden.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Companywide, major expansion projects Support to education
include a research laboratory and manufac- IBM introduced new support programs for
turing data center in San Jose, Calif., a chip schools and universities in order to help im-
production facility in East Fishkill, N.Y., and prove the quality of education and prepare
manufacturing plants in Manassas, Va., and teachers and students to work with advanced
Vimercate, Italy. information-handling products.
In 1983, IBM-owned and leased manu- Twenty-two U. S. universities received
facturing and laboratory space was increased advanced IBM computer-aided design and man-
9.1 percent to a total of approximately 81 ufacturing systems or cash grants as part of a
million square feet. $50 million program to encourage excellence in
manufacturing systems engineering education.
Cooperative development, investments The donation program, the largest in the com- IBM is an official sponsor of the 1984 Olympics,
and IBM Personal Computers and office systems are
IBM and ROLM Corporation announced pany's history, is in response to the need in
being used by the. Los Angeles Olympic Organizing
an agreement to work together to find ways to industry for people who can make full use of Committee to help handle a luide range of adminis-
link their respective products. ROLM is a advanced-technology manufacturing systems. trative a nd other support tasks.
California-based manufacturer of commu- Another program named 50 untenured
nications products such as private automatic faculty members from 25 U.S. universities as
branch exchanges. The agreement also pro- the first recipients of IBM grants established to
vides for IBM to purchase a minority interest in help universities retain outstanding teachers
ROLM. At the end of 1983, IBM owned in computer science, materials science and
about 20 percent of ROLM'S common stock. related engineering fields. The IBM Faculty
IBM also increased its investment in Development Awards Program provides two-
Intel Corporation, a major semiconductor year grants of $30,000 a year to each recipi-
manufacturer and an important supplier to ent to help support research work. Fifty
IBM. The investment helps strengthen more recipients will be named in 1984.
Intel's research, development and production In Europe, IBM is sponsoring the devel-
capacity At year end, IBM owned about 17.5 opment of an international network that will
percent of Intel's common stock. link university scientists and IBM research
facilities in Europe and the U. S. Called the
Employee suggestions European Aaidemic and Research Network, it
In 1983, six IBM employees were awarded will be the first such privately sponsored net-
$100,000 each for cost-saving ideas that helped
IBM improve operations. The awards, the
maximum under IBM's employee suggestion
program, were part of approximately $14 mil-
lion awarded to employees companywide.
The 36,000 suggestions recognized under this
program during the year represent a savings
to the company of at least $65 million.
Satellite Business Systems
Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a partner-
ship formed by COMSAT General Corporation,
Aetna Life & Casualty and IBM, continued
expanding its highly reliable voice and data
transmission services during 1983. A growing
number of large corporations, small busi-
nesses and residential customers are using SBS
fiicilities, and traffic is increasing significantly. An IBM instructor in Neiv York City provides
The future progress of SBS will be significantly technical training via satellite network to customers
in New York, Houston and Minneapolis. In 1984,
afi^ected by actions associated with the de-
this cost-effective training will be offered in eight
regulation of the telecommunications industry.
more cities.
SBS will work with others to arrive at solutions
which will foster the healthiest economic
climate in the industry.

===== PAGE 26 =====
An IBM-sponsored television program on Worldwide, IBM's contributions of cash,
the scientific and artistic contributions of equipment and other resources to social,
Leonardo da Vinci was telecast in nine coun- cultural and educational programs reached a
tries. In the U S., educational materials for record $115 million in 1983.
use in conjunction with the program were sent
to some 22,000 schools and community Affirmative Action within IBM
colleges. Commercial time during the U. S. During 1983, IBM hired about 10,000
broadcast was devoted to the importance of people in the U. S. Of these, 45 percent were
quality education in America. women and 19 percent were minorities. At
year end, IBM had approximately 3,600 women
IBM and the community managers and 3,000 minority managers in the
Community programs initiated by U. S. Companywide, several thousand handi-
IBM during 1983 included providing support to capped persons are employed by IBM.
a drug awareness program in the U. S. Teachers' IBM expanded its program to support
guides and classroom materials dealing with the minority-owned businesses in the U.S. In 1983,
devastating effects of drug abuse will be distrib- IBM did business exceeding $90 million with
New businesses such as this small furniture uted to elementary school students in 35,000 more than 750 such firms. IBM also purchased
refinishing shop in London receive support and schools. IBM also supported nonprofit organiza- more than $50 million in products and services
counselingfrmn IBM employees on loan to tions working on a range of problems such as from more than 500 companies owned primar-
inner city revitalization agencies throughout the
delivering health care and social services to ily by women and more than $16 million from
United Kingdom.
elderly and handicapped persons and improving more than 80 companies which employ large
housing in inner city neighborhoods. numbers of handicapped workers.
work and will encourage the exchange of IBM expanded its support of job training
scientific and technical information among in- programs, providing equipment and technical
stitutions and colleagues in many countries. support at 30 major centers in the U. S.
IBM also sponsors annual summer institutes in The centers—nine of them new in 1983—are
Europe to facilitate the exchange of informa- operated in connection with nonprofit, com-
tion among scientists and IBM specialists. munity-based organizations. They provide
IBM is working with several leading training for the socially and economically dis-
universities in the U. S. and Europe to develop advantaged in fields such as computer operations
communications links that will tie powerful and word processing.
workstations to central computers serving the Since the mid-r970S, IBM has helped estab-
entire academic community. These projects lish 27 job training centers for the physically
are aimed at the development of new hardware disabled. More than r,ioo handicapped people
and software that will improve and simplify have received training as entry-level programmers.
access to information systems. In addition, more than 100 employees began
Twelve teacher-training institutions and participating in the IBM Social Service Leave
89 schools in California, Florida and New Program during 1983. Under this program, IBM
York are participating in an IBM-sponsored employees work for nonprofit organizations.
program designed to help secondary schools
determine the best ways to use computers IBM's support of the arts in included sponsor-
and software in the classroom. IBM is providing ship of an exhibition of the works of American
some 1,500 Personal Computers, related artist Robert Motherwell. The exhibition opened
software, technical support and cash grants. in Buffalo, N.Y., and will travel to Los Angeles,
San Francisco, Seattle, Washington, D.C. and
Companywide, Personal Computers have
Nexv York City iii 1984.
been donated to schools, colleges, universities
and nonprofit research centers in 29 countries.
Fifty-seven IBM employees were partici-
pants in the Faculty Loan Program in 1983, Classes in an IBM-sponsored job training center
and will spend at least one academic year teach- in Enschede, Holland, are designed to help students
ing or working at educational institutions develop basic business and data processing skills.
IBM sponsors similar job training programs in many
which have programs that serve disadvantaged
other European countries.
students. Since the program was established
in 1971, more than 400 employees have been
loaned at full pay to participating institutions.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity standards, as set forth in the IBM Business
of the financial information presented in this Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The lated into numerous languages, are distributed
accompanying financial statements have been to employees throughout the world, and
prepared in conformity with generally accepted reemphasized through internal programs to
accounting principles, applying certain esti- assure that they are understood and followed.
mates and judgments as required. Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
IBM maintains an effective system of tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, statements. Their accompanying report is
of organizational arrangements with clearly based on an examination conducted in accor-
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of dance with generally accepted auditing stan-
authority We believe this system provides dards, including a review of internal accounting
reasonable assurance that transactions are controls and tests of accounting procedures
executed in accordance with management au- and records.
thorization, and that they are appropriately The Audit Committee of the Board of
recorded, in order to permit preparation of Directors is composed solely of outside directors,
financial statements in conformity with generally and is responsible for recommending to
accepted accounting principles and to the Board the independent accounting firm to
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain be retained for the coming year, subject to
accountability of assets. An important element stockholder approval. The Audit Committee
of the system is an ongoing internal audit meets periodically and privately with the
program. independent accountants, with our internal
To assure the effective administration of auditors, as well as with IBM management, to
internal control, we carefully select and train review accounting, auditing, internal account-
our employees, develop and disseminate written ing controls and financial reporting matters.
policies and procedures, provide appropriate
communication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of John R.Opel Chairman of the Board
controls. We continue to believe that it is
essential for the company to conduct its business
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical Allen J. Krowe Senior Vice President,
Finance &: Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors January 31,1984
of International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated statements were made in accordance with
financial statements, appearing on pages 26, 28, generally accepted auditing standards and accord-
30, and 32 through 41, present fairly the financial ingly included such tests of the accounting
position of International Business Machines records and such other auditing procedures as we
Corporation and its subsidiary companies considered necessary in the circumstances.
at December 31,1983 and 1982, and the results
of their operations and changes in funds
for each of the three years in the period ended
Price Waterhouse
December 31,1983, in conformity with 153 East 53rd Street
generally accepted accounting principles con- New York, N.Y. 10022
sistently applied. Our examinations of these

===== PAGE 28 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1983 1982
Gross Income:
Sales 16,815 12,901
Rentals 9,^30 11,121 10,839
Services 7^676 6,428 5,330
$40,180 $34,364 $29,070
Cost of sales 9»748 6,682 5,162
Cost of rentals 3>i4i 3,959 4,041
Cost of services 3,506 3,047 2,534
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . . 10,614 9,286t 8,383t
Research, development and engineering expenses. 3,582 3,042 2,451
Interest expense 390 454 407
30>98I 26,470 22,978
9»i99 7,894 6,092
Other income, principally interest 741 368
Earnings before income taxes 9,940 8,222 6,460
Provision for income taxes 3,8i3t 2,850t
4>455
Net Earnings $ 5,485 $ 4,409 $ 3,610
Per share $ 9.04 $7-39 $6.14
Average number of shares outstanding:
1983-606,769,848
1982-596,688,501
1981-587,803,373
t State and local income taxes have been reclassified to
conform with 1983 presentation. (See note on page 37)

===== PAGE 29 =====
Results of Operations
Operations in 1983 showed positive results IBM Credit Corporation and similar IBM activities Research, development and engineering
across the broad range of our activities and around the world, approximately $2 billion remains a vital factor in IBM's leadership strategy
exceeded our prior year's record performance. in purchase value of IBM equipment. The trend In 1983, the company expended $3.6 billion in
Gross income in 1983 increased by 16.9 per- toward purchase and long-term leases is expected research, development and engineering, an
cent to $40.2 billion. Gross income from U. S. to continue. increase of 17.7 percent over the prior year.
operations rose 21.5 percent and gross income The information on Industry Segments for Other income grew substantially in 1983 to
from non-U. S. operations increased by 11.2 classes of similar products or services is set $741 million, primarily from earnings on our
percent. forth on page 41. The trend toward greater sales improved cash and marketable securities position.
Net earnings for the year increased by 24.4 and diminished rental revenues is evident in Interest income accounted for in excess of 70
percent to $5.5 billion, yielding a 13.7 percent each of the major classes of product groupings. percent of the total. Other items included net
margin, an increase of approximately one per- Year-to-year growth is expected in each of earnings from the unconsolidated IBM Credit
centage point. Net earnings from U. S. operations the major classes. Corporation and settlements with other computer
grew by 20.3 percent to $3.3 billion and net Services gross income, which consists pri- manufacturers for their prior use of IBM's pro-
earnings from non-U. S. operations increased by marily of maintenance and program products gramming materials.
31.2 percent to $2.2 billion. revenues, rose in 1983 by 19.4 percent over the The effective tax rate in 1983 decreased by
The effects of price elasticity and improved prior year. Program products gross income 1.6 percentage points from the prior year,
technologies have been key elements in IBM's increased by 36.0 percent. Maintenance gross resulting primarily from increased tax credits due
growth. As technology and productivity income grew by 16.2 percent. to cash flows from non-U. S. operations.
programs have yielded improved costs, customers In 1983, gross profits increased by 15.0 The continued strengthening of the U. S.
have benefited through lower prices and enhanced percent to a total of $23.8 billion, and the overall dollar in 1983, in relation to most other major
function. These factors have been vital in the gross profit margin decreased to 59.2 percent currencies (see graphs on page 35), had an adverse
broad, strong market expansion the industry has from 60.2 percent in 1982.This margin change impact on IBM's non-U. S. performance when
experienced. In anticipation of this expanding was caused primarily by changes in product translated into U. S. dollars.
market, IBM has, since the mid-seventies, made and revenue mix. A decline in sales gross profit In 1983, we have seen renewed economic
significant investments in research, development, margin of 2.2 percentage points was partially expansion in the U. S. economy and evidence
engineering and in efficient production facilities. offset by an increase in both rental and service of increased economic activity in other countries
Simultaneously, there has been sustained gross profit margins of 1.6 and 1.7 percentage around the world.
emphasis on quality and greater efficiency in all points respectively The development of new
aspects of our business. These factors have marketing distribution channels, volume
IBM Consolidated Gross Income: (In millions)
led to a continuing flow of successful product and procurement agreements and similar marketing >>>>44440000,,,,000000000000
service offerings, which are benefiting our cus- plans contributed to higher revenues and lower
44444444,,,,000000000000
tomers and providing favorable financial returns selling, general and administrative expense ratios,
44440000,,,,000000000000
to IBM. thereby compensating for the lower price-to-cost
Gross income from sales in 1983 grew by relationship for many of our newer products. 33336666,,,,000000000000 19%
38.4 percent to $23.3 billion. As illustrated In 1983, selling, general and administrative
3311,,000000
in the table below, gross income from sales has expenses were 26.4 percent of gross revenues, as 19%
222888,,,000000000
grown steadily over the past several years as a compared to 27.0 percent in 1982. This ratio has
18%
portion of total gross income, while gross income declined steadily since 1979. In 1983, the cor- 222444,,,000000000
from rentals, primarily convenience leases, has poration announced a special opportunity plan 222000,,,000000000 15% r 32.%
steadily declined. This decline in rental gross applicable to selected locations around the world. ( .Jf K V • :' !
16,000 41%'
income amounted to 17 percent as compared to In those areas where the corporation has excess
44% '58%-
the prior year. skills, incentives were offered to employees with 12,000
•tjs/y
IBM's participation in the financing of our 25 years or more of service to leave the company
8,000 .45%
customers' acquisition of products is growing voluntarily Had this action not been reflected in '41%^ 42%
4,000
steadily In 1983, customers financed through the the 1983 financial results, the reduction in the
t ' ~ 1 E 3
selling, general and administrative expense to rev- 0 i L ttJ
enue ratio would have more than offset the one 1979 '80 '81 '82 1983
percent reduction in gross profit margin. !m m Sales J Rentals Services
IBM Annual Report irj

===== PAGE 30 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1982
1983
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash $ 616 $ 405
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market 4,920 2,895
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 5.735 4,976
Other accounts receivable 645 457
Inventories 4,381 3,492
Prepaid expenses 789
973
$ 17,270 $ I 3,0 1 4
Rental Machines and Parts 13,409 16,527
Less: Accumulated depreciation 7,410
6,597
6,812 9,1 ' 7
Plant and Other Property 14,240
15,778
Less: Accumulated depreciation 6,448 5,794
8,446
9,330
Investments and Other Assets 1,964
3,831
(5 32,541
$ 37,243
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes $ 3,220 $ 2,854
Loans payable 532 529
Accounts payable 983
1,^53
Compensation and benefits 2,450 ',959
Deferred income 382 402
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 1,670 1,482
(t 8,209
$ 9,507
Deferred Income Taxes 713 323
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 1,130 1,198
Long-Term Debt 2,674 2,85 1
Stockholders' Equity:
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 5,800 5,008
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1983-610,724,641; 1982-602,406,128
Retained earnings 19,489 16,259
Translation adjustments (2,070) (1,307)
23,219 I 9,960
<5 32,541
s 37,243
The notes on pages 33 through 41 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Financial Condition
In 1983, IBM further improved its financial In 1983, IBM invested $501 million in long- Although it is not expected that the
condition while continuing to make significant term fixed rate U. S. Government securities matur- corporation will require any appreciable external
investments in research, development and engi- ing in 1985 and 1986, with the intent to hold such financing to provide for its growth in 1984,
neering, technology, efficient production facilities securities to maturity to offset long-term debt significant worldwide capital resources continue
and product distribution and service networks. maturing at approximately the same time. to be available to the corporation. The company
Expenditures for research, development and In addition, investments totaling $843 million has considerable financial flexibility throughout
engineering amounted to $3.6 billion in 1983, were made during 1983 in the Intel and ROLM the world.
which brought the total for the past five years to Corporations. Our investments help to provide At December 31,1983, the equity translation
more than $13 billion.The scope of these invest- these companies with the necessary capital adjustment amounted to $2,070 million, an
ments, all of which are expensed as incurred, resources to participate in significant growth increase of $763 million over the prior year. This
covers a broad range of activities from basic opportunities in an orderly fashion and offer IBM change is attributable to the continued strength
research to applied development. In an increas- a sound investment. of the U. S. dollar in relation to most other
ingly competitive international environment, Funds from operations amounted to $11.9 currencies and the method used for purposes of
these investments are required to maintain billion in 1983, an increase of almost 20 percent translation of non-U. S. operations into U. S.
a steady flow of innovative new products that over the prior year. This increase was primarily the dollars for IBM's consolidated results. It is manage-
provide the basis for future growth. result of the 24.4 percent increase in net earn- ment's view that the translation adjustment has
Investments in land, buildings, machinery ings. The shift toward higher levels of sales has significance only in situations where liquidation
and equipment amounted to $2.6 billion in 1983, resulted in improved funds flow and greater return of net assets may be anticipated, and even in
a 6 percent increase over the prior year. Over the on assets. Sufficient funds were generated by such circumstances, does not reflect the current
past five years these investments have amounted operations to meet all of our operational needs, market value of the assets as translated. Were
to more than $ 11 billion and provide the capac- reduce our debt, provide for dividends, and increase the U. S. dollar to weaken in relation to other
ity for growth to allow us to meet the increasing our cash and marketable securities position. currencies, the translation adjustment would be
demand for our products (see graph depicting The strong growth of our business, and the reduced in proportion to the change in currency
these investments on page 31). Management rate of technological change, require management values, and IBM's net asset position in those
intends to continue to invest prudently at levels to maintain an environment conducive to the countries affected.
commensurate with the anticipated market acceptance of new ideas without losing the disci- IBM's 1983 results were consistent with our
expansion. plines of the past. The company has placed stated goals for the Eighties. The company has
IBM invested $588 million in program prod- considerable emphasis on training and education exceeded the industry's growth rate for the past
ucts in the current year and almost $2 billion over to help prepare employees to manage the business two years. Demand for our products, from the
the past five years. The unamortized portion during this period of change. Personal Computer through high-performance
of this investment amounted to $1.3 billion at the Conservation of capital continues to be a large-scale processors, continues to be strong. The
end of 1983. The continuing success of these major focus in managing IBM. Management is continued improvement in expense to revenue
program products is evidenced by an annual mindful of the risks inherent in high technology, ratios reflects our commitment to greater efficiency.
compound growth rate of revenue in excess of the growing scope and quality of competition, Our earnings results are providing the financial
42 percent over the past five years. Revenue in and uncertain economic conditions. Renewed flexibility necessary to achieve our goals.
1983 amounted to $2.3 billion. focus has been placed on key measurements with
Investments in rental machines and parts special emphasis on quality, turnover rates,
declined by 45 percent in 1983. This trend is return on assets, and return on investments and
consistent with the changing character of our equity. Return on assets in 1983 was 15.7 percent,
business, as described on page 27, and is expected an increase of 1.4 percentage points over 1982.
to continue. Return on stockholders' equity improved to
25.4 percent from 23.4 percent in the prior year,
an historic high for IBM.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1983 1982 1981
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January i $ 3,300 $ 2,029 $ 2,112
Provided from (used for) Operations:
Sources:
Net earnings $ 5^485 $4,409 $ 3,610
Items not requiring the current use of funds:
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 3^362 3,143 2,753
Net book value of rental machines and
other property retired or sold 2,108 1,642 1,212
Amortization of program products 311 249 173
Other 322 85 (189)
11,588 9,528 7,559
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities
capitalized in rental machines 265 419 424
11,853 9,947 7,983
Uses:
Investment in rental machines 4,254 4,610
Investment in plant and other property 2,578 2,431 2,235
4,930 6,685 6,845
Investment in program products 588 468 348
Increase (decrease) in investments and other assets . . .. 1,590 (256) 105
Net change in w^orking capital
(excluding cash, marketable securities
and loans payable) 725 307 (133)
7,833 7,204 7,165
Translation effects (147) 30 (53)
Net provided from operations 3,873 2,773 765
Provided from External Financing:
Net change in long-term debt (177) 182 570
Net change in loans payable 3 (244) 182
Net provided from external financing (174) (62) 752
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 788 613 423
7,787 5,353 4,052
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 2,251 2,053 2,023
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December 31 $5,536 $3,300 $ 2,029
The notes on pages 33 through 41 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions)
Rental Machines
Plant and Other Property $2,578
$351 Reduction of Long-Term Debt
: $588 Program Products
$722 Working Capital t
$788 Stock Plans
$ 174 New Long-Term Debt $ 1,590 Investments and Other Assets
$ 11,706 Operations! $2,251 Cash Dividends
tlnciudes Effects oriranslation + Excludes Cash and Marketable Securities
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property
Over the past five years, the company has (In millions)
invested over $11 billion in land, buildings, and
machinery and equipment to meet customer
demands, maintain technological leadership and
improve productivity These recent additions
represent approximately tw^o-thirds of the gross
asset value of plant and other property as of the
end of December, 1983. Since 1980, investments
exceeded $2 billion in each year. Continuous
upgrading of our facilities is essential to achieve
our objectives. Large investments will continue to
be required in future years.
1979 '80 81 81 1983
i Annual iS?'Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 34 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
for the year ended December 31:
Translation
(Dollars in millions) Capital Stock Retained Earnings Adjustments Treasury Stock Total
1981 , Stockholders'Equity, January 1,1981 . . .. $3,992 $ 12,326 $ 290 $(30) $16,578
Net earnings 3,610 3,610
Cash dividends declared (2,023) (2,023)
Capital stock issued
under employee plans (8,031,550 shares). . 394 394
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plan (4) 30 26
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 3 3
Translation adjustments (912) (912)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1981 . . . 4,389 13,909 (622) 17,676
1982 Net earnings 4,409 4,409
Cash dividends declared (2.,053) (2,053)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholder plans (10,112,504 shares) . . 602 602
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans (6) (6)
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 17 17
Translation adjustments (685) (685)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1982 . . . 5,008 16,259 (1,307) 19,960
1983 Net earnings 5,485 5,485
Cash dividends declared (2,251) (2,251)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) . . . 741 741
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans (4) (4)
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 51 51
Translation adjustments (763) (763)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 . . . $ 5,800 $ 19,489 $ (2,070) $ — $ 23,219
The notes on pages 33 through 41
are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements;
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consohdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation
of Consolidation: and its U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned IBM Credit Corporation
and similar non-U. S. finance subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. Investments in joint ventures, and
other companies in which IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method.
Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted for by the cost method.
Translation of For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S.
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity.
For non-U. S. subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly
inflationary, inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates
prevailing when acquired. All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories
charged to cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items
are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from
remeasurement are included in earnings.
Gross Income: Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services
over the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period.
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM's financing subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales.
Program Products: Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and
development. Costs incurred subsequent to a design verification test to produce the finished product are generally
capitalized as program products assets. The assets are amortized over the estimated revenue-producing life of
the program, but not in excess of five years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed.
Depreciation: Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives.
Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method. Depreciation of plant and
other property is computed using either accelerated methods or the straight-line method.
Retirement Plans: Current service costs are accrued currently Prior service costs resulting from improvements in the plans are
amortized generally over 10 years.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing
differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable
earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense
over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property.
Inventories: Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment sales are included
in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process applicable to equipment rentals is similarly
valued and included in rental machines and parts.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Non-U. S. Operations (Dollars in millions) 1983 1982 1981
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 8,294 $ 6,299 $ 5,436
Current liabilities 4,704 4,240 4,108
Working capital 3»590 2,059 1,328
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 5,622 6,740 7,152.
Investments and other assets 904 887 890
10,116 9,686 9,370
Deferred income taxes 48 — —
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 1,130 1,198 1,184
Long-term debt 466 480 496
1,644 1,678 1,680
Net assets employed $ 8,472 $ 8,008 $ 7,690
Number of employees 150,944 150,444 149,794
For the year:
Gross income from sales, rentals and services $ 17,053 $ 15,336 $ 13,982
Earnings before income taxes $ 3,841 $ 3,226 $ 2,664
Provision for income taxes 1,677 1,577 1,123
Net earnings $ 2,164 $ 1,649 $ 1,541
Investment in rental machines $ 1,257 $ 1,893 $ 2,451
Investment in plant and other property 730 789 823
S 1,987 $ 2,682 $ 3,274
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the cur- Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid-
currency environment account for approximately rencies of many countries. As the dollar strength- iaries included in consolidated retained earnings
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. ens, net assets and net earnings recorded in local amounted to $8,510 million at December 31,
The remaining 15% of the company's non-U. S. currencies are translated into fewer U S. dollars 1983, $7,538 million at December 31,1982, and
gross income is from subsidiaries and branches than they would have been at the previous year's $6,565 million at December 31,1981. These
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic rates. The graphs on the next page illustrate earnings are indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S.
environment is highly inflationary. the decline in relation to the dollar of the five operations. Accordingly, no provision has been
For the years 1983,1982 and 1981, non-U. S. major foreign currencies in which IBM conducts made for taxes that might be payable upon
financial results have been impacted by the most of its non-U. S. business. remittance of such earnings.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Percent Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar
German mark French franc British sterling Italian lira Japanese yen
0% 0% 0%
1981 1982 1983 1981 1982 1983 1981 1982 1983 1981 1982 198 3 1981 [982 1983
Base-as of January i, 1981
Marketable Securities (Dollars in millions) December 31,1983 December 31,1982
U. S. Government securities $ I >745 $ 1,167
Time deposits and other bank obligations . . ^>314 1,388
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed--term obligations . . .. 861 340
Total $ 4,920 $ 2,895
Market value $ 4,929 $ 2,899
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1983 December 31,1982
Finished goods $ 872 $ 615
Work in process 3.267 2,613
Raw materials and operating supplies . . .. 242 264
Total $ 4,381 $ 3,492
Rental Machines and Parts
Rental machines and parts are comprised of amount of $3,331 million and $2,794 million at process and field service parts totaled $2,534
capitalized machines, rental machine work December 31,1983 and 1982, respectively, million and $3,676 million at December 31,1983
in process and field service parts. Rental machines with accumulated depreciation of $2,143 million and 1982, respectively.
include machines installed with IBM in the and $1,952 million. Rental machine work in
Plant and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1983 December 31,1
Land and land improvements . . . . $ 698 $ 688
Buildings 6,051 5,586
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 9,029 7,966
15.778 14,240
Less: Accumulated depreciation 6,448 5.794
Total $ 9.330 $ 8,446

===== PAGE 38 =====
Investments and Other Assets (Dollars in millions) December 31,1983 December 31,1982
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1983,$1,045; 1982., $763) $ 1,287 $ 1,010
IBM Credit Corporation 5^5 290
U. S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value $502) 501 —
Other investments and sundry assets 1,518 664
Total $3,831 $1,964
Included in other investments and sundry assets are 1983 investments in Intel and
ROLM Corporations amounting to $843 million.
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31,1983 December 31,1982
U. S. Operations:
9^/2% notes due 1986 500 500
<)y%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments 1985-2003) 500 500
10.80% notes due 1984-1986 240 300
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1983, in parentheses) payable in :
U.S. dollars, due 1984-2012 (12.9%) 678 678
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (5.5%) 249 251
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 206
^>370 ^>455
Non-U. S. Operations:
Various obligations (average interest rate at December 31,1983, in parentheses) payable in:
U. S. dollars, due 1984-1992 (11.6%) 249 172
Japanese yen, due 1984-2013 (8.3%) 133 128
French francs, due 1984-1994 (12.8%) 75 125
Other currencies, due 1984-1993 (18.2%) 98 ^
555
2,925 2,996
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 9V2% notes and 9%% debentures 1 3
2,922
Less: Current maturities 248 ^,993
Total $ 2,674
$2,851
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars
on long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1983, are as follows: 1984, $248;
1985, $416; 1986, $905; 1987, $338; 1988, $275; 1989 and beyond, $743.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Taxes (Dollars in millions) 1983 1982! 19811
Earnings before income taxes:
U.S. operations $ 6,099 $4,996 $3,796
Non-U. S. operations 3^841 3,226 2,664
$ 9,940 $ 8,222 $ 6,460
Provision for income taxes:
U. S. operations $ 2,778 $ 2,236 $ 1,727
Non-U. S. operations 1,677 1,577 1,123
4,455 3,813 2,850
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 1,550 1,450 1,387
Total $ 6,005 $5,263 $4,237
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
US. Federal:
Current $ 1,624 $1,378 $ 994
Net tax effects of timing differences 188 212 49
Net deferred investment tax credits 47 71 70
1,859 1,661 1,113
Non-US.:
Current 2,250 1,829 1,464
Net tax effects of timing differences 31 73
2,282 1,860 1,537
U.S. State and local:
Current 265 288 231
Net tax effects of timing differences 49 4 (31)
314 292 200
Total provision $ 4,455 $3,813 $ 2,850
t State and local income taxes for U. S. operations, previously included in
selling, general and administrative expenses, are now included in provision for
income taxes. Prior years have been reclassified to conform with 1983 presentation.
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 44.8% in 1983,
46.4% in 1982 and 44.1% in 1981.

===== PAGE 40 =====
IBM Credit Corporation available, in addition to $875 million shared Research and Development
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned with the IBM Corporation. IBM Credit Corpora- Research and development expenses
unconsolidated subsidiary, finances installment tion finances operations through public and amounted to $2,514 million in 1983, $2,053 mil-
payment agreements (iPAs) relating to sales by private debt arrangements and retained earnings. lion in 1982 and $1,612 million in 1981.
IBM of its products in the United States, and IBM Credit Corporation purchased $848 million
offers term lease financing to IBM customers for in 1983 and $68z million in 1982 of iPAs from Retirement Plans
periods of three, four and five years at fixed IBM, and $334 million in 1983 and $67 million in The company and its subsidiaries have retire-
rates. Some of the leases are effected through 1982 of IBM products for term lease customers. ment plans covering substantially all employees.
partnerships with unrelated third parties. IBM's The following information has been The total cost of all plans for 1983,1982 and 1981
investment in the IBM Credit Corporation summarized from the consolidated financial was $1,180 million, $ 1,187 million and $1,060
is accounted for by the equity method and earn- statements of the IBM Credit Corporation. million, respectively.
ings are included in other income in IBM's Additional information is available in its 1983 U. S. employees are covered by noncontribu-
consolidated statement of earnings. IBM has Annual Report. Copies may be obtained tory plans which are funded by company con-
agreed to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to by writing to: tributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is
have a positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit IBM Stockholder Relations Department, held for the sole benefit of employees. Benefits are
Corporation has $205 million of lines of credit 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. based principally on earnings and length of ser-
vice and become vested upon completion of ten
years of service. At December 31,1983, benefits
Earnings for the years ended December 31,1983 and 1982,
and for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981: were being received by 17,064 individuals.
The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter-
(Dollars in thousands) 1983 1982 1981
mined using an actuarial cost method which
Finance and Other income $162,655 $ I l8,Oi7t $ 49,^12. relates pension cost to direct compensation. The
Interest and other expenses 117,149 83,599! 34,^70 prior service portion of plan changes and re-
Provision for income taxes 3»836 3>M4 5,075 visions to actuarial assumptions is amortized in
Netearnings $ 41,670 $ 31,274 $ 9,867 equal annual amounts over ten years. Significant
tReclassified to conform with 1983 presentation.
assumptions include: rate of return on fund as-
sets, future compensation levels, retirement ages,
Financial position at December 31:
turnover and mortality Variances between actual
(Dollars in thousands) 1983 1982 1983 1982 and assumed experience are amortized as a per-
centage of direct compensation over the remain-
Assets: Liabilities and Stockholder's; Equity:
Cash and marketable Short-term debt... $ 558,935 $ 207,576 ing working years of current employees.
securities $ 60,724 $ 730 Taxes and other The cost of U. S. plans was $702 million
Installment payment accruals 62,287 53,975 in 1983, $701 million in 1982 and $553 million in
agreement Due to IBM 1981, and represented 9.7%, 10.9% and 9.9%
receivables-net. . 1,182,047 951,438 Corporation:
of direct compensation in each of the respective
Net investment in Current 239,470 143,984
years. Most of the increased costs in 1982 re-
financing leases . 367,981 65^504 Noncurrent . . 100,000 —
Note receivable- Long-term debt . . . 512,810 508,120 sulted from plan changes announced in that year.
affiliated Stockholder's The effect of plan changes announced in 1983,
company 35,000 35,000 equity 185,184 145,714 on 1983 costs was offset by refinements of actu-
Deferred charges Total Liabilities arial techniques and amortization of the 1982
and other assets . 1^,934 6,697 and Stockholder's variance between actual and assumed experience.
Total Assets $ 1,658,686 $ 1,059,369 Equity $ i ,658,686 $ 1,059,369 It is the company's policy to fund costs in
the year accrued, to the extent such costs are tax
deductible in that year. Contributions to the fund
were $644 million, $619 million and $553 million
in the years 1983,1982 and 1981, respectively.
At December 31,1983, the unamortized
cost of plan and assumption changes, to be amor-
tized during the next ten years, amounted to
$532 million.

===== PAGE 41 =====
The following table provides information Stock Purchase Plan The following table summarizes stock
on the status of the U. S. pension plans. The table The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan option transactions during 1983:
shows the actuarial present value of accumulated enables employees who are not participants
benefits based on actual compensation and in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital Number of Shares
service to date and assumes a rate of return of stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% Available
Under Option for Option
This rate represents the current estimate of of eligible compensation. The price an employee
Balance at
the long-term actuarial rate of return expected to pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average
January i, 1983 . . . . 14,^77,945 6,966,612
be earned over the life of the plans. market price on the date the employee has accu-
Options granted 1,799,905 (i,799>905)
mulated enough money to buy a share. During Options terminated . . (62,989) 31,166
At December 31
1983, employees purchased 4,796,942 shares, Options cancelled-
(Dollars in millions) 1983
including 221,508 treasury shares, for which SARs exercised. . . . (116,445)
Actuarial present value $465 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, Options exercised . . . (2,711,557)
of accumulated benefits:
1983, 23,803,422 reserved unissued shares Balance at
Vested $ 7,154 $ 6,748
remain available for purchase under the Plan. December 31,1983. . 13,186,859 5,197,873
Nonvested 298 238
$ 7,452 $ 6,986 Exercisable at
Stock Option Plans December 31,1983. . 8,925,960
Plan net assets (estimated
The stock option plans provide for granting
market value) $ 10,388 $ 8,390
officers and other key employees options to pur- The options exercised during 1983 were at
chase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the market an average option price of $64.79 per share. The
A comparison of fair market value of plan price on the day of grant. Options have a max- 13,186,859 shares under option at December 31,
net assets with these estimates provides an indi- imum duration of 10 years and may be exercised 1983, are at option prices ranging from $41.60 to
cation, at a point in time, of the company's in up to four annual installments, commencing $114.00 per share.
progress toward meeting its future commitment one year from date of grant.
to pay benefits when due. However, it must be The plans are administered by the Executive Litigation
recognized that the market value of plan net as- Compensation Committee of the Board of In December, 1980, the Commission of the
sets available for benefits will fluctuate. Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, European Communities filed a "statement of
Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to holders objections" seeking modification of certain IBM
which funds are deposited with trustees, annu- of options. Such rights offer optionees the business practices in the Common Market
ities are purchased under group contracts, or alternative of electing not to exercise the related area. The Commission may also seek to impose
reserves are provided. At December 31,1983 and stock option, but to receive instead an amount fines. Most of the practices to which the
December 31,1982, it is estimated that the in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock Commission has objected have been held to be
market value of fund assets and reserves of indi- equivalent to the difference between the option legitimate competition in the United States.
vidual non-U. S. subsidiaries exceeded or price and the average market price of IBM stock IBM has denied the charges in the proceeding and
approximated the actuarial present value of on the date of exercising the right. is defending its position.
accumulated benefits. The 1982 plan also provides, subject to
Committee approval, that payment by the
optionee upon exercise of an option may be made
using IBM stock as well as cash.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Segment Information
IBM operates primarily in the single industry income by industry segment and by classes of operations. Material interdependencies and
segment encompassing information-handling similar products or services within the informa- overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and,
systems, equipment and services. This segment tion-handling segment. therefore, the information may not be indicative
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross Financial information by geographic area of the financial results of, or investments in,
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. for the years 1983,1982 and 1981 is summarized the reported areas were they independent
The schedule on the next page shows gross below to provide a better understanding of IBM's organizations.
United States
Gross income-Customers $ 23,127 $ 19,028 $ 15,088
Interarea transfers 1,875 1,857
Total $ 25,402 $ 20,903 $ 16,945
Net earnings 3,296 2,766 2,094
Assets at December 31 23,083 19,028 16,022
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Gross income-Customers $ 11,324 $ 10,260 $ 9,312
Interarea transfers 235 337 383
Total $ 11,559 $ 10,597 $ 9,695
Net earnings 1,580 1,196 1,074
Assets at December 31 10,011 9,197 8,981
Americas/Far East
Gross income-Customers $ 5,729 $ 5,076 $ 4,670
Interarea transfers 728 651 659
Total $ 6,457 $ 5,7^7 $ 5,329
Net earnings 562 450 478
Assets at December 31 5»iio 4,925 4,694
Eliminations
Gross income $ (3,238) $ (2,863) $ (2,899)
Net earnings 47 (3) (36)
Assets (961) (609) (590)
Consolidated
Gross income $ 40,180 $34,364 $ 29,070
Net earnings $ 5,485 $ 4,409 $ 3,610
Assets at December 31 $ 37,^43 $ 32.,54I $ 29,107
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local cur- In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, world. The cost and service charges that relate to
rency environment account for approximately 85% European operations accounted for approximately asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or
of the company's non-U. S. gross income. The re- 95% of gross income in 1983,1982 and 1981. amortized by the importing area. Interarea
maining 15% is from subsidiaries and branches, pre- Interarea transfers, consisting principally of accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
dominantly in the Americas/Far East area, which completed machines, subassemblies and parts, service charges, and the net change during the
operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environ- are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate year in unamortized service charges, have been
ment is highly inflationary. service charge, applied consistently throughout the eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services
Consolidated U.S. Only
(Dollars in millions) 1983 19821 1983 19821
Information-Handling:
Processors:
Sales $ 9,046 $ 7,784 $ 4,908 $ 4,203
Rentals 1,692 2,363 711 1,086
10,738 10,147 5,619 5,289
PPeerriipphheerraallss::
Sales 6,205 3,311 3,669 1,717
Rentals 4,778 5,371 2,533 2,917
1100,,998833 88,,668822 66,,220022 44,,663344
Office Systems/Workstations:
Sales 5,752 3,667 3,667 2,278
Rentals 2,275 2,778 1,295 1,498
8,027 6,445 4,962 3,776
Program Products 2,302 1,693 1,288 935
Maintenance Services 4,577 3,940 2,633 2,230
Other:
Sales 1,181 1,238 778 768
Rentals 485 609 278 372
Services 648 689 135 no
2,314 2,536 1,191 1,250
38,941 33,443 21,895 18,114
FFeeddeerraall SSyysstteemmss::
Sales 1,028 753 1,028 753
Services 148 105 148 105
1,176 858 1,176 858
OOtthheerr BBuussiinneessss::
Sales 62 62 55 55
Services I I I I
63 63 56 56
Total $ 40,180 $ 34,364 $ 23,127 $ 19,028
tReclassified to conform with 1983 presentation.
While IBM operates primarily in a single industry Workstations. Peripherals include printers, ments for technological enhancements to permit a
segment and manages its worldwide business copiers, storage and telecommunication devices. peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be functionally inte-
as such, gross income has been categorized into Peripheral functions embedded in processors are grated with a display, telecommunication device and
major classes of product. classified with Processors. Program Products a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
For purposes of classifying similar products include both applications and systems software. changeability and technological progress tend to
of the Information-Handling industry segment, Maintenance Services consist of separately billed make year to year comparisons less valid than they
user programmable equipment having the charges for maintenance. Other consists prin- would be in an industry less subject to rapid change.
capability of manipulating data arithmetically or cipally of supplies and unit record equipment. Federal Systems consists of specialized infor-
logically and making calculations, in a manner Some products logically fit in more than mation-handling products and services primarily for
directly addressable by the user through the one class and are assigned to a specific class based the United States defense, space and other agencies.
operation of a stored program, has been classified on a variety of factors. Over time, products tend Other Business consists of training and
as Processors, except that small business com- to overlap, merge into or split from existing testing materials and services for school, home and
puters and intelligent workstations are included classes as a result of changing technologies, industrial use.
under Office Systems/Workstations. Typewriters market perceptions, and /or customer use. For
have also been classified under Office Systems/ example, market demand may create require-

===== PAGE 44 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1983 1982 1981 1980 19791
For the year:
Gross income from sales,
rentals and services $ 40,180 $ 34,364 $ 29,070 $ 26,213 $ 22,863
Net earnings 5,485 4,409 3,610 3,397 3,011
Per share 9.04 7-39 6.14 5.82 5.16
Cash dividends paid 2,251 2,053 2,023 2,008 2,008
Per share 3-71 3-44 3-44 3-44 3-44
Investment in rental machines . . .. 2,352 4,254 4,610 4,334 4,212
Investment in plant and other property. 2,578 2,431 2,235 2,258 1,779
Return on stockholders' equity . . . 25.4% 23.4% 21.1% 21.1% 21.2^
At end of year:
Total assets $ 37,243 $ 32,541 $ 29,107 $ 26,831 $ 24,530
Net investment in rental machines . . 6,812 9,117 9,252 8,390 6,927
Net investment in plant and
other property 9,330 8,446 7,545 6,810 5,266
Working capital 7,763 4,805 2,983 3,381 4,406
Long-term debt 2,674 2,851 2,669 2,099 1,589
Stockholders' equity 23,219 19,960 17,676 16,578 14,961
tNot restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change.
Selected Quarterly Data
Per Share Stock Prices
Gross Gross Net
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) Income Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
1983 First Quarter . . . . $ 8,287 $ 5,018 $ 976 $ 1.62 $ .86 $ 104.88 $ 92.25
Second Quarter . . . . 9,590 5,776 1,343 2.22 •95 124.50 101.13
Third Quarter . . . . 9,406 5,502 1,303 2.14 •95 129.50 115-25
Fourth Quarter . . . . 12,897 7,489 1,863 3.06 •95 134-25 117-13
Total . . . . $ 40,180 $ 23,785 $ 5,485 $ 9.04 $ 3.71
1982 First Quarter . . . . $ 7,066 $ 4,293 $ 789 $ 1.33 $ .86 $64.75 $ 55.63
Second Quarter . . . . 8,053 4,923 1,076 1.81 .86 66.13 57-50
Third Quarter . . . . 8,171 4,870 1,044 1-75 .86 77.63 59.38
Fourth Quarter . . . . 11,074 6,590 1,500 2.50 .86 98.00 73-25
Total . . . . $ 34,364 $ 20,676 $4,409 $7.39 $3.44
There were 769,979 stockholders of record March 10,1984, will be at the rate of $.95 per prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York
at December 31,1983. During 1983, stock- share. This dividend will be IBM'S 276th con- Stock Exchange composite tape for the last
holders received $2,251 million in cash dividends. secutive quarterly cash dividend. two years.
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low

===== PAGE 45 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices
Although inflation rates moderated signifi- information, which has been prepared in accord- The estimates are based upon latest production
cantly in the United States, and to a lesser extent ance with standards established by the Financial costs, published price indices, current suppliers'
in many other countries during 1983, its cumu- Accounting Standards Board, is presented to prices, and appraised valuations. Cost of sales and
lative effect over the past several years has eroded assist users of financial statements in understand- depreciation expense are restated to reflect the
industry's ability to fund the replacement and ing the implications of changing prices on the change in the related asset values.
expansion of productive capacity. Traditional company's operations. In order to provide useful trend data,
financial statements may not adequately reflect The following data reflect the effects on information for each of the years presented is
the effects of changing prices and declines in earnings and stockholders' equity resulting from restated in 1983 dollars of purchasing power, as
purchasing power on cash flows required to using estimated changes in specific prices to measured by movement of the Consumer Price
replace capital assets and provide opportunities restate the value of inventories and other proper- Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U).
for future growth. Therefore, supplemental ties at currently prevailing prices (current cost).
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost)
As Reported in
Financial Statements In Average 1983 Dollars
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1983 1983 1982 1981 1980 i979t
Gross income from sales, rentals and services . . $ 40,180 $ 40,180 $ 35,469 $ 31,844 $ 31,694 $ 31,381
Cost of sales, rentals and services 16,395 16,593 14,221 13,105 12,542 11,740
Expenses and other income 13^845 14,001 13,001 12,041 12,365 12,169
Provision for income taxes 4,455 4,455 3,936 3,122 2,980 3,663
Net earnings $ 5,485 $ 5,131 $ 4,311 $ 3,576 $ 3,807 $ 3,809
Earnings per share $9.04 $8.46 $7.23 $6.08 $6.52 $6.53
Stockholders' equity (net assets) $ 23,219 $ 26,076 $ 23,405 $ 21,634 $ 22,120 $ 22,815
Loss from decline in purchasing power of
net monetary assets $ 77 $ I $ 68 $ 329 $ 624
Translation adjustments $ (763) $ (904) $ (802) $ (1,091) $ (i75)
Change in specific prices-
net of general inflation $ (72) $ (317) $ (1,272) $ (1,737) $ (1,602)
fNot restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices (continued)
IBM's 1983 financial results, when adjusted nological advances continue to partially offset in- the dollar in the world economy.
for changing prices, show a reduction of $354 flationary pressures, as is evidenced by the rela- In dollars of average 1983 purchasing
million from reported net earnings and an in- tively small increase (3%) in the cost of rental power, the increase in current costs that might
crease in stockholders' equity of $2,857 million. machine assets when adjusted for changing prices. have been expected from general inflation
The estimated current cost of acquiring exist- Companies which retain monetary assets or exceeded IBM's specific price level changes by
ing plants and other property is $2,718 million liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains and $72 million. Management views this positively,
greater than depreciated original costs. The losses in purchasing power during periods of in- in that technology and productivity improve-
rental machine asset base would increase by $181 flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted ments substantially offset inflation. Similar pat-
million if valued at current production costs in a purchasing power loss of $77 million in 1983. terns are reflected in the prior years.
while other inventories would be increased by $4 The effects of translation on the changes in Although inflation-adjusted information
million. The additional depreciation in 1983 on specific prices of IBM's net assets have been is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to
the restated rental machines, plant and other estimated without any attempt to adjust the data emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation.
property would have been $326 million while for general rate of inflation differences among It points out the importance of bringing inflation
other costs would have been increased by $28 various countries. The translation adjustments under control and the need for further public
million. Accordingly, 1983 earnings would have reflect the decline in the valuation of assets de- policy initiatives to encourage capital investment.
been reduced by the above-mentioned $354 nominated in currencies other than the
million. Productivity improvements from tech- U. S. dollar caused by the relative strength of
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation
The amounts shown below for the years alent purchasing power of 1983 dollars by changes in the average CPI-U from that year to year
1979 to 1982 have been converted into the equiv- applying to the amounts reported the rate of 1983.
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1983 1982 1981 1980 19791
Gross income from sales, rentals and services . . .. $ 40,180 $35,469 $ 31,844 $ 31,694 $ 31,381
Earnings per share $ 9.04 $7.63 $6.73 $ 7.04 $ 7.08
Cash dividends paid per share $3.71 $3.55 $ 3.77 $ 4.16 $4.72
Market price per share (at December 31) $ 122.00 $99.35 $ 62.31 $ 82.07 $ 88.36
Average Consumer Price Index for
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 298.4 289.1 272.4 246.8 217.4
The actual market price of IBM stock on the New York Stock Exchange
composite tape at December 31, for years 1979 to 1983
vras $64.38, $67.88, $56.88, $96.2.5 and $122.00, respectively.
fNot restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change.

===== PAGE 47 =====
IBM is organized into the folloioing groups, divisions
and wholly owned subsidiaries:
Information Systems Group Information Systems and Technology Group System Products Division
Customer Service Division Data Systems Division Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
Provides maintenance, related support and Has worldwide development and associated facturing responsibility for small and inter-
programming services within the U. S. and its programming responsibility for large, complex mediate-sized general purpose systems and
territories for assigned products. systems, with primary emphasis on high- related programming, as well as for low-end
performance products, plus U. S. manufacturing direct access storage devices.
Federal Systems Division
responsibility for those systems.
Provides specialized information-handling and
Other Divisions
control systems to the Federal government for General Products Divisicm
Reed Estate and Construction Division
seaborne, spaceborne, airborne and ground- Has worldwide development and U. S. man-
Manages the selection and acquisition of sites,
based environments. Also participates in applied ufacturing responsibility for storage systems,
the design and construction of buildings and the
research and exploratory development. including tape units, disk products and
purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM opera-
mass storage systems, program products and
Field Engineeriyig Division tions in the U. S. The division has responsibility
product-related programming.
Provides maintenance and related services within for assessing real estate projects outside the
the U. S. and its territories for assigned products, General Technology Division U. S., as well as for IBM's worldwide energy and
as well as support for specified IBM program Has worldwide development and product assur- environmental programs. It also provides facility
offerings. Has overall responsibility for the distri- ance and U. S. manufacturing responsibility services to selected headquarters locations.
bution of all hardware and software products and for logic, memory and special semiconductor
Research Division
related publications. Also provides maintenance devices and multi-layer ceramics. The division
Brings scientific understanding to bear on
marketing support and central programming also procures components for the IBM World
areas of company interest through basic research
services for assigned products. Trade Americas/Far East Corporation and U. S.
and development of technologies of potential
operating units.
IBM Instruments, Inc. (a subsidiary) long-range importance.
Has responsibility for IBM's efforts in the Systems Technology Division
analytical instruments field, including marketing Has worldwide development and product assur- Other Subsidiaries
and servicing selected products in the U. S. ance and U. S. manufacturing responsibility IBM Credit Corporation
for circuit packaging used in IBM computing Offers lease financing of IBM products, either
National Accounts Division
systems. Also develops and manufactures inter- directly or through partnerships, and finances
Has marketing and field administration
mediate processors and printers and develops installment receivables resulting from sales
responsibility within the U. S. and its territories
programming systems. by IBM of its information processing systems and
for the full standard line of IBM products. Its
equipment to customers in the U. S. It also
assigned customers are selected large accounts
Information Systems finances non-IBM equipment.
with complex information processing needs.
and Communications Group
Science Research Associates, Inc.
National Distribution Division Communication Products Division
Has worldwide development, publication and/or
Has marketing responsibility within the U. S. Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
marketing responsibility for a wide range of educa-
for selected systems and high-volume products facturing responsibility for telecommunications
tional and testing materials and services, includ-
delivered through alternate channels of distribu- systems, display products, distribution industry
ing microcomputer software designed for use in
tion such as IBM Product Centers, value added systems and related programming. The division
schools, colleges, businesses and the home.
remarketers and authorized dealers. In addition, serves as the worldwide architectural and
the division has responsibility for manufacturing systems focal point for office systems and Systems IBM World Trade Americas / Far East Corporation
or procurement and marketing within the Network Architecture activities. With a territory extending across four continents,
U. S. of IBM supplies and accessories, as well as this subsidiary is responsible for IBM operations
Entry Systems Diiision
for the worldwide supplies business strategy. in 46 countries, including Australia, Brazil,
Has worldwide development and product man-
Canada and Japan.
Nationcd Marketing Division agement, and U. S. manufacturing responsibility
Has marketing and field administration respon- for IBM's general purpose, low-cost, personal- IBM World Trade Europe / Middle East /
sibility within the U. S. and its territories for the use computer systems and related software. Africa Corporation
full standard line of IBM products. Its assigned Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe, located
Information Products Division
customers are large and medium accounts. in Paris, it is responsible for IBM operations in
Has worldwide development and related pro-
85 countries.
gramming and U. S. manufacturing responsibility
for typewriters, copiers and systems for the IBM World Trade Corporation
banking industry, and for peripheral equipment, Provides designated support to IBM World Trade
including printers, copier systems, diskettes organizational units.
and associated supplies.

===== PAGE 48 =====
IBM Corporation John F. Akers President, IBM Board Committees:
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction Executive:
George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM Frank T. Gary, Chairman
Harold Brown Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C. Amory Houghton, Jr.
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J.-health care products Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller
Frank T. Gary Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM William H. Moore
William T. Coleman, Jr. Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France- John R. Opel
attorneys at law Irving S. Shapiro
Patricia Roberts Harris Professor of Law, George Washington University, Washington, D.C. Thomas J. Watson, Jr.
Carla Anderson Hills Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif.- Retirement Plans:
attorneys at law William W. Scranton, Chairman
Amory Houghton, Jr. Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N. Y.- George B. Beitzel
glass products Harold Brown
John N. Irwin II Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law William T Coleman, Jr.
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM Carla Anderson Hills
Richard W. Lyman President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. Dean P. Phypers
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Senior Vice President, IBM Paul J. Rizzo
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller ... Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet Compensation:
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. Cyrus R.Vance, Chairman
J. Richard Munro President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
John R. Opel Chairman of the Board, IBM James E. Burke
Dean P. Phypers Senior Vice President, IBM Patricia Roberts Harris
Paul J. Rizzo Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM Amory Houghton, Jr.
William W. Scranton Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania Irving S. Shapiro
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance Audit:
Committee, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products John N. Irwin 11, Chairman
Cyrus R. Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law Richard W. Lyman
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman Emeritus, IBM J. Richard Munro
Advisory Board: John M. Fox Vice Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass. -waste disposal services
G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kartell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y
Louis H. LaMotte Retired Executive Vice President, IBM
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
William McChesney Martin,Jr. Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Officers: John R.Opel Chairman of the Board Erich Bloch Vice President Paul J. Kofmehl Vice President
Paul J. Rizzo , , Vice Chairman of the Board Charles E. Branscomb .. Vice President Terry R. Lautenbach Vice President
John F. Akers . , President Lewis M. Branscomb ... Vice President Thomas M. Liptak Vice President
CC.. MMiicchhaaeell AArrmmssttrroonngg . , Senior Vice President Walton E. Burdick Vice President Edward E. Lucente Vice President
& Group Executive Ronald F. Casella Vice President Victor R. Macdonald Vice President
George B. Beitzel , . Senior Vice President George H. Conrades Vice President James F. Manning Vice President
Kaspar V. Cassani .. Senior Vice President *Carl J. Conti Vice President David E. McKinney Vice President
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach.. .. Senior Vice President Vincent N. Cook Vice President Charles E.McKittrick,Jr. . .Vice President
& General Counsel Edward M. Davis Vice President Frank A. Metz, Jr. Vice President
AAlllleennJJ.. KKrroowwee .. Senior Vice President, Wallace C. Doud Vice President Theodore C. Papes, Jr. Vice President
Finance & Planning Robert B. Dunlop Vice President Francis G. Rodgers Vice President
JJaacckkDD..KKuueehhlleerr .. Senior Vice President William W. Eggleston... Vice President Stephen B. Schwartz Vice President
& Group Executive
*Philip D. Estridge Vice President H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. Vice President
Jacques G. Maisonrouge ... .. Senior Vice President
Donato A. Evangelista .. Vice President John F. Williams Vice President
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. .. Senior Vice President
Bob O. Evans Vice President John H.Grady Secretary
Dean P. Phypers .. Senior Vice President
P. Martin Foley Vice President Jon W. Rotenstreich Treasurer
CCllaarreennccee BB.. RRooggeerrss,, JJrr.. .. Senior Vice President
James J. Forese Vice President Robert E. Bonchick Assistant Controller
& Group Executive
& Controller J. William Scruggs Assistant Controller
Arthur G.Anderson .. Vice President
Richard T. Gerstner Vice President John H. Stewart Assistant Controller
John E. Bertram .. Vice President
Victor J. Goldberg Vice President Thomas C. Irwin Assistant Secretary
Charles P. Biggar .. Vice President
Ralph E. Gomory Vice President Sidney Handler Assistant Treasurer
James A. Bitonti .. Vice President
John B.Jackson Vice President Bruce E. Langton Assistant Treasurer
*Elected 1/31/84

===== PAGE 49 =====
Division and Subsidiary John E. Bertram.. President, General Products Division Lewis W. Gray President, National Marketing Division
Chief Executives: Charles P. Biggar . President, Field Engineering Division John E. Guth,Jr. President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
James A. Bitonti.. President, Communication Products Division Paul R. Low President, General Technology Division
KasparV. Cassani Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ Edward E. Lucente President, Information Products Division
Middle East/Africa Corporation Jacques G. Maisonrouge .. Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation
Ronald F.Casella.. President, Customer Service Division Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. Chairman, IBM World Trade
CarlJ. Conti President, Data Systems Division Americas/Far East Corporation
Vincent N.Cook.. President, Federal Systems Division Patrick A. Toole President, Systems Technology Division
Philip D. Estridge . President, Entry Systems Division Everett H. Van Hoesen President, Industrial Systems
David A. Finley ... President, IBM Credit Corporation H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. ... President, System Products Division
Victor J. Goldberg. President, National Distribution Division Cecil R Webb President, IBM Instruments, Inc.
Ralph E. Gomory . Director of Research John F. Williams President, Real Estate and
William O. Grabe . President, National Accounts Division Construction Division
IBM World Trade Thomas J. Bata Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization,Toronto, Canada
Americas/Far East Jill K. Conway President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Corporation Morton Ehrlich Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla.
Board of Directors: Howard G. Figueroa., IBM Director of Commercial Relations
T. Brian Finn Managing Director, IBM Australia, Limited
Ralph E. Gomory ..., Director of Research and Vice President, IBM
Thomas Moving President, Hoving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y., and Editor-in-Chief, The Connoisseur
Ryoichi Kawai Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan
Donald R. Keough ... President, The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga.
David E.McKinney... President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM
Raymond G. O'Neill . Vice President, Finance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr.... Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr.. Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Takeo Shiina President, IBM Japan, Limited
Paulo D.Villares Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. VolImer.... President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela
IBM World Trade Tore Browaldh . Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden,
Eu rope /M idd le East / and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden
Africa Corporation Kaspar V. Cassani . Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; President, IBM Europe
Board of Directors: and Senior Vice President, IBM
Frank J. Cummiskey.. . Retired Vice President, IBM
William W. Eggleston. . Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM
P Martin Foley . Executive Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation and Vice President, IBM
Pierre L. Gousseland.. . Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Gilbert E.Jones . Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
PaulJ.Kofmehl , President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe,
and Vice President, IBM
Jack D. Kuehler , Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge . Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
Umberto Nordio , Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy
Sir Philip Shelbourne ... , Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England
Otto Sturzenegger , Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N. Y.
Ruud Van Ommeren.... , Directeur-Generaal, IBM Netherlands
Kurt Werner , Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
Science Research Joseph H. Allen Retired Associate Dean, School of Business Administration, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn.
Associates, Inc. George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Board of Directors: Patricia Albjerg Graham Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass.
John E. Guth, Jr President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Wayne H. Holtzman.... President, The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin, Tex.

===== PAGE 50 =====
The follordng information may be obtained without IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Depart- are available.The report is translated into
ment, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022: French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette
recording in English is available for the blind.
The Form 10-K Annual Report
A Service for Deaf Stockholders
to the Securities and Exchange Commission
provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations
provides further details on IBM's business, includ-
Department enables deaf stockholders who have
ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the
access to a teletypewriter to communicate with
Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April.
the department's New York City office. Stock-
holders who wish to use the service should
The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report
call (212) 407-4552 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m..
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is
Eastern time, on any weekday
available in May, August and November.
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet
explains how stockholders may automatically
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make
optional additional investments for that purpose.
Innovation in IBM Computer Technology
is a booklet that describes the hardware, software
and manfecturing advances within IBM during
the last four decades.
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide
describing the ethical and business principles that
the company sets for the conduct of its business.
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs
in the United States are outlined in a
document that describes programs for women,
minorities and handicapped persons, and
also reviews IBM's Affirmative Action efforts
Four decades of technological advances within IBM
in the community.
are described in a new booklet, "Innovation in
IBM Company Citizenship IBM Computer Techyiology." The booklet is available
booklet describes support programs for edu- loithout charge from Stockfwlder Relations,
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts Madison Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022.
and other areas.
IBM Operations in South Africa
are summarized in a report of the company's
business in that country This report describes the
personnel principles and practices to which
IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa.

===== PAGE 51 =====
The folloxving information is provided as a Stock Transfer Offices:
convenient reference for IBM stockholders: IBM Stockholder Relations Department
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
The 1984 Annual Meeting IBM Stockholder Relations Department
of stockholders will be held in the Los Angeles One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611
Convention Center, Los Angeles, Calif., on
Co-Transfer Agents:
Monday, April 30th, at 10 a.m.
Trust General du Canada
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement 1100 University Street, Montreal, Quebec,
and Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each stock- Canada H3B 2G7
holder in March. The Proxy Statement describes National Trust Company, Limited
the items of business to be voted on at the Annual 21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario,
Meeting and provides biographies of the Board's Canada M5C 1B3
nominees for director and their principal affiliations Registrars:
with other companies or organizations, as well as Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York
other information about the company. 30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10015
The First National Bank of Chicago
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting,
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes
Montreal Trust Company
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including
777 Dorchester Boulevard West,
the Chairman's report on the company, questions
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 4A5
and answers of general interest, and the results
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario,
of voting on items of business.
Canada M5H 1B4
IBM Stock Transfer
For Information:
is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations
Regarding stockholders' accounts, call
Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York,
(212) 407-4000.
N. Y. IOOZ2. The department maintains stock-
General questions about IBM, call
holder records and can answer questions
(800)426-3333.
regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders
wishing to transfer stock or to change the International Business Machines Corporation
name on a stock certificate should contact the Corporate Headquarters
department for instructions. Armonk, N.Y. 10504
Stock certificates are valuable and should
be safeguarded, since replacement takes time
and requires payment of a surety bond premium
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost,
stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations
should be notified. Registered mail should be
used whenever stock is mailed.
IBM Stock is Traded
on the New York Stock Exchange, other
exchanges in the United States and exchanges
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England,
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the
Netherlands.
G505-1983-00 PRINTED IN USA

===== PAGE 52 =====
International
Business Machines
Corporation
Armonk, N. Y.
10504