

===== PAGE 1 =====
1
*
...
1,1,
m
mmmm

===== PAGE 2 =====
I Financial Highlights
z Letter to Stockholders
5 More Uses, More Users
i6 1984 in Review
25 Financial Report
Report of Management
Report of Independent Accountants
Earnings
Management Discussion—Results of Operations
Financial Position
Management Discussion—Financial Condition
Funds Flow
Stockholders' Equity
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
Supplemental Financial Information
46 Directors and Officers
48 IBM Organization
Stockholder Information
Cover:
Software, one of the fastest-growing elements of
IBM's business, is symbolized in a sampling of Personal
Computer programs shown by IBM marketing repre-
sentative Judy Engstrom. As the central, common link
that makes computers more useful, particularly to
people without special training, program products
comprise a worldwide industry currently growing at
a compound rate of over 30 percent a year, with indus-
try revenues expected to reach more than $150 billion
by 1994. Customers can choose from more than 2,500
different IBM programs to extend the usefulness of
systems from the largest 308X computer to the smallest
desk-top PC. More visible since the introduction of PC
programs, IBM software has delivered steadily increasing
yiY^.
productivity for more than three decades.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
for the year ended December 31,1984
Highlights of the year: (Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1984 1983
Gross income from sales, services and rentals . . .. 45,937 40,180
Earnings before income taxes 11,623 9,940
Income taxes 5,041 4,455
Net earnings 6,582 \ 5,485
Per share $ 10.77 $ 9.04
Cash dividends paid 2,507 2,251
Per share $ 4.10 $3.71
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 5,473 4,930
Return on stockholders' equity 26.5% 25.4%
At end of year:
Total assets $ 42,808 $ 37,461
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . $ 16,363 $ 16,142
Working capital $ 10,735 $ 8,168
Long-term debt $ 3,269 $ 2,674
Stockholders'equity $ 26,489 $ 23,219
Number of employees 394,930 369,545
Number of stockholders 792,506 769,979
IBM's operations:
IBM's operations are primarily in the field of
information-handling systems, equipment and services
to solve the increasingly complex problems of
business, government, science, space exploration,
defense, education, medicine and many other areas of
human activity IBM's products include infor-
mation processing products and systems, program
products, telecommunications systems, information
distributors, office systems, typewriters, copiers,
educational and testing materials, and related supplies
and services. Most products are both leased and
sold through IBM's worldwide marketing organizations.
Selected products are marketed and distributed
through authorized dealers and remarketers.

===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders
IBM's Strong performance reflects continued
high demand, worldwide, for IBM products and
services during 1984. Earnings also improved
as a result of substantial productivity gains
in 1984, as reflected by increases in before- and
after-tax margins.
Worldwide net earnings for the year were
$6,582 million, compared with $5,485 million
for 1983, an increase of 20.0 percent. Net
earnings were $10.77 per share on 611.4 million
shares, the average number outstanding
during 1984, compared with $9.04 per share on
606.8 million shares during 1983. After-tax
margins increased to 14.3 percent in 1984 from
13.7 percent in 1983.
Earnings before income taxes were
$11,623 rnillion in 1984, an increase of 16.9
percent over $9,940 million in 1983. Before-tax
margins improved to 25.3 percent from
24.7 percent in 1983.
Worldwide gross income was $45,937
million in 1984, up 14.3 percent from $40,180
million in 1983. Operations within the U. S.
were strong, with revenue growth of 18.3 per-
cent and net earnings growth of 20.3 percent.
Gross income from operations outside
the U. S. during 1984, included in consolidated
results, was $18,566 million, up 8.9 percent
from $17,053 million in the prior year.
Non-U. S. net earnings of $2,587 million in
1984 showed an increase of 19.6 percent
over $2,164 million in 1983.
John R. Opel, chairman of the board, John F. Akers, president, and Paid J. Rizzo, vice chairman Shipments of our products reached high
levels in many non-U. S. countries as economic
activity increased during the year. Despite this
success, the stronger U. S. dollar, relative to
other major currencies, had a severe impact on
period-to-period financial comparisons. It is
estimated that, if currency rates had remained
the same as in 1983, gross income for non-U. S.
operations would have been $1,675 million
greater, resulting in non-U. S. gross income
growth of 18.7 percent and a corresponding net
earnings growth of 32.4 percent. This excellent

===== PAGE 5 =====
performance, as measured in local currency, increased their total computing capacity by as the new Personal Computer AT, business
was the result of both strong demand and nearly 50 percent, and disk storage capacity by professionals, scientists and engineers have the
highly efficient and effective operations by IBM about 55 percent. Deliveries of mid-range option of using powerful programs at their
employees worldwide. systems and revenues from software products desks, or interacting with a network that
In the quarter ended December 31,1984, also were up sharply. includes the resources of larger computers.
net earnings were $2,172 million, or $3.55 per IBM's Personal Computer line, in recent A new impact printer and an enhanced
share, compared with $1,863 million, or years a rapidly growing part of our business, laser printer offer customers greater flexibility
$3.06 per share, for the same period of 1983. again registered impressive gains. We shipped in performing text and graphics printing
Gross income for the fourth quarter of 1984 three times more PC units during 1984 than applications. The Selectric System /2000
was $14,496 million compared with we did the preceding year. electronic typewriters, also introduced during
$12,897 million in the fourth quarter of 1983. IBM is well-positioned to participate the year, feature a model with a unique
The impact of currency exchange rates on fully in meeting the expanding worldwide ribbon technology; they also can be used as
financial results was strongest in the fourth demand for information processing technology. personal computer printers.
quarter. Gross income would have been an The company also continues to explore
estimated $690 million higher than the 1983 additional avenues for future growth, including Increased efficiency
fourth quarter, yielding a revenue growth rate participation in joint ventures where IBM's Becoming the industry's low-cost producer,
of 17.7 percent, and a corresponding net earn- strengths complement those of other leading distributor, seller and servicer is central to IBM's
ings growth of 24.6 percent. If the strong dollar companies in the pursuit of new and promising long-term strategy. To help meet our cost goals,
continues at the present level, it will affect business opportunities. we have pursued a program of plant moderniza-
1985 non-U. S. revenue growth, as reported in tion and expansion unparalleled in the industry.
dollars, particularly in the first six months. Product leadership strengthened As a result, our overall manufacturing capacity
Our record shipments during 1984 reflect has been substantially renewed and designed
Long-term prospects customer confidence in IBM's continuing to support highly efficient production.
IBM's performance for 1984 was gratifying, ability to introduce advances in technology The drive for more efficient operations
and the fundamental forces that produced and improvements in productivity. extends beyond manufacturing, however.
those results are cause for us to remain optimis- Performance enhancements and addi- Increasingly, our products are marketed through
tic about the company's long-term prospects. tional computing options were introduced a range of distribution channels that enables
Every economy around the world is faced across the range of IBM systems, from top-of- us to reach more customers in cost-effective
with a rapidly growing need for information, the-line 308X processors, through the 4300 ways. IBM products are available from IBM mar-
and that provides great opportunity for our series and the smaller System736, to the keting representatives and in IBM Product
industry—an industry now estimated to be desktop products of the Personal Computer Centers, as well as through catalog sales and
more than $250 billion in annual revenues line. New software enables users to link a other direct marketing programs. In addition,
worldwide. wider array of systems, terminals and selected products are offered through authorized
Our positive results also underscore the sus- input/output devices for sharing information dealers and by companies that add their
tained progress IBM is making toward the goals and computing resources. expertise and specialized offerings to our own.
of growth, product leadership, efficiency and Disk control devices announced in 1984 The results have been impressive. A few years
profitability we set for the company in the 1980s. provide up to four times the storage capacity ago, sales through non-traditional channels
of earlier models, and are among the first in the accounted for less than one percent of total reve-
Continued growth industry to use an advanced memory chip nue; in 1984, the figure was nearly ten percent.
Growth continues to be substantial across with a capacity of 256,000 bits of information. Similarly, we have introduced more effi-
our major business areas. Demand for large- A new generation of tape storage units replaces cient ways of providing service to our customers.
scale computers and our most advanced disk familiar tape reels with easy-to-handle car- IBM specialists are available via toll-free
storage devices was especially strong. Last tridges, providing cost savings and greater numbers to solve service and software problems
year, for example, customers for these products convenience. With powerful workstations such over the phone. Lower priced carry-in and

===== PAGE 6 =====
mail-in service agreements have been added to ROLM merger opportunity to increase their productivity and
give customers a wider range of choices. In September, IBM and ROLM Corporation creativity and, in the process, has created
We also offer such agreements at our Product entered into a merger agreement, a proposal worldwide demand that is likely to exceed
Centers, reducing the cost of making high- that was approved by ROLM'S stockholders in $i trillion for our industry by the early 1990s.
quality IBM service available to more people. November. The merger grew from a close and This report reviews some of the ways IBM
We continue to adjust our organization productive relationship in which IBM and ROLM employees and customers are adapting informa-
to decentralize decision-making and streamline both sought to improve the ways in which tion products to contribute to virtually every
operations. During 1984, new operating units our respective products work together. ROLM aspect of our lives.
in both the IBM World Trade Europe/Middle will now operate as a wholly owned IBM sub-
East/Africa and Americas/Far East corpo- sidiary under its own name. The merger enables Future based on people
rations were created, with greater autonomy in each company to draw on the expertise and It has been my good fortune to serve as chief
making business decisions within their geo- traditional strengths of the other to create executive officer of IBM, a company I believe to
graphic areas. In the U. S., the National Service sophisticated telecommunications products. be the finest in the world. And it has been
Division was given responsibility for delivering ROLM'S employees have made their company my privilege to meet and work with the people
high-quality service to customers, a mission a leader in a highly competitive field, and their of IBM, who share uncommon skill, energy and
formerly shared by two divisions. talents will become an even more significant dedication. The company's success and long-
asset to IBM in the years ahead. We are con- term prosperity rest with them. I am confident
Profitability vinced that both companies, and especially our it is in good hands.
Sustained profitability is the key element in the customers, will benefit from this relationship.
investment-innovation-demand cycle. In 1984, January 29, 1985, by order of the Board of Directors
we were successful in meeting our profitability John F. Akers elected CEO
goals, achieving a return on stockholder equity John F. Akers, IBM's president since February
of 26.5 percent, a new record for IBM. 1983, becomes the chief executive officer in John R. Opel
February 1985. He has performed with excel- Chairman of the Board
Importance of quality lence in executive positions in marketing and
The importance of quality to IBM's service, finance, development and manufac-
continued success cannot be overemphasized. turing. His broad experience in these areas has
Providing reliable, defect-free products and prepared him particularly well to lead our
error-free service to our customers is essential company. While I am stepping down as chief
to attaining our business objectives. We have executive officer, I will retain my responsibilities
established guidelines requiring that each new as chairman of the board. I look forward to the
IBM product be superior in quality to the continued opportunity to work closely with
one it replaces, and to comparable products in John and with Paul Rizzo, IBM's vice chairman.
the marketplace. It is less obvious, but no less
important, that our focus on quality extends Building on innovation
beyond products and services to all other The expansion of the information industry
facets of IBM's operations. We believe that continues to be driven by new technology that
improvement can be achieved in the office as well makes computing accessible and useful to
as on the plant floor, and intend to strengthen more and more people. The trend has been
IBM's well-deserved reputation for quality dramatic. A dollar now buys more than zoo
by continuing to improve the business processes times the processing power it did thirty years
throughout the company. ago. This has given individuals tremendous
IBM engineers apply the advanced technology of
the ^080 graphics system to the design of complex
computer chips that will continue to expand the
usefulness of information-handling products.

===== PAGE 7 =====
.IBM employees and customers
are adapting information products
to contribute to virtually every
aspect of our lives."
» ^
. v..

===== PAGE 8 =====
c
>omputers are greatly expanding
the capabilities of this student and
his classmates in special education
classes at a Brooklyn, N.Y., high schoo'
Students with special needs due to
disabilities such as cerebral palsy and
hearing or vision impairments are
becoming computer literate in record
time, experiencing new levels of
accomplishment and control over
their environment. Educators in
New York City public schools, where
IBM Personal Computers are being
introduced as an integral part of the
special education program, say
computers can be effective equalizers
for students who may be at a dis-
advantage in a typical classroom envi-
ronment. The city's board of edu-
cation purchased PCs to equip two
schools and plans to expand the
program over the next several years
to include most of the city's
25,000 special education students.
IRM JCR^ Anniml. Rp/hnrt

===== PAGE 9 =====
T
he development of high-quality
digital image processing systems
is creating new ways to analyze data
and new uses for information tech-
nology At IBM's Rome Scientific
Center, experimental image processing
techniques have been applied to art
restoration. An IBM 7350 image proc-
essing system, capable of displaying
more than 32,000 hues, has been
used to analyze damaged portions
of a i6th century painting being
restored at Rome's Central Institute
for Restoration. The analysis helps
experts select restoration colors that
will minimize the damage yet
retain the integrity of the original
painting. Digital techniques also
can be used to record, store and trans-
mit images of art work, creating
permanent, practical "galleries" for
schools and libraries.
8 IBM IQ8A Annual Reijorf.

===== PAGE 10 =====
1> • 1
.his chain of DIY (do-it-yourself)
home improvement stores in the
United Kingdom is typical of compa-
nies moving to larger systems to
meet growing information processing
needs for point-of-sale, inventory
management and other business
applications. To help such customers
expand their systems with minimum
disruption, IBM programmers have
developed a customized approach to
system installations and upgrades.
It enabled this operation of more than
150 stores to install an IBM 4381 and
a powerful software system, called
# « » » * • • % t
MVS/XA, 65 percent faster than pre-
viously possible. Customers using large
IBM systems, on average, are doubling
i « » t # # • • W
their computer power every two years.
« » «• % t. *
* * « # • * •
I* 'i A « » *
i i
5 • « f *
* ^ * * • * *
» * ^ « • * * »

===== PAGE 11 =====
§
* >
Xarents of these boys at a nursery
school in Toyama, Japan, will receive a
report on their activities, including
how much the children ate for lunch,
when they come to school to take
the children home at the end of the
day. The individualized daily reports
are part of a nursery school software
package developed for the IBM 5550
computer by one of IBM's value
added dealers in Japan. The system
enables the school to keep detailed
records on its 100 youngsters, handles
accounting functions and salary
records for the staff, and tracks nutri-
tional content of school meals.
«
•

===== PAGE 12 =====
. : \
ill ^i.;
V.
IM-f,
mal statistics of this young orang-
utan being examined by a veterinarian
at the San Diego Zoo will become
part of a growing data base aimed
at maintaining healthy, self-sustaining
animal populations worldwide.
The zoo uses an IBM System/38 and
/
an international veterinary medicine
coding system to provide access
to detailed clinical and pathological
information throughout its various
departments and to other zoological
institutions, veterinary colleges M
and medical schools.
t ^ V > y v..
•
./Vr
t »i
WM

===== PAGE 13 =====
1984 in Review chips, roughly two and a half times the number
possible on a five-inch wafer.
In addition, researchers are working on an
During 1984, research, development and experimental speech recognition system that
engineering efforts remained a primary focus, transforms human speech into text. The system
and the company introduced a wide range of employs a statistical technique designed to
products that continued to increase the produc- find the best match between spoken words and
tivity, flexibihty and rehabihty of information- those in its 5,ooo-word vocabulary. Words
handling systems. IBM also continued to that sound alike are distinguished by examining
explore new business opportunities. the context in which they are used.
Quality emphasis programs directed the
Large-scale systems
attention of employees throughout the
company to the importance of error-free work Improved models of IBM's 308x large-scale,
in every aspect of IBM's activities. In addition, advanced-technology computers and the
IBM emphasized and expanded its corporate introduction of a new entry-level 3083 system
responsibility programs in support of education increased the span of computing options
An IBM engineer inspects an experimental
and community service worldwide. available to customers requiring the company's
eight-inch silicon wafer that can accommodate
most powerful computers. Within the 308X
more than 2,000 chips.
Advances in technology series, customers can incrementally upgrade
Major advances were made in sciences and making it the densest signal processor ever their systems from the entry-level 3083 to the
technologies important to the company's future. reported. Key to the development of the chip top-of-the-line 3084—about a tenfold increase
IBM engineers in Burlington, Vt., success- was an advanced fabrication process that in performance—with minimal disruption to
fully produced a memory chip that can store produced transistors about one-third the size their information processing operations.
of those currently available in the industry. The improved 308X processors feature
Researchers at IBM's Yorktown and East design and circuit packaging enhancements
Fishkill, N.Y., laboratories have developed and offer 5 to 14 percent increases in internal
an experimental amplifier chip that speeds the performance at no increase in price. Memory
exchange of data between computers and options providing customers with up to
storage devices or other computers. Used in 128 million characters of main memory were
conjunction with a fiber optics line, the chip announced, as were programming enhance-
can send data at a rate equivalent to about ments to the MVS/XA operating system that
17,000 typewritten pages per second, 16 times extended the communications capabilities
faster than amplifiers currently in use by IBM. available to large system users. Enhancements
Yorktown researchers also have to Virtual Machine control programming
developed a new method for creating precise provided performance improvements ranging
patterns of gold in making circuit inter- from 10 to 25 percent for 308 X computers.
connections. The approach uses a laser and
a liquid jet to direct gold-bearing liquid to A laser and a liquid jet direct gold for circuit
spots less than one-fiftieth of an inch wide. interconnections to precise spots in this experimental
device developed by IBM researchers.
The process is much faster and more accurate
This experimental amplifier chip used in conjunc-
than other methods.
tion with fiber optics can transmit data at a rate
The world's shortest light pulses, bursts
equivalent to ij,ooo typewritten pages per second.
lasting just 12 femtoseconds, have been
more than one million bits of information. generated by IBM scientists. A femtosecond is
The experimental chip was fabricated on to a second as a second is to 30 million
an existing manufacturing line used to mass- years. These ultra-short pulses can serve as
produce other high-density chips. Each "strobe lights," slowing or freezing the motion
one-million-bit chip can store about 100 pages of molecules, atoms and electrons. The tech-
of double-spaced typewritten text. nique could help researchers better understand
The Federal Systems Division developed physical processes important to the devel-
a signal processor chip capable of executing opment of ultra-fast computer components.
100 million multiplications a second, 10 times IBM engineers also have produced an
the rate of any previously reported chip. The experimental eight-inch silicon crystal, the
new chip has 37,000 circuits on a piece of largest ever "grown" in IBM. Wafers from the
silicon about three-tenths of an inch square, crystal can accommodate more than 2,000

===== PAGE 14 =====
family of computers with the addition of an data processing applications. The model E
entry-level system small enough to fit under a provides twice the main memory, and offers
desk. The new system can attach up to 22 one and a half times the internal perform-
local and 64 remote workstations. Compact ance of the previous high-end Series71. The
packaging makes it possible for users to add model 60 E also offers memory and performance
communications features, memory or work- improvements, along with an integrated
stations by simply inserting plug-in modules. disk file capable of storing up to 60 million
A new Conversion Aid program also makes it characters of information.
easier for System736 customers requiring
greater capability to upgrade to the more pow- IBM Personal Computer
erful System738.The new IBM 4214 matrix Additional Personal Computer products
printer provides high-quality printing capabil- were introduced at a rapid pace in 1984, while
ity for System736 and System738 processors. the price7performance of other PC products
Also announced was a series of was improved. Innovative PC hardware options
complementary programs, called the Office and program products also were announced.
Systems Family, that offers full-function text
Each technician in a control room at IBM's editing, library services and electronic docu-
Kingston, N. Y., plant can monitor testing 0/40 large-
ment distribution. These programs also permit
scale ^o8Xsystems simultaneously.
exchange of information within networks of
IBM Personal Computers, System736s and
Mid-range and small processors models of the System/^jo.
IBM expanded the growth paths available to Five new models of the IBM 8150
customers with mid-range information process- computer expand the capacity and flexibility
ing needs, introducing new or enhanced of the 8100 information system family. The
models of the 4300, System738, System736, 8100 new units offer up to 8 million characters
and Series71 computers. Programming and of main memory. A PC Adapter, which extends
attachments designed to increase the productiv- the 8ioo's utility in the workstation environ-
ity of these systems also were announced. ment, also was introduced. The adapter allows
The IBM 4381 model 3, which features users to attach IBM Personal Computers
two processors operating under a single control directly to an 8100, enabling them to shift
program, offers significant performance im- quickly from a program running on the PC's
provements in both commercial and scientific operating system to one running on an 8100 or
applications. It can process information on a host System7370 computer. A technician at the Greenock, Scotland, plant
monitors tests of the IBM Personal Computer AT.
almost twice as fast as the largest 4300 series Two new models of the IBM Series71
computer previously available. The new 4381 processor enable customers to extend their The new IBM Personal Computer AT^"^
model makes use of an advanced memory distributed processing, communications and system delivers up to three times the system
chip that can store some 256,000 bits of performance and twice the storage of pre-
information. IBM diskfiles, shown here in production viously available IBM PCs. It can be used as a
The IBM 4361 model 3 is a new, low-cost at the Vimercate, Italy, plant, now are manufactured powerful single-user system or, with optional
in four locations worldwide.
entry in the 4300 computer family. Equipped programming, can be shared by up to three
with up to 4 million characters of main users. The AT model also is ideal for use with the
memory, the model 3 can accommodate CADAM • new PC Network, a series of products that
Express, an easily installed, computer-aided enables customers to link up to 72 IBM PCs to
design and manufacturing program product. share information and peripheral devices.
Two additional System738 models are The IBM Portable Personal Computer,
available for customers with rapidly expanding announced in February, is a compact version of
information processing needs. The IBM the IBM Personal Computer. The Portable PC
System738 model 40 offers twice the main is easily transported as work requirements
memory and 70 percent greater internal change and can accommodate two slim-line
performance than the IBM System738 model 8. diskette drives.
The IBM System738 model 20 offers 30 percent More cost-effective models of the IBM
greater internal performance than the model 8. Personal Computer and PC XT™ system were
IBM extended the range of its System736 introduced. Also, several features that extend
the power and versatility of IBM PC;R™
*CADAM is a registered trademark of CADAM, Inc. computers became available. One such feature

===== PAGE 15 =====
is a memory expansion attachment which they can say and read everything they write.
allows memory to be increased to 512,000 Other educational programs include an earth
characters of information, or roughly 330 pages science series, programs to teach computer skills,
of typed text. Other enhancements include an and instructional aids for teachers and students.
economical color display, new typewriter-style Additional PC program products include:
keyboard, speech synthesizer, and a program a full-function version of the FORTRAN lan-
that allows the expanded memory to be used as guage compiler, which offers increased perform-
if it were a second diskette drive. ance; the Personal Computer Cluster Program,
Two workstations based on the IBM which allows up to 64 IBM Personal Computers
Personal Computer were added to the product to be connected to share information; the
line in 1984. The IBM 3270 Personal Com- Electric Literature Series of educational pro-
puter/G and Personal Computer/GX bring to a grams; several PC entertainment programs, and
workstation sophisticated graphics functions a variety of instructional programs from Science
previously offered only on large host computers. Research Associates, Inc., an IBM subsidiary.
Expanded disk storage capacity and pro-
gram products offering greater communications Workstations
A Nova Scotia fishery uses IBM PC XTs with
and graphics flexibility were other options intro- Three compact, low-cost display stations offer-
a System in a system developed for the fishing
duced. A compact IBM 3852 ink-jet printer, ing customers new data entry and handling
industry by an IBM value added remarketer
designed for use with the 3270 Personal Com- alternatives became available. Two of them—
puter/G and Personal Computer/GX, can formerly announced Japanese language— the IBM 3179 color and 3180 monochrome
Kanji—capability displays—include as standard features most of
A PC application developed by the Red Cross in IBM Japan also announced the IBMJX, the frequently ordered options of IBM's
Brisbane, Australia, combines Personal Computers IBM Japan's first low-cost Japanese language popular 3278 and 3279 termmals.They
and laser readers to verify blood type labels.
personal computer designed for home and occupy less desk space, are lighter and use less
business, and the IBM 5295 Japanese work- power than the 3270 displays. Both have
station, a low-cost workstation with Japanese keyboards that can be modified by users to
language capability for use with IBM System/ accommodate their particular applications.
36 and System/38 computers. The third new workstation is the
compact IBM 3205, a low-priced console for
PC program products IBM 4381 and 4361 processors.The 3205 is
A number of innovative program products about one-third smaller and 22 pounds lighter
extended the range of applications available than a comparable IBM 3279 console.
with the Personal Computer family of products.
The TopView^ program enables users to Storage units and printers
access and display data from several applica- A new generation of magnetic tape drives,
tions concurrently on a single display screen. advanced storage control units and faster.
The IBM Personal Computer Assistant Series
programs offer a range of business and graphics Programmers from Korea, China, the U. S.
applications and text-handling activities. and Japan confer on multiple language capabilities
of the IBM 5550 multistation.
PC text processing programs include the
produce color graphics, text and images on IBM Personal Computer DisplayWrite Series and
both paper and transparencies. the IBM PCWriter program products.These
The new IBM PC AT/370 and an enhanced products feature programs similar to those avail-
model of the IBM PC XT/370 workstation can able with the IBM Displaywriter, 5520 Adminis-
function either as standalone processors trative System and System/23 Datamaster.
or intelligent terminals. They also can provide The IBM Business Management Series
additional data and word processing capability. and IBM Personal Decision Series are designed
IBM began manufacturing PCs at to help small businesses or departments in
the Wangaratta, Australia, plant for delivery to larger organizations with a range of accounting
Australia, New Zealand and the Southeast and business management tasks, including
Asian countries. inventory control, text processing, financial
IBM Japan enhanced its high-performance reporting and graphics presentation.
personal business computer, the 5550 multi- "Writing to Read" is a complete language
station, adding English, Korean and Chinese laboratory designed to teach kindergarten and
language word processing functions to the first-grade children how to write everything

===== PAGE 16 =====
the IBM Quietwriter® 7 typewriter, which payload than the 7545, is especially suited for
features a unique print technology that materials-handling tasks.
electronically "paints" characters onto the The IBM 5531 industrial computer
paper.The IBM Wheelwriter^*^ 5 and IBM is an IBM PC XT specially modified for the
Wheelwriter 3 typewriters use cartridge physical conditions typically found in a
printwheels. manufacturing environment. The computer,
The Selectric System/zooo typewriters its display and printer can be used for a
offer an optional 50,ooo-word dictionary that
detects possible spelling errors, and have paper
movement keys which align paper so precisely
that traditional platen knobs are not needed.
They also can be used as personal computer
printers. Also introduced were two associated
letter-quality printers—the IBM Quietwriter
printer and the IBM Wheelprinter—for use
with personal computers.
A laboratory test specialist at the Tucson, Ariz.,
A new electronic typewriter, the IBM
facility uses a special camera to inspect a 3480 tape
Electronic 95, offers twice the memory capacity
system's cartridge load mechanism.
of the model 85. A diskette drive for use with
more flexible printers were introduced in 1984. the IBM Electronic 85 and 95 typewriters
The new generation of tape drives provides the added storage capacity of single-
replaces the familiar tape reel with a compact or double-sided 5^A-inch diskettes.
cartridge. The new drives, part of the IBM
3480 magnetic tape subsystem, can transfer Manufacturing systems
data at up to 3 million characters a second, IBM's offerings of automated manufacturing A keyboard in production at the Lexington, Ky.,
plant is put through its paces by a robotic tester.
more than double the previous rate. An systems were expanded with new robotic
innovative tape head using thin-film technol- systems, industrial computers and program- spectrum of applications on the manufac-
ogy delivers a significant improvement in ming support. turing floor, as well as for traditional office
data reliability. The new cartridge, about one- applications.
third the size of a tape reel, can store about This advanced print head is the heart of the Enhanced versions of IBM's entry-level
20 percent more data. IBM Quietwriter 7 typewriter, one model in the new robotic programming language—AML/Entry
The il^M 3880 models 23 and 21 storage Selectric System /2000 family. Versions 3 and 4—enable manufacturers to
control units speed the flow of data by acting create application programs tailored for their
as temporary storage for the most frequently production requirements.
used data being transferred between disk New Series/1 programs that simplify the
storage units and a host computer. The units implementation of control and monitoring
offer storage capacities up to 32 million applications also were introduced. These
characters of information and are less expen- programs allow users to set up data commu-
sive than previous comparable 3880 models. nications between programmable controllers
The IBM 4248 printer, the company's supplied by other manufacturers.
fastest impact printer, can print at three
Scientific products
different speeds to accommodate varying
volume and print quality requirements. The The company also extended its product
4248, designed for quiet operation, prints at offerings geared specifically for the scientific
3,600, 3,000 and 2,200 lines a minute. and engineering communities.
Advanced-function printing programs for The IBM Personal Computer Engineering/
the IBM 3800 model 3 laser printer enable users Scientific Series enables IBM Personal Com-
to combine text, graphics, signatures, logos puter products to be tailored to support engi-
and type styles on a single page. The model 3 The IBM 7545 manufacturing system, a neering design, control laboratory experiments
prints up to 20,040 lines per minute. low-cost addition to the company's robotic and perform high-speed mathematical com-
systems family, is designed for a range of putations. The series includes the IBM PC
Typewriters electromechanical assembly, fabrication and Professional Graphics Display and Professional
A new generation of IBM typewriters made materials-handling tasks. The IBM 7547 Graphics Controller, which make it possible
its debut last year. The IBM Selectric® manufacturing system, another programmable to generate advanced color graphics, and the
System/2000 typewriter family includes robotic system with a longer reach and larger IBM PC Graphics Development Toolkit, which

===== PAGE 17 =====
allows users to design graphics applications nationwide credit verification system, connects
independent of displays, printers and plotters. computers at credit companies with terminals
A new line of Nuclear Magnetic installed in stores around the country. The
Resonance spectrometers and an advanced IBM 4743 Automatic Cash-In counts and com-
desktop computer were introduced by IBM putes the values of a stack of currency. Used
Instruments, Inc. Spectrometers are used in the in conjunction with one of IBM's finance
pharmaceutical, petroleum, biotechnology and communication systems, the 4743 also can
other industries to study the molecular complete a variety of banking transactions.
structure of compounds. A new model of the
IBM 9000 computer, the IBM 9002 is an Enhanced graphics
economical, compact computer that provides Graphics capabilities previously available
customers the power of a minicomputer. The only on large computers now are available to
9002, when used in conjunction with an IBM System738 users following enhancements
optional operating system, also can function as to the computer's operating system.
a host computer, supporting up to four users. The Graphical Data Display Manager
enables users to create diagrams and charts
Telecommunications products A waitress in a Tokyo restaurant uses CATNET, using an IBM 5292 model 2 color display.
a nationmde credit verification system introduced
Several products that make it easier for users Another program—Graphics Data File—
by IBM in Japan.
to transmit information were announced. permits graphics to be exchanged with another
They include enhancements to IBM's Systems host computer using an IBM Scanmaster System738 or a System/370 computer.
Network Architecture (SNA) that increase the information terminal, then distributed to Presentation Graphics Routines enable
number of available "logical addresses" designated workstations. user-written application programs to create a
125-fold, expanding the number of devices that The IBM Cabling System permits users variety of charts on one screen. OFFICE/38
can be linked in a single network. SNA is to install permanent computer cabling in their Business Graphics Utility, a simplified graphics
a communications architecture that allows ter- offices or buildings, eliminating the need for capability, enables a customer to create eight
minals, workstations, printers and storage rewiring every time a computer, workstation or types of charts, using menus and prompts.
devices to be combined into networks. related information-handling device is moved.
Federal Systems Division
Programs that increase the effectiveness of
IBM's SNA is helping a major producer of silicone telephone systems became available in 1984. The Federal Aviation Administration has
products link 80 percent of its employees, such One, used in conjunction with IBM's selected IBM'S Federal Systems Division (FSD)
as this engineer designing a chemical plant, to an Professional Office System, allows messages as one of two primary participants in a
interactive network of workstations.
taken by an operator to be directed to a competition to design an advanced U. S. air
terminal in an individual's office. The capacity traffic control system. The competition
of IBM's Audio Distribution System also was requires IBM to demonstrate an advanced flight
tripled to 3,000 users. control workstation and to submit an im-
The IBM 3710 network controller reduces proved approach to air traffic control.
the number and cost of telecommunications
lines and devices needed to connect worksta- Employees of a German furniture cooperative
tions and other equipment to remote computers. handle customer inquiries and orders received over
a nationwide videotex information system.
The 3710 can consolidate up to 32 lines into
one or more high-speed transmission lines.
The new IBM 7171 ASCII control unit en-
ables users to connect up to 64 ASCII devices—
either directly or remotely via a modem—to host
computers without programming changes.
Industry systems
The IBM 3680 restaurant system, the first
Introduced by IBM in 1974, it is the most widely restaurant system to run on an IBM point-of-
used network architecture in the industry sale terminal, was introduced. The system
Another new software enhancement enables restaurant operators to manage sales,
enables customers to transmit forms contain- food inventories and other key areas of their
ing both handwritten and printed information business more efficiently.
and to display the documents on a variety of IBM Japan added two products in support
terminals. Document images are entered into a of the financial industry in Japan. CATNET, a

===== PAGE 18 =====
tional business, providing customers attractive automation programming to deliver a range of
financing options for leasing or purchasing market data and financial services.
new equipment. Last year, the Credit Corpora- IBM formed a partnership called Trintex
tion financed, solely or through partnerships, with CBS, Inc., and Sears, Roebuck and Co.,
$2.4 billion in new equipment in the U. S. to develop a commercial videotex service
The Credit Corporation also introduced its own directed at households with home and personal
credit card for the purchase of IBM PCs and computers. Videotex, a two-way, interactive
related products at IBM Product Centers and at
more than 1,300 of IBM's authorized dealers
in the U. S.
Satellite Business Systems
Satellite Business Systems (SBS) successfully
launched its fourth satellite in August. Carried
aloft by the space shuttle Discovery, the
satellite will be used for the expansion of SBS
IBM instructors train U. S. Department of
Skyline* long-distance telephone services and
Agriculture employees as part of a government con-
other communications services.
tract that includes the installation of almost 2,goo
System/^S computers in state and county offices. SBS is owned by Aetna Life and Casualty
and IBM. COMSAT General Corporation,
FSD also was awarded a U. S. Department one of the original partners in Satellite
of Agriculture contract for the USDA State Business Systems, sold its one-third interest to
and County Office Automation Project. The IBM and Aetna in December.
contract calls for installation, systems support
and maintenance of nearly 2,900 System/36s The IBM Credit Corporation credit card can be used
to purchase supplies and many IBM products.
in Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
Service offices across the country. The net-
work also will include more than 13,500 work- service, enables consumers to call up infor-
stations and 6,400 printers. mation, send messages and perform trans-
actions like banking, bill-paying and home
ROLM shopping.
With the ROLM Corporation merger in Also announced was an agreement
November, IBM expanded its range of business by IBM Italy and STET, a government-owned
communications products for voice, data holding company in Italy, to form a joint
and networking applications. Among these venture between IBM Italy and ELSAG-STET
products is the CBX 11, one of the most advanced Group, a firm specializing in numerical
communications controllers currently avail- control equipment, robotic systems, mail
able. The CBX II handles up to 4.4 billion bits automation products and naval systems. The
of information a second. The ROLM Cedar^^ joint venture will develop and market
personal communications computer combines software products for factory management,
A technician works on IxK/L-iiVl Cedar personal
personal computing with advanced voice production process control, and design and
communications computers in final assembly at
and data communications in a single unit. development functions.
ROLM's Austin, Tex., plant.
Another product—the PhoneMaiP system—
is an advanced voice message system which European Commission proceedings
allows customers to leave and retrieve voice New joint ventures In August, the Commission of the European
messages from any pushbutton phone. IBM announced its participation in two Communities agreed to settle proceedings
Headquartered in Santa Clara, Calif., the additional joint ventures in the U. S. last year, against the company. IBM agreed to provide,
ROLM organization includes some 10,000 IBM and Merrill Lynch & Co., Inc., formed a within specified time limits, interface
employees who provide professional services joint venture called International MarketNet information to facilitate the attachment of
ranging from design and engineering to to market a new information delivery system competitive products to new IBM System/370
manufacturing, sales and customer support. for the financial industry. The system combines products, and technical information about
IBM Personal Computer-based workstations IBM's Systems Network Architecture. IBM will
IBM Credit Corporation and specialized communications and office not release any proprietary product design
The IBM Credit Corporation continued to details. In turn, the Commission suspended
promote the growth of the company's tradi- *Skyline is a service mark of Satellite Business Systems. proceedings against the company.

===== PAGE 19 =====
The company invested more than
An advanced digital communications net- $4.6 billion in plant and other property in
work designed to improve response to customer 1984, adding more than 2.3 million square feet
requests for service soon will be available in of plant and laboratory space. An additional
more than 300 U. S. cities. The network links 6.7 million square feet are under construction.
IBM service representatives equipped with Major projects completed during 1984
portable terminals to computers at central include a computing center in Owego, N.Y.;
service data centers, giving them two-way com- a data center in San Jose, Calif.; manufacturing
munications capabilities while traveling facilities in Burlington, Vt., Charlotte, N.C.,
between locations or working in a customer's Endicott, N.Y., Lexington, Ky, Mainz,
office. The hand-held terminals provide Germany, Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and Vimercate,
updated customer call information and enable Italy; an expansion of research facilities
service representatives to transmit service data at Yorktown, and administration buildings in
and parts orders directly to their offices. Manassas, Va., and Purchase, N.Y
IBM also installed an "expert system" in
Employee suggestions
Automated testing systems at the East Fishkill, N.Y.,
IBM employees earned approximately
plant help ensure the quality of logic circuitry used in
$17 million in awards under the IBM Sugges-
models of the 4^00 computer
tion Plan in 1984. The cost-saving ideas
IBM World Trade IBUs focused on unique recognized under the suggestion program
needs for individual countries. I BUS operating during the year represent savings to the com-
in the U. S. at the end of 1984 were: Academic pany of more than $ 100 million.
Information Systems, Engineering Systems
Affirmative action
Products, Financial Services Business Unit,
General Products Business Unit, IBM Informa- IBM hired more than 19,700 new employees
tion Services, IBM Instruments, Inc., Low-End in the U. S. in 1984. About 42 percent of
Storage Business Unit, Manufacturing Systems those hired were women and 23 percent were
Products and Science Research Associates, Inc. minorities. At year end, IBM employed approx-
imately 4,500 women and 3,350 minority
IBM China, Inc. managers in the U. S.
IBM announced the establishment of IBM IBM continued its efforts in support
China, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of IBM of minority-owned businesses. In 1984,
Service coordinators in Atlanta use a computer-
World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, IBM purchased in excess of $110 million in
based dispatch system to assign representatives to
to conduct IBM's business in the People's products and services from some 750 minority-
handle customer service calls.
Republic of China. The company also named owned firms. IBM also made purchases
its support centers in Boulder, Colo., Chicago seven authorized dealers to market the IBM totaling over $60 million from more than 550
and Tampa, Fla., to improve the ability of 5550 and IBM Personal Computer products in
service personnel to resolve customers' pro- the People's Republic of China. A giant-sized PC keyboard was part of a traveling
gramming problems. The computer system computer show and exhibit sponsored by IBM for
helps service personnel compare current prob- New facilities school children in Australia.
lems with similar ones previously resolved, One of the largest, most highly automated
so they can suggest solutions immediately. test facilities in the world was completed at the
IBM's two U. S. service organizations— IBM East Fishkill site. The 153,000-square-
the Customer Service and Field Engineering foot facility houses testers capable of generating
divisions—were consolidated into a new field up to 100 million test signals a second.
division, the National Service Division, which The testers are used to ensure the quality
will provide service to IBM's full product line in of state-of-the-art Very Large Scale Integration
the United States. A separate group service (VLSL) chips manufactured at the site.
staff will ensure continued emphasis on service Programs to automate manufacturing
in the company's strategic planning process. operations continued at a number of
IBM plants. At the Lexington, Ky., facility, new
Independent Business Units
Selectric System/2000 typewriters and
IBM's Independent Business Units (iBUs) printers now are being manufactured on auto-
continued efforts to develop and market prod- mated lines put in place as part of the site's
ucts and services in specialized fields. $350 million automation project.

===== PAGE 20 =====
companies that are owned primarily by grants of cash and equipment will be made to
women, and in excess of $15 million from more selected U. S. universities.
than 80 companies employing large numbers The company also provided more than
of handicapped workers. $8 million to more than 1,400 colleges and
universities in the U. S. under the IBM Match-
Support to education
ing Grants Program for Higher Education.
IBM also expanded its programs aimed at IBM matches, two for one, contributions by
improving the quality of education in 1984. employees and their spouses.
The company added the Education
Executive Program, a program tailored for IBM and the community
school superintendents, principals and other Worldwide, IBM's contributions of cash,
senior administrators. The program is designed equipment and other resources to social,
to familiarize them with personnel and cultural and educational programs totaled
business management techniques that have more than $145 million in 1984.
proven successful in the private sector. More Among community programs in the U. S.,
than 562 educators from 135 school districts the nationwide "Project to Train the Disabled"
have participated in the program since it IBM employees participating in the Faculty Loan marked a milestone with its i,oooth place-
Program are on assignment during the '84-'8^ term
was established in May. ment. Begun in 1972, the IBM-initiated project
at ^8 schools in 24 states and Washington, D.C.
A program to educate more than 200,000 seeks to establish self-sustaining, locally
students and teachers from selected public and literacy programs in many countries where operated projects to teach programming skills
private school systems in the use of com- the company does business. In many cases, to people with severe physical disabilities
puters also was implemented.The IBM Model IBM support included the contribution of IBM and to help them become gainfully employed.
Computer Literacy Program was designed to Personal Computers and programming. Another IBM-initiated program—the
help schools and their faculties use computers In Europe, the company donated 770
effectively in classrooms. IBM Personal Computers and software to
In the fall, 67 employees were granted secondary schools in Germany, Italy, the
leaves under the Faculty Loan Program to Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and
the United Kingdom to familiarize teachers
A totem pole is carved in the Garden Plaza of and students with the use and potential
IBM's 5po Madison Avenue building in New York of computers.
City in preparation for an exhibit of Indian art The University of Cambridge and IBM
at the IBM Gallery of Science and Art.
United Kingdom announced a joint project to
develop methods for using computers to
enhance engineering education programs.
In support of the program, IBM is providing
equipment, funding, programming and
technical guidance.
A third IBM Europe Institute was held
in Davos, Switzerland. Intended to increase
technical dialogue between industry and
An extensive exhibition of IBM products and
universities, the institute brought together
technology was held in London, one stop on a three-
more than 700 scientists and researchers from
year, 14-nation European tour
across Europe for a series of presentations.
IBM announced a $25 million grant Summer Youth Employment Program—
program to help U. S. graduate schools of resulted in jobs at non-profit agencies for about
business strengthen instruction and research 350 disadvantaged youths in major metropolitan
in the management of information systems. areas with sizeable youth unemployment.
Under the program, 12 graduate schools, to be Support continued for centers that train
teach engineering, computer science, marketing selected in the spring of 1985, will receive socially and economically disadvantaged
and business courses, and to assist with admin- both cash grants and IBM information process- people for careers in fields such as computer
istration at educational institutions with large ing equipment and software. operations and word processing. IBM provides
minority and disadvantaged student enroll- IBM announced a similar program to help equipment and technical support at 47 centers
ments. More than 490 employees have partici- universities initiate research programs and in the U. S.
pated in the program since it began in 1971. develop graduate-level curricula in the Through the IBM Child Care Referral
IBM supported or introduced computer materials and processing sciences. Twelve Service, grants were made to 200 community-

===== PAGE 21 =====
based child care and referral agencies to increase
the quality of local child care providers. IBM
Personal Computers and supporting software
were donated to 33 agencies.
IBM played an active role in recognizing
the achievements of disabled athletes through
its support of the 1984 International Games
for the Disabled. The company provided
a System736 computer to monitor the achieve-
ments of the 1,800 athletes from 45 nations
who participated in the games.
Some 125 IBM employees were granted
leaves to work at non-profit organizations
under the IBM Social Service Leave Program.
More than 800 employees have been
granted leaves since the program was estab-
At a major exposition to open in Tsukuba, Japan,
lished in 1971.
in March 198^, the IBM pavilion mil stress the role
IBM served as the official personal
of science in the development of civilization.
computer and office systems sponsor of the
1984 Summer Olympics, IBM provided support Helen Keller International agency to treat
for the administrative operations of the blindness in the African nations of Tanzania
Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee and Malawi.
and the competitive events. IBM's Americas/Far East organization
Community involvement within IBM's entered a partnership with the Government of
World Trade organizations was directed toward Antigua and Barbuda to develop a com-
a range of human and civic needs. In England, puterized storm warning system for the
the expertise of IBM employees as well as a Caribbean islands. In Brazil, IBM scientists
4341 computer, storage devices, displays and worked to apply ecologic systems to protect
other products are being provided to the sugar cane from destructive insects.
Oxford University Press to help produce a new A number of exhibits were staged
edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. A throughout the world to familiarize people
blood cell processor was donated to a hospital with emerging information processing
in Greece for the study and treatment of technologies and products. An exhibition of
thalassemia, a congenital blood disease IBM products and technology—one of the
affecting Greek children. The corporation also most extensive ever assembled in Europe—has
provided support to a project sponsored by the begun a three-year, 14-nation European tour.
The exhibition attracted more than 180,000
IBM is providing computers, software and the
visitors in Paris, Milan and London in 1984.
help of IBM specialists in a project to publish a new
The exhibition is scheduled to be in Lyon,
edition of the Oxford English Dictionary.
France; Copenhagen; Amsterdam; Oslo;
Manchester, England; Stuttgart, Germany;
West Berlin and Rome durmg 1985.
IBM Japan will participate in a major
science exposition scheduled to open in
Tsukuba, Japan, in March 1985.
IBM Brazil exhibited some of the
company's most advanced technologies and
product offerings at Brazil's international
"Informatics" show, held in Rio de Janeiro in
November. The show, one of the largest
data processing trade shows in the world,
attracted more than 150,000 attendees.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
of the financial information presented in this lated into numerous languages, are distributed
Annual Report rests with IBM management.The to employees throughout the world, and
accompanying financial statements have been reemphasized through internal programs to
prepared in conformity with generally accepted assure that they are understood and followed.
accounting principles, applying certain estimates Price Waterhouse, independent accountants,
and judgments as required. are retained to examine IBM's financial state-
IBM maintains an effective system of ments. Their accompanying report is based on an
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, examination conducted in accordance with
of organizational arrangements with clearly generally accepted auditing standards, including
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of a review of internal accounting controls and tests
authority We believe this system provides reason- of accounting procedures and records.
able assurance that transactions are executed The Audit Committee of the Board of
in accordance with management authorization, Directors is composed solely of outside directors,
and that they are appropriately recorded, in and is responsible for recommending to the
order to permit preparation of financial state- Board the independent accounting firm to
ments in conformity with generally accepted be retained for the coming year, subject to stock-
accounting principles and to adequately safeguard, holder approval. The Audit Committee meets
verify and maintain accountability of assets. periodically and privately with the independent
An important element of the system is an on- accountants, with our internal auditors, as
going internal audit program. well as with IBM management, to review account-
To assure the effective administration of ing, auditing, internal accounting controls and
internal control, we carefully select and train financial reporting matters.
our employees, develop and disseminate written
policies and procedures, provide appropriate
communication channels, and foster an environ- John R. Opel Chairman of the Board
ment conducive to the effective functioning of
controls. We continue to believe that it is
essential for the company to conduct its business
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical Allen J. Krowe Senior Vice President,
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Finance & Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of January 29, 1985
International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated were made in accordance with generally accepted
financial statements, appearing on pages 26,28, auditing standards and accordingly included
30, and 33 through 43, present fairly the financial such tests of the accounting records and such other
position of International Business Machines auditing procedures as we considered necessary
Corporation and its subsidiary companies in the circumstances.
at December 31,1984, and 1983, and the results
of their operations and changes in funds
for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31,1984, in conformity with gen- Price Waterhouse
erally accepted accounting principles consistently 153 East 53rd Street
applied. Our examinations of these statements New York, N.Y. 1002 z

===== PAGE 23 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1984 1983
Gross Income:
Sales $ 29,753 23,274 16,815
Services 9,605 7,676 6,428
Rentals 6,579 9,230 I 1,121
$45,937 $40,1 80 $34,364
Cost of sales 12,374 9,748 6,682
Cost of services 4,347 3,506 3,047
Cost of rentals 2,198 3,141 3,959
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . 11,587 10,614 9,286
Research, development and engineering expenses 4,200 3,582 3,042
Interest expense 408 390 451
35,114 30,981 26,470
10,823 9,199 7,894
Other income, principally interest 800 Z41 3^8
Earnings before income taxes 11,623 9,940 8,222
Provision for income taxes 5,041 4,455 3,813
Net Earnings $ 6,582 $ 5,485 $ 4,409
Per share $ 10.77 $ 9.04 $7-39
Average number of shares outstanding:
1,426,324
1983-606,769,848
1982-596,688,501

===== PAGE 24 =====
Results of Operations
In 1984, the company posted a record income, which increased 38.9 percent to $3.2 implementation of more efficient administra-
financial performance. billion. Maintenance gross income increased tive systems, a continuing focus on quality and
Worldwide gross income in 1984 totaled 15.1 percent. the use of non-traditional distribution channels
$45.9 billion, an increase of 14.3 percent. Gross Income by Industry Segments and to market selected products. Gross income per IBM
Worldwide net earnings increased by 20 percent Classes of Similar Products or Services (table on employee rose from approximately $77 thousand
to $6.6 billion. page 43) highlights several trends. Informa- in 1980 to approximately $120 thousand in 1984.
Gross income from U. S. operations tion-handling, the predominant segment, has At the same time, the selling, general and
increased by 18.3 percent to $27.3 billion, while grown substantially over the past three years, with administrative expense as a percent of gross
non-U. S. gross income increased by 8.9 percent a compound growth rate of 15 percent. Within income went from 30.9 percent to 25.2 percent.
to $18.6 billion. this segment. Office Systems/Workstations, The company's goal to reduce selling, general
The year was one of market growth driven Processors, Program Products and Maintenance and administrative expense as a percent of total
by new product introductions, price elasticity contributed the major portion of the growth. gross income continues to be met.
and broadened use of marketing channels. Sales of Peripherals also experienced significant Other income, principally interest,
The company increased worldwide customer ship- growth, and, as expected, peripherals rentals increased by 8.0 percent over 1983. Other income
ments substantially exhibited a decrease. Rentals declined as a also includes earnings of IBM's non-consolidated
The financial performance of non-U. S. percentage of gross income in each applicable finance subsidiaries and I BM'S share of results
operations continued to be adversely affected by product class. Although afiected by the strength from other equity investments.
the strength of the U. S. dollar, a trend which of the U. S. dollar, non-U. S. trends were similar The effective tax rate declined during the
began in 1980. Management believes the in most classes. current period by 1.4 percentage points com-
company's performance outside of the U. S. has Total gross profit increased by 13.6 percent pared to 1983. This improvement results primarily
been obscured as a result. To assist the reader to $27.0 billion. The total gross profit margin was from the resolution of tax matters related to
in assessing results in non-U. S. markets, page 32 down slightly As rental gross income, with prior years.
includes graphs reflecting the U. S. and non-U. S. its higher than average profit margin, becomes a Management remains optimistic about
currency relationships. smaller contributor to total gross profit, the the long-term future of the industry and the com-
Total gross income from sales grew to overall gross profit margin will tend to be lower pany's performance.
$29.8 billion in 1984, an increase of 27.8 percent. than in prior periods until the decline in rental
As illustrated in the table below, sales gross gross income stabilizes.
income has been accelerating for several years and Gross profit from sales increased to IBM Consolidated Gross Income:
this trend is expected to persis,: as outright $17.4 billion in 1984, an increase of 28.5 percent, (In millions)
purchase continues to be our customers' preferred while gross profit from rentals decreased by
$50,000
mode of acquisition. $1.7 billion, a decline of 28.0 percent.
As a direct corollary, total gross income Services gross profit increased 26.1 per- 45,000
14%
from rentals, primarily risk leases, declined by cent to $5.3 billion. Maintenance gross profit, the
40,000
28.7 percent, a trend that has been apparent since major component, increased 20.4 percent.
23%
1982. Management expects this trend to con- This increase reflected the result of IBM'S world-
35,000 21%
tinue, though diminishing in proportion to total wide quality and productivity improvements.
revenue. As revenues continue to shift toward Program products gross income grew at a rate 30,000 32% 19%
sales, quarter-to-quarter performance compari- significantly greater than costs, yielding a signifi-
25,000 37%
sons may become more volatile, particularly cant increase in gross profit.
H 4 >% 19%
as new products go through introductory cycles. Management increased investments 20,000
65%
Multi-year volume sales agreements, increased in research, development and engineering by 18%
maintenance revenues, the rapid expansion of $618 million from 1983 levels to a total of 15,000 58%
49%
program products revenue and the growth in $4.2 billion, 9.1 percent of gross income. These
10,000 ^H
45%
financing income should dampen this volatility investments are crucial to maintaining the
over time. company's leadership position. 5,000 H|
Services gross income reached $9.6 billion, Selling, general and administrative expenses
'82. '83
an increase of 25.1 percent. This was largely as a ratio to gross income improved as a result
the result of growth in program products gross of volume sales agreements, the development and I Sales Hli Services I Rentals

===== PAGE 25 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1984 19831
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash $ 600 $ 616
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 3,762 4,920
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 7,393 5,577
Other accounts receivable 718 645
Inventories 6,598 4,381
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,304 1,191
$20,375 $ 17,330
Rental Machines and Parts 6,375 9,201
Less: Accumulated depreciation 3,425 4,335
2,950 4,866
Plant and Other Property 23,048 19,986
Less: Accumulated depreciation 9,635 8,710
13,413 11,276
Investments and Other Assets 6,070 3,989
$42,808 3> 37,461
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes $ 2,668 $ 3,220
Loans payable 834 532
Accounts payable 1,618 1,^53
Compensation and benefits 2,223 2,105
Deferred income 340 382
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 1,957 1,670
$ 9,640 (S 9,162
Long-Term Debt 3,269 2,674
Other Liabilities 1,353 1,475
Deferred Income Taxes 2,057 931
Stockholders' Eqviity:
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 5,998 5,800
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1984-613,076,500; 1983-610,724,641
Retained earnings 23,486 19,489
Translation adjustments (2,948) (2,070)
26,536 23,219
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 47 —
Shares: 1984-390,961
26,489 23,219
$ 42,808 $ 37,461
t Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform with 1984 presentation.
The notes on pages 34 through 43
are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Financial Condition
In 1984, IBM further strengthened its well as the changing business environment. the U. S. dollar since 1980 has resulted in the
financial position, while investing $8.8 billion in Notes and accounts receivable increased by accumulation of $2,948 million in such adjust-
research, development and engineering, and $1.8 billion and current inventories by $2.2 billion. ments. Were the U. S. dollar to weaken
plant and other property. The growth in receivables resulted primarily in relation to other currencies, the translation
Expenditures for research, development from the record revenues recorded in the fourth adjustment would be reduced in proportion to
and engineering amounted to $4.2 billion, repre- quarter. The increase in the level of current the change in currency values and IBM's net asset
senting 9.1 percent of gross income in 1984. inventories was influenced by the demand for position in the affected countries. It is manage-
These expenditures, which are expensed in the high-volume products, which are in large measure ment's view that the translation adjustment
year incurred, have amounted to more than delivered from shelf stock. In addition, work in has significance only in situations where liquidation
$ 15.5 billion over the past five years. The future process inventories increased, reflecting of net assets may be anticipated; and even in such
growth of the company depends upon these anticipated demand. Cash and marketable secu- circumstances, the values assigned to the assets
investments. They are the foundation for rities decreased by $1.2 billion and current do not reflect the current market value.
a continuous stream of innovative products liabilities increased by $478 million. Management is mindful of the scope and
and services to meet customers' needs in an During the year, the company added quality of growing international competition
intensely competitive international environment. $1,363 million to long-term debt, principally as a and the risks inherent in the information process-
Management expects to sustain high levels of result of the issuance of $1,285 million of ing industry. Therefore, we continue to focus
investment in technology and for future products convertible debentures in connection with the on prudent management of IBM resources.
and services. ROLM Corporation acquisition, and reduced Each operating unit has activities which
IBM invested $4.6 billion in plant and prior year long-term obligations by $768 million. focus on key operational measurements and
other property, an increase of 31.z percent over This resulted in a net increase of $595 million in asset management. Units are assigned targets in
the prior year. These investments were made long-term debt. areas such as quality performance, cash manage-
throughout the world to accommodate the During 1984, shares were purchased ment, collections and inventory turnover.
company's growth and improve efficiency, and in the open market to meet most requirements of In 1984, the company's return on assets was
have amounted to more than $16.5 billion over the IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans. 16.4 percent, compared to 15.7 percent in 1983.
past five years. Management intends to continue Almost 90 percent of the total 1984 funds Return on stockholders' equity reached
to make substantial investments in plant and provided, or $12.8 billion, were from opera- 26.5 percent, an increase of i.i percentage points
other property. tions. Depreciation as a source of funds has dimin- from the prior year's historic high. IBM's current
One category of 1984 capital spending that ished, reflecting decreased risk lease activity ratio is 2.1 to i and the long-term debt to equity
did not increase was rental machines, which Operations are expected to provide sufficient funds ratio is 12.3 percent. These returns and financial
declined by $554 million from the prior year. This to support the business needs in 1985. ratios are indications of the company's
is consistent with recent trends of declining Management anticipates that IBM'S financial strength.
installations on risk leases. participation in financing of customers' purchases IBM's performance continues to meet
The company invested $803 million in of IBM's products will be primarily through our the company's stated goals. Demand for IBM'S
program products production costs, an finance subsidiaries. These subsidiaries will access products and services remains strong. We antici-
increase of 36.6 percent over 1983. These costs the worldwide capital markets for funds as the pate balanced financial growth that will provide
are capitalized. The growth in program need arises. the flexibility to fund future needs and meet
product investments is consistent with our view Deferred income taxes increased by our long-term goals.
of future potential in this business area. $1.1 billion during 1984. This is attributable to tax
Other investments, amounting to $1.1 billion, timing differences related to sales-type leases,
were made in finance subsidiaries and sales-type installment sales and the deferral of investment
leases. These investments reflect IBM'S growing tax credits.
participation in the financing of products The accounting method for translating the
purchased by our customers. Also included in majority of non-U. S. net assets into U. S. dollars
investments and other assets is the goodwill requires such items to be translated at current
related to the ROLM Corporation acquisition. exchange rates. The cumulative effect of this cur-
The company's working capital increased by rency translation is included in the equity section
over $2.5 billion. The increase was caused by of the Statement of Financial Position as
both the high level of business activity in 1984 as 'translation adjustments". The strengthening of

===== PAGE 27 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow
for the year ended December 31:
(Dollars in millions) I984t 19831 i982t
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January I . . . . $ 5,536 $ 3,300 $ 2,029
Provided from (used for) Operations:
Sources:
Net earnings 6,582 ' 5,485 4,409
Items not requiring the current use of funds:
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses . . .. 2,987 3,362 3,143
Net book value of rental machines and
other property retired or sold 1,483 2,108 1,642
Amortization of program products 486 311 249
Other (principally deferred income taxes) 1,004 749
12,542 12,015 9,52.7
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized . 228 4x9
12,770 I 2,280 9,946
Uses:
Investment in rental machines 858 1,412
3,^93
Investment in plant and other property 4,615 3,39^
5,473 4,930 6,685
Investment in program products 803 588 468
Increase (decrease) in investments and other assets 1,764 1,887 (320)
Net change in working capital
(excluding cash, marketable securities
and loans payable) 4,043 855 370
12,083 8,260 7,2-03
Translation effects (324) (147) 12
Net provided from operations 363 3,873 ^,773
Provided from External Financing:
Net change in long-term debt 595 (177) 182
Net change in loans payable 302 3 (Mi)
Net provided from external financing 897 :i74) (62)
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 73
6,869 7,787
5,353
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 2,507 2-,2.5 I
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December 3 j . . . 4,362 $ 3,300
$iill6
11984 includes, on the appropriate lines, the amounts
expended for the acquisition of the net assets of ROLM
Corporation.
Net change in long-term debt for 1984 includes $ 1,185 million
face value of 7%% convertible subordinated debentures issued
in connection with the acquisition of ROLM Corporation.
^ Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform
with 1984 presentation.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions)
Working Capital $4,043 $768 Reduction of LongTerm Debt
$ 1,764 Investments and Other Assets
Items Not Requiring $1,363 New Long-Term Debt
Current Use of Funds
$5,864 $858 Rental Machines
$302 Loans Payable
$73 Stock Plans
$803 Program Products
Plant and Other Property $4,( $2,507 Cash Dividends
Operations $i2,446t
t Includes Effects of Translation
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property
(in millions)
Over the past five years, the company
has invested over $ 16.5 billion in land, buildings,
118,000
machinery and equipment, and internally
installed IBM manufactured equipment required
to meet customer demand, maintain tech-
nological leadership and improve productivity.
These recent additions represent 73 percent
of the gross asset value of plant and other
property as of December 31, 1984. The addi-
tions for 1984 include assets acquired as a
result of the purchase of iiOi.M Corporation.
Since 1980, investments exceeded
$2.5 billion in each year. Continuous upgrading
of our facilities is essential to achieve our
objectives. Large investments will continue to
be required in future years.
1984
Annual Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 29 =====
Percentage Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar
British pound Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen
— 13%
—41%
J L J I J I
1982 1983 1984 1982 1983 1984 1982 1983 1984 1982 1983 IS 1982 1983 IS 1983 1984
Base—as of January i, 1982
Six Major Countries—
In 1984, U S. gross income increased by The graph to the right depicts the aggre-
Combined Gross Income by Year
18.3 percent, and non-U. S. gross income gate revenue growth from 1981 through 1984 for
(Percent change over 1981)
increased by 8.9 percent as reported in U. S. the same six countries, as reported in U. S.
dollars. It is estimated that had currency rates dollars. The graph also shows the local currency
remained constant with those of 1983, gross revenue growth rates calculated using 1981
income would have been $1,675 million greater U. S. dollar exchange rates. Management
than that reported in 1984, and gross income believes that this composite growth rate, as
from non-U. S. operations would have grown measured in local currency, is illustrative of the
by 18.7 percent. health of IBM's non-U. S. business and reflects
As the dollar strengthens, net assets, the strong worldwide demand for its products.
revenue, costs and expenses, recorded in local To the degree that profits from these 60% im
currencies, translate to fewer U. S. dollars non-U. S. operations are not repatriated in the
than they would have at the previous year's form of dividends or other payments, the
exchange rates. The graphs above illustrate the currency effects are deferred to future periods,
decline, in relation to the dollar, of the six since these resources continue to be invested
major currencies in which ibm conducts most in the country.
w -
of its non-U S. business. IBM manufactures products throughout
the world, and there is little dependence 20% I' ~
on U. S. exports in most of the major non-U. S.
operations. The company has been able to
compete effectively and profitably outside the
U. S. as well as in the U. S. 1982 '83 '8 1982 '83
I Combined revenues
as reported in U. S. dollars
I Combined revenues
as measured in local currency

===== PAGE 30 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity
International Business Machines Corporation
and Subsidiary Companies for the year ended December 31:
Translation
Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1982 $4,389 $ 13,909 $ (622) $ — $ 17,676
Net earnings 4,409 4,409
Cash dividends declared (2.,053) (2-,053)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholderplans (10,112,504 shares) . . . 602 602
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans (6) (6)
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 17 17
Translation adjustments (685) (685)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1982 . . . 5,008 16,259 (1,307) 19,960
1983 Net earnings 5,485 5,485
Cash dividends declared (^,2.51) (2.,2.5I)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) . . . 741 741
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans (4) ((44))
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 51 51
Translation adjustments (763) (763)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 . . . 5,800 19,489 (2,070) 23,219
1984 Net earnings 6,582 6,582
Cash dividends declared (2,507) (2,507)
Capital stock issued under employee
plans (2,351,859 shares) 154 154
Purchases (6,711,522 shares) and sales
(6,320,561 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . . (78) ((4477)) ((112255))
Tax reductions applicable to stock
related to employee plans 44 44
Translation adjustments (878) (878)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1984 . . . $ 5,998 $ 23,486 $(2,948) $ (47) $ 26,489
The notes on pages 34 through 43
are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consoHdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and
of Consolidation: its U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned IBM Credit Corporation, ROLM Credit
Corporation and non-U. S. finance subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. Investments in joint ventures,
and other companies in which IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method.
Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted for by the cost method.
Translation of For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: U. S. dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevail-
ing during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity.
For non-U. S. subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly
inflationary, inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing
when acquired. All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to
cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated
at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are
included in earnings.
Gross Income: Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services
over the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period.
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM's finance subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales.
Program Products: Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and develop-
ment. Costs incurred subsequent to a design verification test to produce the finished product are generally capitalized
as program products assets. The assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated revenue-producing
lives, but not in excess of five years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed.
Depreciation: Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives.
Depreciation of assets acquired subsequent to December 31,1983 is computed using the straight-line method.
Depreciation of assets acquired prior to January i, 1984 is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method for
rental machines, and either accelerated methods or the straight-line method for plant and other property.
Goodvill: The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and
amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. Goodwill related to equity investments is included in the
investment and amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years.
Retirement Plans and Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently Prior service costs resulting from improvements in
Other Postretirement Benefits: the plans are amortized generally over 10 years. Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued
when the employee retires.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing
differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable
earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over
the average useful life of the applicable classes of property.
Inventories: Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process are included at the lower of average
cost or market.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Non-U. S. Operations (Dollars in millions) 1984 19831 i98zt
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 8,583 $ 8,115 $ 6,299
Current liabilities 4,636 4,,5 85 4,226
Working capital 3,947 3,530 2,073
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 4,902 5,622 6,740
Investments and other assets 1,690 1,062 887
10,539 10,214 9,700
Long-term debt 222 466 480
Other liabilities 1,125 1,249 1,212
Deferred income taxes 346 27 —
1,693 1,692
Net assets employed $ 8,846 $ 8,472 $ 8,008
Number of employees 156,042 150,944 150,444
For the year:
Gross income from sales, services and rentals $ 18,566 $ 17,053 $ 15,336
Earnings before income taxes $ 4,640 $ 3,841 $ 3,226
Provision for income taxes 2,053 1,677 1,577
Net earnings $ 2,587 $ 2,164 $ 1,649
Investment in rental machines $ 549 $ 938 $ 1,630
Investment in plant and other property 1,258 1,049 1,052
$ 1,807 $ 1,987 $ 2,682
t Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable,
to conform with 1984 presentation.
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local strengthens, net assets and net earnings recorded Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid-
currency environment account for approximately in local currencies translate into fewer U. S. iaries included in consolidated retained earnings
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. dollars than they would have at the previous amounted to $9,837 million at December 31,1984,
The remaining 15% of the company's non-U. S. year's rates. The translation adjustments, resulting $8,510 million at December 31,1983 and $7,538
gross income is from subsidiaries and branches from the translation of net assets, amounted to million at December 31,1982. These earnings are
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic $2,948 million at December 31,1984, $2,070 indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S. operations.
environment is highly inflationary million at December 31, 1983 and $1,307 million Accordingly, no provision has been made for taxes
For the years 1984, 1983 and 1982, non- at December 31, 1982. The graphs on page 32 that might be payable upon remittance of such
U. S. financial results have been impacted by the illustrate the decline, in relation to the dollar, of earnings.
strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the the six major currencies in which IBM conducts
currencies of many countries. As the dollar most of its non-U. S. business.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Marketable Securities (Dollars in millions) December 31,1984 December 31,1983
U. S. Government securities $ 616 $ 1,745
Time deposits and other bank obligations 1,837 ^,314
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 1,309 861
Total $ 3,762 $ 4,920
Market value $ 3,774 $ 4,929
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1984 December 31,1983
Current inventories:
Finished goods 1,619 872
Work in process 4,676 3,2.67
Raw materials and operating supplies 303
Total current inventories 6,598 4,381
Work in process and field service parts included in:
Rental machines and parts 1,221 I,
Plant, laboratory and office equipment . . . . 746 685
Total inventories $ 8,565 S 6,915
Plant and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1984 December 31, i983t
Land and land improvements . . . . 823 $ 698
Buildings 6,673 6,051
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 15,552 13,^37
23,048 19,986
Less: Accumulated depreciation 9,635 8,710
Total 13,413 $ 11,276
tlnternally installed IBM manufactured equipment, previously included with Rental machines and parts,
is now included in Plant, laboratory and office equipment. The 1983 amounts have been reclassified to
conform with 1984 presentation.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Investments and Other Assets (Dollars in millions) December 31,1984 December 31, 1983
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1984,51,491; 1983,51,045) . 5 1,604 5 1,287
Investments in finance subsidiaries 1,220 547
Net investment in sales-type leases 594 i58t
U S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value: 1984,5510; ic> 83,5502). . . 503 501
Other investments and sundry assets 2,149 1,496
Total $ 6,070 53,989
Included in other investments and sundry assets at December 31,1984
is $882 million of goodwill (net of accumulated amortization of $4 million)
arising from the acquisition of ROLM Corporation.
Also included is $655 million representing the total investment in Intel Corporation, of which
$404 million represents goodwill (net of accumulated amortization of $27 million).
tThe 1983 amounts, previously included in Notes and accounts receivable-trade, have been reclassified
to conform with 1984 presentation.
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31,1984 December 31, 1983
US. Operations:
7%% convertible subordinated debentures due 2004^ 1,285
9V2% notes due 1986 500 500
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 450 500
10.80% notes due 1985-1986 180 240
Other, payable in:
(Average interest rate at December 31,1984, in parentheses)
U.S. dollars, due 1985-2012 (12.1%) 486 678
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (4.3%) 247 249
German marks, due 1985-1988 (8.8%) 210 203
3,358 ^,370
Non-U. S. Operations:
Various obligations, payable in:
(Average interest rate at December 31,1984, in parentheses)
Japanese yen, due 1985-2014 (7.8%) 125 133
US. dollars, due 1985-1992 (11.7%) 123 249
French francs, due 1985-1994 (12.6%) 62 75
Other currencies, due 1985-1994 (22.3%) 84 98
394 555
3,752 2,925
^
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 7%% and 9%% debentures . 3
3,742 2,922
Less: Current maturities 473 248
Total $ 3,269 $2,674
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1984, are as follows:
1985,5473; 1986,5885; 1987,5270; 1988,577; 1989,555; 1990 and beyond, 51,992.
tThe 7%% convertible subordinated debentures are unsecured subordinated obligations of IBM, which are
convertible into IBM capital stock at a conversion price of $153.6563 per share. They will be redeemable,
at the option of the company, starting in November 1988 at a price of 104.725% of the principal amount,
and at decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund payments starting in 1994 are intended to retire 75%
of the debentures prior to maturity

===== PAGE 35 =====
Taxes (Dollars in millions) 1984 1983 1982
Earnings before income taxes:
U S. operations $ 6,983 $ 6,099 $4,996
Non-U S. operations 4,640 3,841 3,226
$ 11,623 $ 9,940 $ 8,222
Provision for income taxes:
U. S. operations $ 2,988 $ 2,778 $2,236
Non-U S. operations 2,053 1,677 1,577
5,041 4,455 3,813
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 1,636 1,450
Total $ 6,677 $ 6,005 $ 5,263
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
US. Federal:
Current $ 1,406 $ 1,624 $ 1,378
Net tax effects of timing differences 702 188 212
Net deferred investment tax credits . . . . 80 47 71
2,188 1,859 1,661
Non-US.:
Current 2,102 2,250 1,829
Net tax effects of timing differences 465 31
2,567 2,282 1,860
U.S. State and local:
Current 187 265 288
Net tax effects of timing differences 99 49 4
286 292
314
Total provision $ 5,041 $4,455 $ 3,813
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 43.4% in 1984, 44.8% in 1983, and
46.4% in 1982. The consolidated net tax effects of timing differences in 1984
amounted to $i,z66 million, of which $6x3 million is related to sales-type leases and
installment sales. Of the remaining timing differences, no individual item is material.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Acquisition of ROLM Corporation Finance Subsidiaries method and earnings are included in other in-
IBM entered into a merger agreement The company's wholly owned unconsol- come in IBM's consolidated statement of earnings.
with ROLM Corporation on September 26,1984. idated finance subsidiaries consist of IBM Credit Summarized below is combined financial in-
ROLM develops, manufactures and markets Corporation, several non-U. S. finance subsid- formation for these finance subsidiaries, of which
advanced telecommunications systems such as iaries and ROLM Credit Corporation. IBM Credit IBM Credit Corporation accounts for more than
private branch exchanges. Effective with the Corporation offers lease financing of selected 90% of the total activity IBM has agreed to cause
approval by the ROLM shareholders on November IBM products, finances receivables resulting from the IBM Credit Corporation to have a positive net
21,1984, ROLM Corporation became a wholly installment sales by IBM of its products, and worth at all times. IBM Credit Corporation has
owned subsidiary of IBM. Prior to the merger, IBM finances selected non-iBM equipment in the U. S. $500 million of lines of credit available, in addition
owned approximately 23% of the outstanding The non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer leases in to $500 million shared with the IBM Corporation.
common stock of ROLM Corporation. The several European countries, and in some cases Additional information is available in the 1984
18,358,189 remaining outstanding shares of ROLM finance installment receivables. ROLM Credit Cor- Annual Report of the IBM Credit Corporation.
common stock are being exchanged for $1,285 poration offers lease financing related to sales by Copies may be obtained by writing to:
million face value of 7%% convertible subordi- ROLM of its products in the U. S. IBM's investment IBM Stockholder Relations Department,
nated debentures due 2004. in these subsidiaries is accounted for by the equity 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
The merger has been accounted for
Financial position at December 31:
as a purchase, and the results of operations for
ROLM have been included in the consolidated (Dollars in millions) 1984 .983 (Dollars in millions) 1983
financial statements from the date of acquisition. Assets: Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity:
IBM has agreed to divest itself of the Mil-Spec Cash and marketable Short-term debt $ 1,03 I $ 560
securities . $ 112 $ 80 Deferred taxes and
Computer Division of ROLM Corporation in 1985.
Installment payment accruals 209 62
Therefore, the portion of the acquisition cost agreement Due to IBM
applicable to the estimated fair value of this divi- receivables-net 1,619 1,189 and affiliates:
Net investment Current 293 264
sion's net assets has been segregated and classified
in leases 1,577 399 Noncurrent 502 100
as a current asset, ROLM s other assets and Receivable from Long-term debt 965 513
liabilities have been recorded at their estimated IBM and
Stockholder's
fair values and the excess of the related acquisition affiliates 74 39 499 222
Other 117 14
cost over the estimated fair value (goodwill) Total Liabilities
was $886 million and is being amortized on a and Stockholder's
Total Assets $ 3,499 $ 1,721 Equity $ 3,499 $ 1,721
straight-line basis over 20 years.
Had ROLM been acquired on January i,
1983, the pro forma effect on the consoli- Earnings for the years ended December 31: (Dollars in millions) 1984 1983
dated results would not have been material for
Finance and other income $ 305 $ 164 $ I 18
either 1983 or 1984. Interest and other expenses ^30 118 84
Provision for income taxes 7 4 3
Net earnings $ 68 $ 42 $ 31
Total purchases from IBM: (Dollars in millions) 1984
IBM products for term lease customers $ j,2iz 369 $ 67
Installment payment receivables $1,143 8^2 $68z

===== PAGE 37 =====
Accounting Change—Depreciation Rental Expense and Lease Commitments The principal actuarial assumptions used
On January i, 1984, for financial reporting Rental expense amounted to $713 million in to determine cost are: rate of return on fund assets
purposes, the company adopted the straight-Hne 1984, $567 million in 1983 and $490 million in (7.5% through 1993 and 5.5% thereafter), future
method of depreciation for rental machines, plant 1982. Minimum rental commitments, in millions compensation levels, retirement ages, employee
and other property capitalized subsequent to of dollars, under noncancelable leases for 1985 turnover and mortality rates. Variances between
December 31,1983. Rental machines capitalized and thereafter are as follows: 1985, $758; 1986, actual and assumed plan experience (actuarial
prior to January i, 1984, continue to be depreci- $642; 1987, $508; 1988, $386; 1989, $276; and after gains or losses) are amortized over the remaining
ated using the sum-of-the-years digits method. 1989, $i,37i.These leases are principally for the employee service period and are included in the
Plant and other property capitalized prior to rental of office premises. determination of current cost.
January i, 1984, continue to be depreciated using It is the company's policy to fund costs in
either accelerated methods or the straight-line Retirement Plans the year accrued, to the extent such costs are tax
method. In the opinion of management, this The company and its subsidiaries have retire- deductible in that year. Pertinent cost and
change will result in a more appropriate matching ment plans covering substantially all employees. contribution data for U. S. retirement plans is
of costs with revenue for these new assets as a The total cost of all plans for 1984,1983 and 1982 presented below:
result of evolving changes in our operations, main- was $1,096 million, $1,180 million and $1,187
tenance costs, and technology. The new method million, respectively (Dollars in millions) 1984 1983 1982
conforms to prevailing practice in industry U. S. regular and part-time employees, Pension cost:
This change did not have a material effect except employees of the recently acquired ROLM Current cost $ 490 $55' $ 504
Amortization of prior
on 1984 earnings. Corporation, are covered by noncontributory
service costs 160 197
plans which are funded by company contribu-
Total cost $ 650 $ 702 $ 701
Research, Development and Engineering tions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is
Pension cost as a % of
Research, development and engineering held for the sole benefit of employees. Monthly
compensation 8.2% 9.7% 10.9%
expenses amounted to $4,200 million in 1984, retirement benefits generally represent the
Unamortized prior service
$3,582 million in 1983 and $3,042 million in 1982. greater of a fixed amount per year of service, or
costs at December 31 . $413 $ 53^ $ 733
Included in these amounts were expenditures a percent of career compensation. For plan
of $3,148 million in 1984, $2,514 million in 1983 purposes, annual compensation for each year of Contributions $ 650 $644 $ 619
and $2,053 million in 1982 for a broad program service before January i, 1984, is defined as the
of research and development covering basic average annual compensation paid for the years As noted above, pension costs are calculated
scientific research in a variety of fields and the 1974 through 1983. Actual compensation is based on a number of assumptions. In 1984,
application of scientific advances to the develop- used thereafter. Benefits become vested upon pension costs decreased primarily as a result of
ment of new and improved products and their completion of ten years of service. two major factors: changing the rate of return
uses. In addition, expenditures for product The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter- assumption from 5.5% to 7.5% for years through
related engineering amounted to $1,052 million, mined using an actuarial cost method known 1993, and the amortization of higher than
$ 1,068 million and $989 million for the same as the Frozen Initial Liability method. Under this assumed investment gains on plan assets. These
three years. method, annual pension cost comprises both decreases were partially offset by the effect of
current cost and the amortization of prior service increased compensation on pension cost calcula-
costs which generally result from plan amend- tions. In 1983, the effect of plan improvements
ments. Current cost is determined by relating the was offset by refinements of actuarial techniques
present value of future benefits (excluding benefits and the amortization of investment gains.
related to prior service costs), less fund assets, The following table provides information
to the present value of future compensation and on the status of the U. S. retirement plans.
applying the resulting percentage to current The actuarial present value of plan benefits
compensation. Prior service costs are determined provides an estimate of that portion of the total
and frozen at the time of a plan amendment, and prospective benefit obligation applicable to
amortized over ten years in equal annual amounts. employee service to date and assumes the same

===== PAGE 38 =====
rate of return on fund assets as was used to Other Liabilities upon exercise of an option may be made using
determine pension cost. Other liabilities consist principally of IBM stock as well as cash.
indemnity and retirement plan reserves for non- Shares of IBM capital stock have been
At December 31
U. S. employees. substituted for the shares of ROLM common
(Dollars in millions) 1984
stock covering the options granted under the
Actuarial present value Stock Purchase Plan ROLM Stock Option Plan.
of plan benefits:
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan The following table summarizes stock
Earned to date:
enables employees who are not participants option transactions during 1984:
Vested $ 7,016 $ 7,154
in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital
Nonvested 280 298
Number of Shares
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10%
$ 7,Z96 $ 7,45^
of eligible compensation. The price an employee Available
including effect of pro- Under Option for Option
jected future compen- pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average
Balance at
sation levels $ 10,296 $ 10,008 market price on the date the employee has accu-
January i, 1984 . . . .. 13,186,859 5,197,873
mulated enough money to buy a share. During
Plan net assets (estimated ROLM options
market value) $ I 1,444 $ 10,388 1984, employees purchased 5,208,287 shares, 1,515,000 —
Number of individuals including 4,918,983 treasury shares, for which Options granted. . . . , 1,796,800 (1,796,800)
receiving benefits .... 20,937 17,064 $511 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, Options terminated . , (66,528) 53,862
1984,18,595,135 reserved unissued shares Options cancelled—
remain available for purchase under the Plan. SARs exercised . . . , (227,883) —
A comparison of plan net assets to these
Shares of IBM capital stock will be substi- Options exercised. . . ,. (2,099,584) —
estimates provides an indication of the company's
Balance at
tuted for ROLM common stock that may be
progress toward meeting its future commitment
purchased under the ROLM Stock Purchase Plan. December 31,1984 ,. 14,104,664 3,454,935
to pay benefits when due. However, it must
This plan will expire on March 15,1985. At Exercisable at
be recognized that the market value of plan net
December 31,1984,75,000 shares of IBM capital December 31,1984 , 9,311,247
assets available for benefits will fluctuate.
stock were reserved for purchases under this
Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under
which funds are deposited under various fiduciary- plan. No shares of IBM capital stock were issued The options exercised during 1984 were at
type arrangements, annuities are purchased under this plan in 1984. an average option price of $58.82 per share. The
under group contracts, or reserves are provided. 14,104,664 shares under option at December 31,
At December 31,1984 and December 31,1983, Stock Option Plans 1984, are at option prices ranging from $30.71 to
it is estimated that the market value of fund The stock option plans provide for granting $132.41 per share.
oflicers and other key employees options to pur-
assets and reserves of individual non-U. S. sub-
sidiaries exceeded or approximated the actuarial chase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the market Litigation
present value of plan benefits earned to date. price on the day of grant. Options have a max- In December, 1980, the Commission of the
imum duration of ten years and may be exercised European Communities (EC) filed a "Statement of
Postretirement Benefits in up to four annual installments, commencing Objections" seeking modification of certain IBM
The company and its U S. subsidiaries have one year from date of grant. business practices in the Common Market area.
medical, dental and life insurance plans for The plans are administered by the Executive On August 1,1984, IBM and the EC agreed to
retirees, the estimated costs of which are fully Compensation Committee of the Board of settle the EC's proceedings against the company.
accrued and funded with an independent trustee Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, Under the terms of a voluntary undertaking,
at the time an employee retires. These costs grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to holders IBM will provide, within specified time limits,
amounted to $222 million, $129 million and $140 of options. Such rights offer optionees the interfece information to permit the attachment of
million in 1984,1983 and 1982, respectively. alternative of electing not to exercise the related competitive products to new IBM System/370
stock option, but to receive instead an amount products, and technical information about IBM's
Certain of the company's non-U. S. sub-
in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock Systems Network Architecture (SNA) to fecilitate
sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However,
equivalent to the difference between the option the connection of competitive systems and net-
many retirees outside the U. S. are covered by gov-
price and the average market price of IBM stock works to SNA networks. IBM will not release any
ernment sponsored and administered programs.
on the date of exercising the right. proprietary product design details.
As a result, the costs of company sponsored
The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
programs outside the U. S. are not significant.
tee approval, that payment by the optionee

===== PAGE 39 =====
Segment Information
IBM operates primarily in the single industry income by industry segment and by classes of operations. Material interdependencies and
segment encompassing information-handling similar products or services within the informa- overlaps exist among IBM'S operating units and,
systems, equipment and services. This segment tion-handling segment. therefore, the information may not be indicative
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross Financial information by geographic area of the financial results of, or investments in,
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. for the years 1984,1983 and 1982 is summarized the reported areas were they independent
The schedule on the next page shows gross below to provide a better understanding of IBM's organizations.
Geographic Areas (Dollars in millions) 1984 19831 1982
United States
Gross income-Customers $ 27,371 $ 23,127 $ 19,028
Interarea transfers. . . 3 >074 2-,2-75 1,875
Total $ 30,445 $ 25,402 $ 20,903
Net earnings 3,981 3,296 2,766
Assets at December 31 . 28,394 23,322 19,028
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Gross income-Customers $ 11,996 $ 11,32.4 $ 10,260
Interarea transfers . . . 363 Ul
Total $ 12,359 $ 10,597
Net earnings 1,873 1,580 1.196
Assets at December 31 . 9,864 9,958 9.197
Americas/Far East
Gross income-Customers $ 6,570 $ 5,729 $ 5,076
Interarea transfers . . . 1,124 Z^
Total $ 7,694
Net earnings 719 562 450
Assets at December 31 . 5,600 5,14^ 4,9^5
Eliminations
Gross income $ (4,561) $ (3,2.38) $ (2,863)
Net earnings 9 47 (3)
Assets (1,050) (961) (609)
Consolidated
Gross income $ 45,937 $ 40,180 $ 34,364
Net earnings $ 6,582 $ 5,485 $ 4,409
Assets at December 31 . $ 42,808 $ 37,461 $ 3^,541
t Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform with 1984 presentation.
Non-U S. subsidiaries which operate in a local cur- In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, the world. The cost and service charges that relate
rency environment account for approximately 85% European operations accounted for approximately to asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated
of the company's non-U. S. gross income. The 95% of gross income in 1984,1983 and 1982. or amortized by the importing area. Interarea
remaining 15% is from subsidiaries and branches, Interarea transfers, consisting principally of accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
predominantly in the Americas/Ear East area, completed machines, subassemblies and parts, service charges, and the net change during the
which operate in U S. dollars or whose economic are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate year in unamortized service charges have been
environment is highly inflationary service charge, applied consistently throughout eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services
Consolidated U.S. Only
(Dollars in millions) 1984 19831 19821 1984 19831 1982-
Information-Handling:
Processors:
Sales $ 10,923 $ 9,102 $ 7,714 $ 5,975 $ 4,886 $ 4,172
Rentals 900 1,680 2,332 353 699 1,083
11,823 10,782 10,046 6,328
5,585 5,^55
Peripherals:
Sales 8,077 6,350 3,431 4,977 3,802 1,801
Rentals 3,621 4,743 5,410 1,940 2,547 ^,935
11,698 11,093 8,841 6,917 6,349 4,736
Oflice Systems/Workstations:
Sales 8,200 5,535 3,545 5,361 3,549 2,212
Rentals 1,637 2,221 2,672 884 1,241 1,418
9,837 7,756 6,217 6,245 4,790 3,630
Program Products 3,197 2,302 1,693 1,708 1,288 93 5
Maintenance Services 5,266 4,577 3,940 3,106 2,633 2,230
Other:
Sales 1,362 1,197 1,310 945 785 781
Services 620 648 689 167 135 110
Rentals 421 586 707 250 330 437
2,403 2,431 2,706 1,362 1,250 1,328
44,224 58,941 33,443 25,666 21,895 18,114
Federal Systems:
Sales 1,123 1,028 753 • 1,123 1,028 753
Services 522 148 lOJ^ 522 148 105
1,645 1,176 858 1,645 1,176 858
Other Business:
Sales 68 62 6z 60 55 55
Services — I I — 1 I
68 63 63 60 56 56
Total $45,937 $40,1 80 $34,364 $ 27,371 $23,127 $19,028
tReclassified to conform with 1984 presentation.
While IBM operates primarily in a single industry Workstations. Peripherals include printers, ments for technological enhancements to permit a
segment and manages its worldwide business copiers, storage and telecommunication devices. peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be functionally in-
as such, gross income has been categorized into Peripheral functions embedded in processors are tegrated with a display, telecommunication device
major classes of product. classified with Processors. Program Products and a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
For purposes of classifying similar products include both applications and systems software. changeability and technological progress tend to
of the Information-Handling industry segment, Maintenance Services consist of separately billed make year to year comparisons less valid than they
user programmable equipment having the charges for maintenance. Other consists prin- would be in an industry less subject to rapid change.
capability of manipulating data arithmetically or cipally of supplies and unit record equipment. Federal Systems consists of specialized infor-
logically and making calculations, in a manner Some products logically fit in more than mation-handling products and services primarily for
directly addressable by the user through the one class and are assigned to a specific class based the United States defense, space and other agencies.
operation of a stored program, has been classified on a variety of factors. Over time, products tend Other Business consists of training and
as Processors, except that small business com- to overlap, merge into or split from existing testing materials and services for school, home and
puters and intelligent workstations are included classes as a result of changing technologies, industrial use.
under Office Systems/Workstations. Typewriters market perceptions, and /or customer use. For
have also been classified under Office Systems/ example, market demand may create require-

===== PAGE 41 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1984 19831 i982t 19811 1980
For the year:
Gross income from sales.
services and rentals $ 45,937 $ 40,180 $ 34,364 $ 29,070 $ 26,21 3
Net earnings 6,582 5,485 4,409 3,610 3,397
Per share 10.77 9.04 7-39 6.14 5.82
Cash dividends paid 2,507 2,251 ^,053 2,023 2,008
Per share 4.10 3.71 3-44 3-44 3-44
Investment in rental machines . . .. 858 1,412 3,^93 4,146 3,975
Investment in plant and other property. 4,615 3,518 3,392. 2,699 2,617
Return on stockholders' equity . . . 26.5% 25.4% 23.4% 21.1% 21.1'
At end of year:
Total assets $ 42,808 $ 37,461 $ 32,541 $ 29,107 $ 26,83 I
Net investment in rental machines . . 2,950 4,866 7,599 8,220 7,470
Net investment in plant and
other property 13,413 11,276 9,964 8,577 7,730
Working capital 10,735 8,168 5,080 3,195 3,409
Long-term debt 3,269 2,674 2,851 2,669 2,099
Stockholders' equity 26,489 23,219 19,960 17,676 16,578
tAmounts have been reclassified, where applicable,
to conform with 1984 presentation.
Selected Quarterly Data
Per Share Stock Prices
Gross Gross Net
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) Income Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
1984 First Quarter $ 9,585 $ 5,630 $ 1,202 $ 1.97 $ .95 $ 125.00 $ 106.50
Second Quarter 11,199 6,666 1,623 2.65 .95 117.25 99.00
Third Quarter 10,657 6,312 1,585 2.60 1.10 128.50 104.00
Fourth Quarter 14,496 8,410 2,172 3.55 1.10 127.75 116.00
Total $ 45,937 $ 27,018 $ 6,582 $ 10.77 $ 4.10
1983 First Quarter $ 8,287 $ 5,018 $ 976 $ 1.62 $ .86 $ 104.88 $ 92.25
Second Quarter 9,590 5,776 1,343 2.22 •95 124.50 lOI.I 3
Third Quarter 9,406 5,502 1,303 2.14 •95 129.50 115.25
Fourth Quarter 12,897 7,489 1,863 3.06 •95 134.25 117.13
Total $ 40,180 $ 23,785 $5,485 $ 9.04 $ 3.71
There were 792,506 stockholders of record at March 9,1985, wiW be at the rate of $1.10 prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York
December 31,1984. During 1984, stockholders per share. This dividend will be ibm's 280th Stock Exchange composite tape for the last
received $2,507 million in cash dividends. consecutive quarterly cash dividend. two years.
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low

===== PAGE 42 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices
Although inflation-adjusted information from using estimated changes in specific losses in purchasing power during periods
is an imprecise estimate, there are circumstances prices to restate the value of inventories and other of inflation. IBM's net monetary asset position
in which it can serve to emphasize the debilitating properties at currently prevailing prices resulted in a purchasing power loss of $ 126
effects of inflation. It points out the importance (current cost). million in 1984.
of keeping inflation under control and The estimates are based upon latest The effects of translation on the changes in
sustaining public policy initiatives to encourage production costs, published price indexes, current specific prices of IBM's net assets have been
capital investment. suppliers' prices and appraised valuations. Cost estimated without any attempt to adjust the data
Rates of inflation continued to moderate of sales and depreciation expense are restated to for general rate of inflation differences among
in the United States and in many other countries reflect the change in the related asset values. various countries. The translation adjustments
throughout 1984. Despite this current positive reflect the decline in the valuation of assets
trend, the cumulative effect of inflation over the Discussion of Financial Results denominated in currencies other than the U. S.
past several years has generally eroded industry's IBM's 1984 financial results, when adjusted dollar, caused by the continued strength of the
ability to fund the replacement and expansion of for changing prices, show a reduction of $297 dollar in the world economy.
productive capacity. This has not been the case million from reported net earnings and an In dollars of average 1984 purchasing power,
with IBM. increase in stockholders' equity of $2,710 million. the increase in current costs that might have
The following supplemental information, The decrease in earnings results principally from been expected from general inflation exceeded
which has been prepared in accordance with stan- increased depreciation expense of $263 million on IBM's specific price level changes by $683 million.
dards established by the Financial Accounting plant, rental machines and other property that Management views this positively, in that tech-
Standards Board, is intended to assist users of have been valued at $ 19,146 million to approximate nology and productivity improvements substan-
financial statements in understanding the impact current cost. Inventories have been valued at tially offset inflation. Similar patterns are
of changing prices on the company's operations. $6,574 million on a current cost basis. reflected in the prior years.
The data presented below reflect the effects Companies which retain monetary assets
on earnings and stockholders' equity resulting or liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains and
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost)
As Reported in
Financial Statements In Average 1984 Dollars
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1984 1984 1983 1982 1981 1980
Gross income from sales, services and rentals . . $45,937 $45,937 $ 41,890 $ 36,979 $ 33,199 $ 33,043
Cost of sales, services and rentals 18,919 19,081 17,299 14,826 13,663 13,076
Expenses and other income 15,395 15,530 14,597 13,554 12.,553 12,891
Provision for income taxes 5,041 5,041 4,645 4,105 3,^55 3,107
Net earnings $ 6,582 $ 6,285 $ 5,349 $ 4,494 $ 3,728 $ 3,969
Loss from decline in purchasing power of
net monetary assets $ 126 $ 80 $ I $ 71 $ 343
Translation adjustments $ (878) $(1,038) $ (942) $ (836) $ (1,137) $ (287)
Change in specific prices—net of general inflation. $ (683) $ (75) $ (330) $ (1,326) $ (1,811)
Stockholders' equity (net assets) at December 31 . $ 26,489 $ 29,199 $ 27,186 $ 24,401 $ 22,555 $ 23,061
Per share information:
Earnings per share $ 10.77 $ 10.28 $ 8.82 $ 7-54 $ 6.34 $ 6.80
Cash dividends per share $ 4.10 $ 4.10 $ 3-87 $ 3.70 $ 3-93 $ 4-34
Market price at December 31 $ 123.13 $ 127.19 $ 103.58 $ 64.96 $ 85.56
Average CPi-U 311.1 298.4 289.1 272.4 246.8
The actual market price of IBM stock at December 31,
for years 1980 to 1984 was $67.88, $56.88, $96.15,
$ 122.00 and $ 123.13, respectively.

===== PAGE 43 =====
IBM Corporation *John F. Akers President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Board Committees:
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction Executive
George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Frank T. Gary, Chairman
Harold Brown Chairman, Foreign Policy Institute, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C.
John F. Akers
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J.-health care products
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Frank T. Gary Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM Amory Houghton, Jr.
William T. Coleman,Jr. Partner, O'Melveny 8c Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif, and Paris, France- William H.Moore
attorneys at law John R.Opel
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. President and Chief Executive Officer, Hospital Corporation of America, Nashville, Tenn. Paul J. Rizzo
Patricia Roberts Harris Professor of Law, George Washington University,Washington, D.C. Irving S. Shapiro
Carla Anderson Hills Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif.-
Retirement Plans
attorneys at law
Dean P. Phypers, Chairman
Amory Houghton, Jr. Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.-
George B. Beitzel
glass products
Harold Brown
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM
William T. Coleman, Jr.
Richard W. Lyman President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N. Y.
Carla Anderson Hills
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N. Y.
J. Richard Munro President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing Compensation
John R. Opel Chairman of the Board, IBM Cyrus R. Vance, Chairman
Dean P Phypers Senior Vice President, IBM Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Paul J. Rizzo Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM James E. Burke
William W. Scranton FormerU.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania Patricia Roberts Harris
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance William W. Scranton
Committee, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products Irving S. Shapiro
Cyrus R.Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law Audit
*Chief Executive Officer, effective 2/1785 Richard W. Lyman, Chairman
Amory Houghton, Jr.
J. Richard Munro
Advisory Board: John M. Fox Retired Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services
G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard &c Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law
John N. Irwin II Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
William McChesney Martin, Jr. Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Chief Executive Officer, A. P. Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark- owners of the Maersk Fleet
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman Emeritus, IBM
Officers: John F. Akers President and John E. Bertram Vice President Terry R. Lautenbach Vice President
Chief Executive Officer Charles P Biggar Vice President Thomas M. Liptak Vice President
John R. Opel Chairman of the Board James A. Bitonti Vice President Paul R. Low Vice President
Paul J. Rizzo Vice Chairman of the Board Charles E. Branscomb ... Vice President Edward E. Lucente Vice President
C. Michael Armstrong Senior Vice President Lewis M. Branscomb.... Vice President Victor R. Macdonald Vice President
8c Group Executive Walton E. Burdick Vice President *Marvin L. Mann Vice President
George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President Ronald F. Casella Vice President James F. Manning Vice President
Kaspar V Cassani Senior Vice President Carl J.Conti Vice President David E. McKinney Vice President
*Ralph E. Gomory Senior Vice President Vincent N. Cook Vice President Charles E.McKittrick,Jr. . .Vice President
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President Edward M. Davis Vice President M. Kenneth Oshman Vice President
8c General Counsel Wallace C. Doud Vice President Theodore C. Papes, Jr Vice President
Allen J. Krowe Senior Vice President,
Robert B. Dunlop Vice President Stephen B. Schwartz Vice President
Finance 8c Planning
William W. Eggleston— Vice President Patrick A. Toole Vice President
Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President
Philip D.Estridge Vice President H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. Vice President
8c Group Executive
Donato A. Evangelista ... Vice President John F. Williams Vice President
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. Senior Vice President
P. Martin Foley Vice President John H.Grady Secretary
Dean P. Phypers Senior Vice President
James J. Forese Vice President Jon WRotenstreich Treasurer
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. Senior Vice President
8c Controller Robert E. Bonchick Assistant Controller
8c Group Executive
George H. Conrades Vice President Richard T. Gerstner Vice President J. William Scruggs Assistant Controller
8c Group Executive Victor J. Goldberg Vice President John H. Stewart Assistant Controller
Frank A. Metz, Jr. Vice President William O. Grabe Vice President Thomas C. Irwin Assistant Secretary
8c Group Executive Lewis W. Gray Vice President Sidney Handler Assistant Treasurer
Paul J. Kofmehl Vice President Bruce E. Langton Assistant Treasurer
* Effective 1/29/85

===== PAGE 44 =====
Division aiid Subsidiary John E.Bertram.. President, General Products Division Paul R. Low President, General Technology Division
Chief Executives: Charles P. Biggar . President, National Service Division Edward E. Lucente President, Information Products Division
James A. Bitonti.. President, Communication Products Division M. Kenneth Oshman President, ROLM Corporation
KasparV Cassani Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ Ralph A. Pfeiffer,Jr. Chairman, IBM World Trade
Middle East/Africa Corporation Americas/Far East Corporation, and
Carl j. Conti President, Data Systems Division Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation
Vincent N.Cook.. President, Federal Systems Division Michael J. Quinlan President, National Accounts Division
Philip D. Estridge . President, Entry Systems Division Patrick A.Toole President, Systems Technology Division
David A. Finley ... President, IBM Credit Corporation Everett H. Van Hoesen President, Industrial Systems
Victor J. Goldberg. , President, National Distribution Division H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. President, System Products Division
Ralph E. Gomory . , Director of Research John F. Williams President, Real Estate and
Lewis W. Gray .... , President, National Marketing Division Construction Division
John E. Guthjr. .. , President, Science Research Associates, Inc. Robert A. Young President, IBM Instruments, Inc.
IBM World Trade Thomas J. Bata Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization,Toronto, Canada
Americas/Far East George H. Conrades. Group Executive, Asia/Pacific Group, and Vice President, IBM
Corporation Jill K. Conway President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Board of Directors: Morton Ehrlich Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla.
Ralph E. Gomory ... Director of Research and Senior Vice President, IBM
Thomas Moving President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y, and Editor-in-Chief, The Connoisseur
Ryoichi Kawai Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan
Donald R. Keough .. President,The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga.
David E.McKinney.. President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM
Raymond G. O'Neill Retired Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/ Far East Corporation
Ralph A.Pfeiffer,Jr... Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation;
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
Clarence B.Rogers,Jr., Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Takeo Shiina President, IBM Japan, Limited
Stephen T. Vehslage .., Vice President, Management Services, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Paulo D.Villares Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. Vollmer... President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela
IBM World Trade Carl-Hugo Bluhme ... Country General Manager, IBM Sweden
Europe /Middle East / Lewis M. Branscomb. Vice President and Chief Scientist, IBM
Africa Corporation Tore Browaldh Vice Chairman, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden
Board of Directors: Kaspar V. Cassani .... Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation; President, IBM Europe;
President, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM
William W.Eggleston. Vice President, IBM
Pierre L. Gousseland.. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Gilbert E.Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
PaulJ.Kofmehl President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; Directeur General, IBM Europe,
and Vice President, IBM
Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Umberto Nordio Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p.A., Rome, Italy
Georges Savy Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation
Sir Philip Shelbourne ... Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England
Otto Sturzenegger Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N. Y.
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBELCmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
Science Research Joseph M. Allen Retired Group President and Director, McGraw-Hill, Inc.
Associates, Inc. George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Board of Directors: Patricia Albjerg Graham Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass.
John E.Guth,Jr President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Wayne M. Holtzman.... President,The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex.

===== PAGE 45 =====
IBM is organized into the following groups, divisions and wholly owned subsidiaries:
Information Systems Systems Technology Division —Has worldwide programs. It also provides facility services to
and Communications Group development and product assurance and U. S. selected headquarters locations.
Communication Products Division —Has world- manufacturing responsibility for circuit pack-
Research Division —Brings scientific under-
wide development and U. S. manufacturing respon- aging used in IBM computing systems. Also devel-
standing to bear on areas of company interest
sibility for telecommunications systems, display ops and manufactures intermediate processors
through basic research and development of tech-
products, distribution industry systems and and printers and develops programming systems.
nologies of potential long-range importance.
related programming. The division serves as the
worldwide architectural and systems focal point Information Systems Group
Subsidiaries
for Systems Network Architecture activities. National Accounts Division —Has marketing
IBM Credit Corporation —Ofiers lease financing
andf ielda dministration responsibility within the
Entry Systems Division —Has worldwide devel- of IBM products, either directly or through part-
U. S. and its territories for the full standard line
opment and product management, and U. S. man- nerships, andf inancesi nstallment receivables
of IBM products. Its assigned customers are
ufacturing responsibility for IBM's general pur- resulting from sales by IBM of its information
selected large accounts with complex informa-
pose, low-cost, personal-use computer systems processing systems and equipment to customers
tion processing needs.
and related software. in the U. S. Provides consumerf inancingo f
National Distribution Division —Has marketing IBM products through IBM credit card. It also
Information Systems and Products Group responsibility within the U. S. for selected systems finances non-IBM equipment.
Information Products Division —Has worldwide and high-volume products delivered through
IBM Instruments, Inc —Has responsibility for
development and related programming and U. S. alternate channels of distribution such as IBM
IBM's efforts in the analytical instruments field,
manufacturing responsibility for typewriters, Product Centers, value added remarketers and
including marketing and servicing selected
copiers and systems for the banking industry, and authorized dealers. In addition, the division has
products in the U. S.
for peripheral equipment, including printers, responsibility for marketing IBM supplies and
copier systems, diskettes and associated supplies. accessories within the U. S. ROLM Corporation —Has worldwide develop-
ment, manufacturing and marketing responsibility
System Products Division—Has worldwide devel- National Marketing Division—Has marketing
for fully integrated computerized business
opment and U. S. manufacturing responsibility andf ielda dministration responsibility within the
communications systems including private branch
for small and intermediate-sized general purpose U. S. and its territories for the full standard line
exchanges, voice messaging systems, circuit-
systems and related programming, as well as for of IBM products. Its assigned customers are large
switched data systems, desktop products, and
low-end direct access storage devices. and medium accounts.
related applications.
National Service Division—Provides service for
Information Systems and Technology Group Science Research Associates, Inc. —Has worldwide
assigned products; manages service business
Data Systems Division —Has worldwide develop- development, publication and/or marketing
within the U. S. and its territories; and supports
ment and associated programming responsibility responsibility for a wide range of educational and
IBM's marketing efforts.
for large, complex systems, with primary empha- testing materials and services, including micro-
sis on high-performance products, plus U. S. computer software designed for use in schools,
manufacturing responsibility for those systems. Other Divisions colleges, businesses and the home.
Federal Systems Division—Provides specialized
General Products Division —Has worldwide IBM World Trade Americas / Far East Corporation —
information-handling and control systems to the
development and U. S. manufacturing responsi- With a territory extending across four continents,
Federal government for seaborne, spaceborne,
bility for storage systems, including tape units, this subsidiary is responsible for IBM operations
airborne and ground-based environments. Also
disk products and mass storage systems, program in 46 countries, including Australia, Brazil,
participates in applied research and exploratory
products and product-related programming. Canada, China and Japan.
development.
IBM World Trade Europe / Middle East! Africa
General Technology Division—Has worldwide Real Estate and Construction Division —Manages
Corporation—Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe,
development and product assurance and U. S. the selection and acquisition of sites, the design
located in Paris, it is responsible for IBM
manufacturing responsibility for logic, memory and construction of buildings and the purchase
operations in 83 countries.
and special semiconductor devices and multi-layer or lease of facilities for all IBM operations in the
ceramics. The division also procures components U. S. The division has responsibility for assessing IBM World Trade Corporation—Provides designated
for the IBM World Trade Americas/Far East real estate projects outside the U. S., as well as support to IBM World Trade organizational units.
Corporation and U. S. operating units. for IBM's worldwide energy and environmental

===== PAGE 46 =====
The folloxmng information is provided as a convenient reference for IBM stockholders:
The 1985 Annual Meeting Stock Transfer Offices: IBM Business Conduct Guidelines
of stockholders will be held in the Atlanta IBM Stockholder Relations Department is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide
Civic Auditorium, Atlanta, Ga., on Monday, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 describing the ethical and business principles that
April 29th, at 10 a.m. IBM Stockholder Relations Department the company sets for the conduct of its business.
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement IBM Equal Opportunity Programs
and Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each Co-Transfer Agents: in the United States are outlined in a document
stockholder in March. The Proxy Statement Trust General du Canada that describes programs for women, minorities
describes the items of business to be voted on HOC University Street, Montreal, Quebec, and handicapped persons, and also reviews IBM's
at the Annual Meeting and provides biographies Canada H3B 2G7 Affirmative Action efforts in the community
of the Board's nominees for director and their The National Victoria and Grey Trust Company
IBM Company Citizenship
principal affiliations with other companies 21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario,
booklet describes support programs for edu-
or organizations, as well as other information Canada M5C 1B3
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts
about the company
Registrars:
and other areas.
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting,
30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10007 IBM Operations in South Africa
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes
The First National Bank of Chicago are summarized in a report of the company's
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670 business in that country.This report describes
a report on the company, questions and answers
Montreal Trust Company the personnel principles and practices to which
of general interest, and the results of voting on
One Place Ville Marie, IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa.
items of business.
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 3L6
IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings
IBM Stock Transfer
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, are available. The report is translated into
is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations
Canada M5H 1B4 French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette
Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York,
recording in English is available for the blind.
N.Y. 10022.The department maintains stock-
The folloxving information may be obtained xvithout
holder records and can answer questions A Service for Deaf Stockholders
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Depart-
regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations
ment, _5po Madison Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022:
wishing to transfer stock or to change the Department enables deaf stockholders who have
name on a stock certificate should contact the The Form lo-K Annual Report access to a teletypewriter to communicate with
department for instructions. to the Securities and Exchange Commission the department's New York City office.
Stock certificates are valuable and should provides further details on IBM's business, includ- Stockholders who wish to use the service
be safeguarded, since replacement takes time ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the should call (212) 407-4552.
and requires payment of a surety bond premium Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April.
For Information:
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost,
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report Regarding stockholders' accounts, call
stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is (212) 407-4000.
should be notified. Registered mail should be
available in May, August and November. General questions about IBM, call
used whenever stock is mailed.
(800)426-3333.
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting
IBM Stock is Traded Outside the continental U S., call
on the New York Stock Exchange, other An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet (617) 895-2874.
exchanges in the United States and exchanges explains how stockholders may automatically
International Business Machines Corporation
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, reinvest dividends toward the purchase of
Corporate Headquarters
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make
Armonk, N.Y. 10504
the Netherlands. optional additional investments for that purpose.
IBM Technology Landmarks
are reviewed in a THINK magazine reprint: "How
one company's zest for technological innovation
helped build an industry."
G505-1984.00 PRINTED IN USA

===== PAGE 47 =====
> n w ^
o
S o c ;4
^ ^ n)
o
li i I
Z f i
^ S: ~
3
rb
C w
s c
HH C/O
0
n
0 C/l W
r-t i-t
W n
0 >- t fl
CO
r-t
0'
3