

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: IBM's operations:
- i A., - . i' VJ
1 Financial Highlights IBM's operations are primarily in the
field of information-handling systems,
2 Letter to Stockholders equipment and services to solve the
I-
increasingly complex problems of business,
5 Partnerships: government, science, space exploration,
defense, education, medicine and many
"Each party contributes; each benefits." other areas of human activity. IBM's
products include information processing
i6 1985 in Review products and systems, program products,
25 Financial Report telecommunications systems, office
Report of Management systems, typewriters, copiers, educational
Report of Independent Accountants and testing materials, and related supplies
Earnings and services. Most products are both
Management Discussion—Results of Operations leased and sold through IBM's worldwide
Financial Position marketing organizations. Selected products
Management Discussion—Financial Condition are marketed and distributed through
Funds Flow authorized dealers and remarketers.
Stockholders' Equity
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
Supplemental Financial Information
46 Directors and Officers
48 IBM Organization
Stockholder Information
Cover:
The IBM ^126 Technician Terminal, pictured
here, is a key element of General Motors'
Computerized Automotive Maintenance System
(GM-CAMS), a joint development effort of the
Buick Motor Division, other units of General
Motors, including Electronic Data Systems
(EDS), and IBM. The terminal, which consists of
an IBM Personal Computer, touch-sensitive
screen and GM and IBM-developed software, is
designed to quickly and accurately diagnose
and isolate electronic problems in GM vehicles.
When linked to GM's centralized system,
maintained by EDS, the terminal will receive
current diagnostic software and repair
information and provide GM with valuable
feedback on repair activities. Buick will begin
marketing GM-CAMS to its dealers this year. The
project with GM, a long-standing IBM customer,
represents the diversity of IBM's associations
with others in activities from research and
development to manufacturing and marketing.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
for the year ended December 31,1985
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 198s 1984
Highlights of the year:
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 50,056 45,937
Earnings before income taxes 11,619 11,623
Income taxes 5,064 5,041
Net earnings 6,555 6,582
Per share $10.67 $ 10.77
Cash dividends paid 2,703 2,507
Per share $ 4.40 $ 4.10
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 6,430 5,473
Return on stockholders' equity 22.4% 26.5%
At end of year:
Total assets $ 52,634 $ 42,808
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property. . $ 19,680 $ 16,363
Working capital $ 14,637 $ 10,735
Long-term debt $ 3,955 $ 3,269
Stockholders' equity $ 31,990 $ 26,489
Number of employees 405,535 394,930
Number of stockholders 798,152 792,506
Gross Income Net Earnings/Dividends
(Millions ofdollars) 50.056 (Millions of dollars)
45-937 6,582 6.555
40,180
34.364
29,070
2,703
2,507
1981 "82 '83 '84 '85 1981
• Dividends i Net Earnings

===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders
IBM's worldwide business health is strong $3.55 for the 1984 period. Gross income for the tained improvement, and we are approaching
despite a difficult year for the computer industry. fourth quarter of 1985 was $17,155 million, com- 1986 with caution. We are managing our costs,
An uncertain North American economy, pared with $14,496 million for the fourth quarter expenses and other resources carefully. Product
currency fluctuations, sluggish capital spending of 1984, an increase of 18.4 percent. costs and expenses in 1985 reflect increases
by our customers, and an early 1985 pause in Total orders for 1985 showed good growth in productivity over the prior year, and we expect
high-end processor installations had an adverse over the prior year. Worldwide shipments for the this direction to continue throughout 1986.
impact on IBM's performance for the full-year full year were higher than in 1984, with substan- We remain optimistic about the future of ibm and
1985. However, our quarterly results improved tially all of the growth continuing to be in the the overall computer industry. Our continuing
each quarter during 1985. non-U. S. portions of the business. Fourth-quar- investments in research, development and
Woridwide net earnings for the year ended ter shipment growth was due mostly to the facilities have positioned us for future growth.
December 31,1985, were $6,555 million, down strength of the 3090 processors and high-end
0.4 percent from 1984's earnings of $ 6,582 mil- storage devices, along with growth in type- Resilient Performance
lion. Net earnings were $10.67 per share in writers, printers and personal computers. IBM's results gained strength steadily during
1985, compared with $10.77 per share for the same There is an absence of convincing evidence the course of 1985, reaching a peak in the fourth
period in 1984. The after-tax margin was 13.1 the North American economy is showing sus- quarter. In a trying year for our industry, as well
percent in 1985, compared with 14.3 percent in
1984. Average shares outstanding were 614.1 PaulJ. Rizzo, vice chairman, John R. Opel, chamnan of the board, and John F.Akers, president and chief executive officer
million in 1985 and 611.4 million in 1984.
Earnings before income taxes were $11,619
million in 1985 and $11,623 million in 1984.
Before-tax margins were 23.2 percent in 1985 and
25.3 percent in 1984.
Worldwide gross income was $50,056
million in 1985, up 9.0 percent from the prior
year's $45,937 million. Even though currency
rates had a favorable effect in the second half of
1985, the full-year impact was still negative
compared with 1984. It is estimated that if cur-
rency rates had remained the same as in 1984,
gross income would have been $400 million
higher in 1985, yielding a revenue growth rate of
9.8 percent, while net earnings would have
been $40 million higher, yielding an increase
of 0.2 percent.
Gross income from non-U. S. operations in
1985, included in consolidated results, was
$21,545 million, up 16.0 percent from $18,566
million in 1984. Non-U. S. net earnings of $3,078
million in 1985 showed an increase of 19.0
percent over r984's earnings of $2,587 million.
As IBM anticipated, the quarter ended
December 31,1985, was particularly strong with net
earnings of $2,681 million, up 23.4 percent over
1984's fourth-quarter earnings of $2,172 million.
Per share earnings were $4.36, compared with

===== PAGE 5 =====
as for our company, ibm's resilient performance functions to our Selectric System/2000 line of deliveries still increased during 1985. Typewriter
stands out and reaffirms the fundamental typewriters and introduced economical desktop sales were also vigorous, reflecting acceptance of
soundness of our business. There is reason for printers for use with IBM and other popular the company's Selectric System/2000 line.
continued optimism about ibm's long-term pros- personal computers. Revenues from software continued as one
pects in the underlying and growing need to In their first year as merged companies, of the fastest-growing areas of our business, with
manage information and improve productivity ROLM Corporation and IBM continued to strong growth in operating systems and general-
in virtually every aspect of human activity. strengthen the relationships between their purpose and application programs.
products. ROLM added to the capabilities and
Strong Product Line enlarged the capacity of its PhoneMail voice Improved Efficiency, Productivity
In part, our confidence is built on ibm's messaging system; it is now being marketed by During 1985, we took actions to improve
product line—already strong, and growing both organizations. A new r o lm product ex- IBM's efficiency and reduce expenses, while
stronger as a result of continuing investments in tends advanced voice and data communications we continued making the investments that are
research, development and engineering. During to IBM's most powerful personal computer mod- essential to capitalize on the opportunities
1985, about half of our shipments came from els and can provide PC users with high-speed before the company.
products newly introduced or significantly access to ibm office systems programs stored in The skills, experience and loyalty of IBM
improved within the past 24 months. This ex- central computers. employees are among the company's most im-
tends a record of sustained innovation that is To assist customers in linking their oper- portant assets. While improving efficiency, we
notable for any company, and essential in our ations—within an office, a building or an entire maintained our long record of full employment
highly competitive industry. organization—the company added new commu- in 1985, through a combination of workload
For customers with large-scale computing nications capabilities. The i bm Token-Ring Net- balancing, retraining and prudent controls on
requirements, for example, new 3090 processors work is a local area network with the potential of hiring. We expect to continue these actions in
ofter improved price/performance and excep- attaching large numbers of personal computers 1986. Early in 1985, we also put stringent expense
tional fiexibility.They can perform significantly and devices from ibm, r o lm or others. It is controls in place. As a result, we were able to
faster than i bm's previous top-of-the-line sys- a key building block in our continuing commit- reduce spending in many categories of expense
tems, while an optional extension can operate ment to telecommunications and to helping well below the rates of the prior year.
specialized programs for engineers and customers to integrate their office systems. To improve service to customers and
scientists at even greater speeds. increase efficiency, IBM reorganized its U. S.
IBM pioneered and continues to lead in Areas of Growth marketing operations in 1985. Responsibility for
technology and quality with the industry's most As the North American economy softened managing the distribution of IBM products
advanced high-capacity disk storage devices. during 1985, much of IBM's growth came in our through authorized dealers and remarketers was
Models introduced last year offer up to 5 billion operations in Europe, the Asia/Pacific area and consolidated within a single division. And,
characters of storage, twice as much as before. Latin America, where our business was up sub- effective January i, 1986, two restructured
New software introduced last year spans the stantially from the previous year. marketing units began offering the full line of
range from programming that improves the per- Installations of large-scale processors in- IBM products to customers within their
formance of multiple operating systems to a creased sharply in the latter part of 1985, as a respective geographic areas.
product for use by researchers in the developing result of our ability to improve shipment sched- As a result of our history of continuing
field of artificial intelligence. ules for new 3090 systems. This achievement is a investments in more efficient plant and equip-
During 1985, we added to our desktop com- credit to the many men and women of ibm ment, unit manufacturing costs reached an
puting options. Lower-cost and higher-capacity who developed and then delivered—well ahead all-time low last year. Although we selectively
models joined the industry's broadest line of of original schedules—a system of exceptional reduced planned expenditures during 1985, ibm
compatible personal computers. In addition, PC quality. invested an additional $10.8 billion in research,
capability was extended to new models of our Shipments of high-capacity disk storage development and engineering, and plant,
System/36 and Series/1 processors, providing devices also showed strong growth. While property and equipment. We expect these invest-
customers with even greater flexibility in meet- demand for ibm Personal Computers did not ments, and the improved productivity that is
ing their office computing needs. We added new climb as steeply as in the past several years, their direct result, to continue in 1986.

===== PAGE 6 =====
MCI to Acquire SBS depends on the United States setting its eco- People are Key
During the year, IBM, Aetna Life & nomic house in order, beginning with reduction In large measure, IBM'S prospects rest with
Casualty and MCI Communications Corporation of the federal deficit. our people, who have confirmed once again that
reached agreements in principle under which Debt service on the deficit depletes re- they are remarkably energetic, resourceful and
MCI would acquire substantially all the assets sources that could be more productively applied dedicated, whether in adverse circumstances or
and operations of Satellite Business Systems (SBS). to strengthening our economy and our society. expansive ones. We are deeply grateful for their
Under the agreements, IBM has purchased Because it has kept interest rates higher than continued support and mindful that they are
Aetna's interests in SBS. MCI will issue approxi- they would otherwise have been, the deficit also the best assurance of the company's continued
mately 47 million shares of common stock has been a significant factor in the overly strong prosperity.
to IBM in exchange for the SBS assets and oper- U. S. dollar, relative to other currencies. The
January 28,1986, by order of the Board of Directors
ations. Completion of the merger is subject to the effect on the economy and on many of our cus-
approval of the FCC and review under the pro- tomers is double-edged: a flood tide of imports
visions of the Hart/Scott/Rodino Act. into the United States, with profound conse-
John R.Opel John F Akers
IBM has a continuing interest in the tele- quences for our industrial sector; and a significant Chairman of the Board President and
communications services industry. We believe disadvantage for U. S. companies which depend Chief Executive Officer
that combining the operations of SBS and on export business, as the strong dollar makes
MCI will strengthen both organizations, as well their products less competitive in other countries.
as competition in the industry, and tele- The dollar's strength has recently mod-
communications customers will benefit. erated, and the Congress' renewed interest in
deficit reduction is a positive first step. We all will
Prospects for the Future have a stake in the difficuh choices that must be
Varying rates of economic growth and capi- made over the next several years to achieve
tal investment, changes in international trade meaningful and lasting change.
and tax policies and currency fluctuations may
continue to affect near-term growth for our in- Continuing Partnerships
dustry. However, we continue to be optimistic Just as no country is an island in today's
about IBM's long-range prospects. global marketplace, an international company
We believe demand for our products and like IBM continues to rely on many interdepen-
services has always been driven by scientific and dent resources and relationships as we partic -
technological progress; by continuous improve- ipate in the growth of this remarkable industry.
ments in price/performance and quality; by Our associations may be with customers,
development of new products that help make our suppliers, remarketers or university researchers.
customers more efficient in everything they do; The results may be innovative products and
and by the steady emergence of new problems services to meet new opportunities, advances in
to be solved to better the lives of people science and technology, or ways of demonstrat-
around the world. ing that we are a responsible and responsive
We see no changes in any of those long- citizen of the countries and communities around
range fundamentals, however uneven rates of the world in which we do business. Each party
growth may be in the short term. contributes; each benefits.
The following pages describe the range of
Deficit Reduction these relationships. Some are traditional and
While we are optimistic about the future, long-standing, while others are distinctly new.
our experience in 1985 makes it clear that much All of them point the way to our future.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Partnerships:
'Each party contributes; each benefits.'
W
ith worldwide revenue projected to surpass
one trillion dollars in the 1990s,
the information-handling industry may
become the world's largest. Within that opportunity,
there are countless needs to be met and solutions
to be found—for business, government and individuals.
To participate fully in all aspects of this growth,
IBM is expanding existing relationships, and forming
new ones, with others whose skills, resources
and interests complement our own. The results are
already evident across the range of the company's
activities, and in the ways information technology is
being expanded to respond to economic and
social needs around the world.
At the National Institute for Deaf Children in Paris, children learn to speak
more clearly with the aid of a speech training system developed at the
IBM France Scientific Center Here, a child working with a therapist matches
his speech to a prototype pattern displayed on an IBM Personal Computer
screeii. Visual feedback allows the child to adjust his pitch until he makes the
correct sound.

===== PAGE 8 =====
An Oakland, (mH/., shipping coiirern, operating in
the Asia-Parifir basin, uses modern ships and
eqinpineiil, as luell as IBM and HOLMpiodurls, lo cut
days o/f normal shipping schednles. The company's
most recent acquisition, an IBM ^^oijo processor, further
expands its information-handling capabilities.
F
^or many customers, IBM is
a partner of long-standing.
As the management and
communication of information
become even more deeply integrated
into their operations, the need for
customers and IBM people to work
closely together grows as well. While
products and programs, service
and support continue to take new
forms, the objective remains the
same—improved productivity at
an affordable cost.
Buyers from a department store chain based in Los
Angeles learn to use systeins that improve operations
such as inventory management. The company links its
six department store divisions and four specialty
store chains through a centralized data processing
center The netiuork includes iy,ooo terminals in 300
locations luith access to centralized data bases.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Representatives of the Italian textile industry and
IBM programmers developed a program that allows
manufacturers to view simulated woven cloth patterns
on a color display screen. This eliminates the need
for costly preproduction samples and allows a more
rapid response to customer requirements.
P
artnerships with industry provide the insight
into new opportunities and the products
and services to respond to them. The goal may
be participating in the growth of telecommunications
in Japan, or creating a product that helps preserve the
vitality of a centuries-old Italian industry. From
joint ventures to cooperative development projects,
IBM works with organizations in ways that can
be both entrepreneurial and international in scope.
IBM Japan and Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
Corporation (NTT) announced a joint venture
to provide telecommunications services and other
products. The worldwide telecommunications market
is expected to triple over the next lo years.

===== PAGE 10 =====
An athletic shoe manufacturer uses CADAM® a
program for computer augmented design and
manufacturing developed by CADAM, Inc. and licensed
by IBM, to efficiently design footiuear (lADAM is one
example of the many products, programs and
services integrated luith IBM ofjerings to fmwide
.mlutions to customers'sfjecialized needs.
Tl o help meet customers' needs, IBM relies on more than
100,000 suppliers worldwide. From widely used components
to specialized software products, their contributions
become part of a comprehensive IBM solution for requirements
in banking, retailing and other industries.
At the same time, IBM reaches more customers in more places
in partnership with a worldwide network of companies that
remarket its products. They include retail dealers in typewriters
and personal computers; firms which tailor IBM products
to perform specialized tasks by adding their own hardware
or software or a combination of both; and even existing customers,
who remarket IBM products to their own agents, dealers
or affiliates.
IBM engineers and product support people visited more
than 2,200 dealers last year to demonstrate the
capabilities of the company's new Personal Ccmiputer
printers. Authorized dealers such as this one in Atlanta
reach millions of potential customers for IBM products.

===== PAGE 11 =====
IBM Germany is involved in a joint effort with the
University of Karlsruhe to develop a prototype
university network and to explore new approaches to
university education. The network, which includes
equipment loaned by IBM, will link a variety
of computer systems from differeiit manufacturers.
T Xniversity research into the
I technologies that underpin
^ ^^ our industry is one aspect of
IBM's partnerships with the academic
and scientific communities. Others
include support of a supercomputer
research facility and the study of
manufacturing systems.
The company participates in
research that both adds to the world's
basic store of knowledge and solves
real and urgent human problems.
Results may shed new light on the
nature of matter or improve satellite
image processing for agricultural
and environmental purposes in
Latin America, Spain and Africa.
Dk Kenneth Wilson, Nobel Laureate and head of
the Center for Theory and Simulation in Science and
Engineering at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.,
directs efforts to establish a supercomputer facility there.
One ofpve such projects sponsored by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) in the U.S., the effort at
Cornell also involves Neiu York State, Floating Point
Systems and IBM.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Stiulinil.s (it the I 'lixni League Job Tniiuiug ('.enter in
San Diego, C.al if., prepare for jobs i)i areas such as
word proeessing anrl data e)itry. It is one of major
renters loeated throughout the United States, to
which IBM has provided equipinetd, traiiiing materials
(Did loaned instructors. The coders have trained
nunc than i^.ooo people si)ice i<-j68.
I
BM strives to meet local needs
as a responsible corporate citizen
in the 132 countries and many
communities around the world in
which it does business. Frequently,
the company joins in partnerships
with government, education,
community-service and cultural
organizations, IBM also encourages
and assists employees in their
individual efforts by contributing
funds, equipment—and sometimes
the full-time services of employees
themselves. As the community
benefits, so do IBM, its customers
and its people.
,4// actress is made up for her part in one of a series
of contemporary CJiine.se dramas being spon.sored by
IBM in Ho)ig Kong

===== PAGE 13 =====
1985 in Review
Large systems and powerful desktop computers to 128 million characters of central storage, and engineering applications. Enhancements
and workstations were among a stream of can process information almost twice as fast as included: a system assist that gives customers
innovative information-handling products that the model 200. improved performance when using multiple
strengthened IBM's product line in 1985. Both 3090 models can be equipped with an operating systems; a software facility that
Advanced technologies extended the speed expanded storage that allows automatic transfer increases the availability of certain data base
and capacity of mid-range systems and storage of data to and from central storage at speeds and data communications programs; and a
devices, while automated manufacturing tech- significantly faster than those available with con- multitasking facility that enables customers to
niques produced high-quality, price-competitive ventional input/output devices. run scientific and engineering applications more
displays, printers and typewriters. New products A vector processing facility for the new efficiently. Also introduced was a fiber optic
designed to meet the specialized needs of the high-end computers also was introduced in 1985. channel-extender link that enables computer
scientific and engineering communities also The enhancement enables the processors to peripherals to be installed further from the
were announced during the year. run many engineering and scientific programs central computer.
The IBM Token-Ring Network and other up to three times faster than a 3090 processor In August, the first 3090 model 200 was
telecommunications products made it easier for without the feature. shipped to a customer, nearly three months
customers to tie together an array of informa- The 3090 also features a unique service- ahead of schedule. Planned first shipment of the
tion products. ability facility that continually monitors the sys- model 400 processor was advanced to the fourth
IBM continued to invest considerable tem's functions. Should a problem develop, quarter of 1986.
resources in research and development efforts the facility informs the user, then with the user's
under way at its research centers and labora- authorization, automatically reports the Storage devices
tories to ensure a continuing flow of products. detected problem to an IBM support center. Two new models in the IBM 3380 family of
The company expanded its commitment Improvements to two of the operating disk storage devices featured disk technology
to community programs as well, strengthening systems for large computers extended their and recording head improvements. The
partnerships in such areas as education and function across a range of business, scientific extended capability models offer users of large
job training. computers nearly a 15 percent performance
improvement when compared with earlier
Large computer systems models. The larger unit has twice the maximum
Introduction of two new high-end proc- storage capacity of previous models.
essors and enhancements to the IBM 308X Up to four of the extended capacity models
computer series extended the power and price/ can be tied together, enabling a data processing
performance options available to customers operation to double its storage capacity without
with large and rapidly growing information proc- requiring additional floor space, power or air
essing requirements. conditioning.
The IBM 3090 model 200 processor, Also announced were expanded cache
announced in February, contains two central memories for the IBM 3880 models 21 and 23
processors and up to 64 million characters of storage control units. Cache storage is an inter-
central storage. The system can execute instruc- mediate storage area that speeds the flow of data
tions almost twice as fast as a comparable between storage devices and the computer.
IBM 3081 processor in commercial applications
and about three times faster in scientific and Mid-range systems
engineering applications. The model 400 IBM extended the computing options
processor, with four central processors and up The IBM 3090 ynodel 200 processor features emitter- available to customers with medium-size infor-
coupled logic circuit technology that contributes to the mation processing requirements, introducing
improved performance of the new system.
desktop versions of its System/36 and Series/1
computers. Numerous enhancements to other
mid-range systems also were announced.

===== PAGE 14 =====
A leadvig cosmetics manufacturer in Japan has
installed an IBM 3^80 disk storage device to facilitate
order tracking and billing.
The IBM System/36 PC, a powerful desktop In addition, special channel attachment drive; the other features two diskette drives.
computer directed at the data processing needs devices and supporting programming make it Both models can be upgraded to include a fixed-
of departments within a large organization, possible for Series/1 customers with networks of disk drive.
combines a compact System/36 processor and a I BM Personal Computers to use their Series/1 A new model of the IBM Personal Com-
directly attached IBM Personal Computer, PC XT® processors as "gateways'" to communicate with puter AT features a fixed-disk drive that can
or Personal Computer AT®. The system enables other PC networks or host computers. accommodate 50 percent more information than
customers to use programs and data from was possible with eariier IBM PCs. The new AT
both the System/36 and PC families, and to com- Personal computers can be equipped with a second fixed-disk drive,
municate with other System/36 or host com- Low-cost models of the IBM PC XT giving the computer a maximum capacity
puters. The computer also can support up to four and powerful PC workstations were among the of more than 60 million characters of storage.
locally attached workstations. personal computer products introduced. For users with more sophisticated informa-
Two desktop versions of the Series/1 com- Two new versions of the IBM PC XT tion-handling requirements, the IBM 3270
puter enable customers to employ existing give customers additional choices in selecting Personal Computer AT doubles the processing
Series/l applications or extend Series/1 networks a personal computer to fit their needs. One power of the eariier 3270 PC workstation. Two
to smaller operations within their organizations. configuration is equipped with a single diskette other 3270 Personal Computer AT workstations
Based on the 1 BM Personal Computer AT and a
modified model of the IBM PC XT, the low-end
Series/1 models make use of a central processing
unit fabricated on a single integrated logic chip.
Customers with larger System/36 proc-
essors can increase the power and flexibility of
their systems by adding optional memory cards.
Increased use of high-speed bipolar tech-
nology and a high-density logic module has
resulted in a more cost-efficient mid-range ver-
sion of the System/38 processor. The new model
18 delivers 10 percent better performance at a
12 percent lower price.
Programs that enable the System/38 to
function in office networks, and equipment
enhancements that allow users to double the
number of workstations they can locally attach
to their systems also were introduced. A major (ierman auto manufacturer uses IBM
Series/1 computers tied to two IBM 4^61 processors
An innovative programming package—
for assembly line control ami communication of
VM/SP-Entry—extends the power and flexibility
last- minute order changes.
of IBM's VM operating system to customers
with IBM 4361 processors for about half the cost
of earlier VM products.

===== PAGE 15 =====
can use data from System/370 host computers to available 34 new software products for use with transmit text, data and graphics information
create and display color charts, diagrams and IBM PCs.The new offerings include a i6-program among their offices and operations.
drawings as well as text. biology and a four-program physics series, The IBM Token-Ring Network is a high-
IBM Japan expanded the IBM Multistation along with additions to IBM's Earth Science and speed local area network designed initially to
computer family, announcing the IBM 5540 Private Tutor series. connect IBM PCs within a building or in a cam-
and 5560 Multistations and new models of the pus environment. The network facilitates a user's
IBM 5550 Multistation, offering enhanced color Displays ability to share information, printers and
graphics and increased fixed-disk capacity. A new color display station and two low- devices and files with other users.
An English-language version of the IBM cost terminal products extended the data entry To meet the need for efficient, quality
Personal Computer jx also became available options available to customers in 1985. service in the rapidly growing field of information
in several Far East countries. The IBM 3179 model G display, the first 3179 processing networks, a new network support
display with color graphics capabilities, is designed center was established in Atlanta.
PC program products for use with IBM System/370 host computers. IBM Japan introduced a nationwide infor-
IBM extended the capabilities of its Personal The IBM 3161 and 3163 display stations mation network service for customers who are
Decision series with the announcement in 1985 are inexpensive, compact workstations featuring establishing enhanced information networks for
of several enhancements. These enhancements built-in capability to emulate both non-IBM specific industries. The Network Management
provide the business/professional user with terminals and IBM display stations. Service also can benefit companies offering data
greater flexibility in a wide range of data process- bank and remote computing services.
ing applications. Four new products that extend Telecommunications products The IBM 3708 network conversion unit
the capabilities of the IBM Assistant series A token-ring network and several enables terminals, PCs and workstations to com-
also were introduced. other telecommunications products introduced municate more easily with host computers using
The company expanded its offering in the past year make it easier for customers IBM's Systems Network Architecture. Customers
of educational application programs, making with decentralized information systems to with IBM 3710 network controllers can take
advantage of the same conversion function with a
new communications adapter.
A new terminal multiplexer allows
IBM 3270 PC terminals to be connected directly
to control units up to 6,000 feet away using
the IBM Cabling System. Modems designed for
use with PCS, display stations and non-IBM
terminals also were introduced.
Typewriters and printers
Four new models in the IBM Selectric®
System/2000 typewriter family provide added
flexibility in keying, editing and storing docu-
ments for customers with large text processing
requirements.The IBM Wheelwriter® Systems/20
and 40 and the IBM Quietwriter® Systems/20
and 40 feature detached keyboards with cursor
controls that facilitate text editing. They also
include a display that shows both text and
A fashionable restaurant in Paris uses a terminal
banking application offered by a major French bank to
handle its daily transactions. The videobank
application operates on an IBM videotex system.

===== PAGE 16 =====
paper-feed mechanism that allows the use of edge bases, vm Programming in Logic can
single-sheet paper, multipart forms or envelopes be used for artificial intelligence research
without removing continuous forms already and development.
in the printer.
The IBM Color Jetprinter is a seven-color Consumer/Financial systems
inkjet printer that can print on 8'/2-by-ii-inch The IBM 4700 Personal Computer work-
transparencies, some coated papers and most station combines the productivity benefits
standard bond papers. Designed for the graphics of PC applications with products and programs
requirements of the business professional, designed specifically for the financial services
the Jetprinter can produce color charts, graphs, industry. The 4700 PC enables bank employees
spreadsheets and text. at a remote office to extract information from data
The I BM 3812 Pageprinter, a tabletop printer bases in the firm's main computer, and modify
for PCs and larger ibm computers, uses electro- the information locally using PC applications.
photographic technology to print up to 12 pages The IBM 4702 processor expands the ability
a minute. The printer can be shared by as many of remote offices to carry out many typical bank-
as eight PC users in an office or department or by ing transactions while on-line with the institu-
A special keyboard for the Chinese-language version users on an ibm local area network. tion's main computers.
of the IJiM 5550 Multistation enables customers to Using IBM's Advanced Function Printing A fault-tolerant system, the IBM System/88
enter CJiinese characters into the system.
software, the i bm 3820 laser printer can provide is designed to ensure continuous system
distributed printing of text, graphics, forms and availability for customers with critical on-line
operator prompts, and a battery back-up that digitized images on both sides of a sheet of transaction processing requirements. The
protects the memory if power is disrupted. standard bond paper. The unit can be connected System/88 uses redundant components and spe-
Both System/40 models provide additional func- to medium and large processors. cial programming to provide uninterrupted
tions through pluggable application program
cartridges. Removable storage cartridges Engineering and scientific products
offer users added storage capacity. Sophisticated analytical equipment and
A graphics model of the ibm Quietwriter expert system program products were among
printer was introduced in 1985. It offers cus- the offerings announced last year for the
tomers high-resolution graphics that match the engineering and scientific communities.
sharpness and clarity of the unit's text printing. The iR/38, an advanced, benchtop
A low-cost, compact version of the IBM spectrometer developed and marketed by IBM
Wheelprinter also was announced. Instruments, Inc., is a high-performance
An economical new electronic typewriter instrument for repetitive chemical analyses. The
provides customers with much of the advanced IBM 9630 gas chromatograph is a powerful
function available with eariier models of the analytical tool designed for use in the chemical,
Selectric System/2000 typewriter family. The pharmaceutical and food industries.
IBM Actionwriter 1 typewriter features a built-in In August, IBM announced two program
microprocessor to assist typists with many products that can help a variety of computer
commonly used functions. The typewriter also users, including engineers and scientists,
has a correction memory that facilitates create expert systems for tasks ranging from oil
minor copy editing. exploration to banking. Expert systems are The IBM Proprinter, introduced in 198^, offers
personal computer users the option of printing single
Two low-cost, desktop printers that can a new type of computer application that
sheets of paper and envelopes without re^noving
produce high-quality text and graphics for per- makes use of large stores of information to find
computer paper already in the printer.
sonal computer users were announced. The solutions to problems beyond the scope of
IBM Proprinter attaches to both IBM and other conventional computer programming. Expert
widely used personal computers. It features System Environment/VM is a develop-
complete graphics capabilities and a special ment tool for constructing and using knowl-

===== PAGE 17 =====
systems support to workstation-intensive indus- of IBM's industrial computer products. The Administration (NASA) in 1985. One contract
tries such as banking, transportation and re- IBM 7531 and 7532 computers can be used for covers the definition and preliminary design of
tailing. The new system includes processors and tasks ranging from machine monitoring to the data management system for the first
programming developed and manufactured by distributed numerical control processing and permanently manned U. S. space station. The
Stratus Computer, Inc., under an agreement that production control. second calls for IBM to upgrade the computer
provides IBM non-exclusive remarketing rights Also announced were an industrial color system in the Mission Control Center at NASA'S
for selected Stratus products. graphics display designed for use in manu- Johnson Space Center in Houston.
facturing environments, and program products
Manufacturing systems that facilitate maintenance scheduling and ROLM Corporation
Automated manufacturing processes re- communications with programmable controllers ROLM Corporation has been awarded a
ceived added attention in the last year as several and other plant applications. NASA contract valued at nearly $15 million to
new industrial computers and manufacturing install a new business communications system at
software products were introduced. Federal Systems Division the Johnson Space Center. The contract calls
An entry-level model of the IBM 5531 indus- The Federal Aviation Administration for ROLM to install an advanced communications
trial computer enables small manufacturers to (FAA) awarded the company's Federal Systems control system, digital telephones and desktop
run many of their information-handling applica- Division (FSD) a contract to upgrade the com- telecommunications devices, and a supporting
tions on the manufacturing floor. Designed for puter systems at the agency's 20 air traffic control cable and fiber optics distribution system.
extended operation in areas prone to harsh con- centers around the U. S. Part of an FAA effort to ROLM introduced an enhanced version of
ditions, the new unit can serve as an equipment modernize the air traffic system, the processors its Central Attendant Service that enables
controller, a tracking terminal for work in will aid flight controllers monitoring and customers to provide better telephone service to
progress or a supervisory workstation. directing aircraft flying between U. S. airports. callers at a lower cost. Enhancements to the
Two more powerful industrial computers FSD also received two major contracts ROLM PhoneMail voice messaging system that
extend the performance available to customers involving the National Aeronautics and Space increase its capacity, reliability and flexibility
also were announced.
ROLM'S Juniper II, a voice/data com-
munications product which complements IBM
Personal Computers, offers users voice and data
features, including terminal emulation, one-
touch log-on for data calls, two-way speakerphone
and powerful digital telephone functions.
Juniper II also allows PC users to transfer infor-
mation to and from an IBM host computer
or another PC at rates significantly higher than a
standard modem.
The divestiture of ROLM'S Mil-Spec Com-
puter Division was completed in June. The
division was acquired by the Loral Corporation
of New York City. Sale of the unit fulfills the
terms of the consent decree that ROLM and IBM
entered into with the U. S. Department of Justice
Air traffic controllers wulergo trahiing at the as a precondition of the companies' merger.
Federal Aviation Administration Technical Clenter
near Atlantic City, N.J. IBM has been awarded
Research and development
a major co7itract to upgrade the computers suf>f)orti'ng
A new one-million-bit computer memory
the system.
chip that operates twice as fast as the company's
previously announced one-million-bit chip

===== PAGE 18 =====
This form is a fractal representation of a mathe-
matical object called a Mandelbrot set. IBM mathemati-
cian Benoit Mandelbrot recently was recognized for
originating the theory of fractal geometry.
University in Ithaca, N.Y Supercomputers are
specially configured systems used to investigate
complex problems that could take years to
complete using conventional methods. Jointly
sponsored by the university, the National
Science Foundation (NSF), New York State,
Floating Point Systems and IBM, the Cornell
project is one of five supercomputer efforts
initiated by the NSF to ensure that the American
research community has access to advanced
scientific computer technology.
has been fabricated by engineers at IBM'S individual atoms on the surface of a sample Benoit Mandelbrot, IBM Fellow and
Burlington, Vt., laboratory. The experimental material. The unit creates a profile of the surface originator of fractal geometry, was awarded the
chip occupies two-thirds the space of the prior under study by measuring and adjusting to Barnard Medal of Meritorious Service to Science
memory chip. Sample chips have been fabricated variations in a current being passed between the by Columbia University. The award is presented
on existing production lines and operated sample and a probe traveling just above its sur- once every five years on the recommendation
at speeds that make them among the fastest face. The latest development in a microscopy of the National Academy of Sciences. A major
megabit memory chips ever reported. technique originally invented by the IBM scien- development in 20th-century science, fractal
Researchers at IBM'S Yorktown, N.Y., tists in 1981, the compact tunneling microscope
research center have fabricated the densest has an added advantage in that it can be aimed
integrated circuits yet reported on two types of at particular segments of a sample with the
experimental integrated circuit chips. The novel aid of a conventional microscope.
fabrication process allows scientists to shrink Yorktown researchers are working with
electronic circuits into an area i6 times smaller scientists from New York University's Courant
than possible with current semiconductor Institute of Mathematical Science in New York
manufacturing technology. The technique is an City to design an experimental, highly parallel
important step toward the fabrication of indi- computer to serve as a research tool for advanced
vidual chips capable of storing up to i6 million computer studies.The experimental machine,
bits of in formation. known as RP3, will consist of up to 512 proc-
A new technique that provides a lo-fold essors, linked in parallel and connected to as
improvement in the accuracy of testing circuit many as two billion characters of main memory.
delays on very-large-scale integration (VLSI) Initial focus of the project is the viability of using
chips has been developed by an engineer at large-scale parallelism—many processors
IBM's East Fishkill, N.Y., laboratory. Circuit working on a single task—to address a variety of
delays are the time intervals that it takes to turn complex problems, including computer-aided
on and off a particular circuit on an integrated design, expert systems and other advanced Scientists of the CERN European Laboratory for
circuit chip. The new technique enables artificial intelligence projects. Particle Physics in Sioitzerland are installing an
IBM Token-Ring Netioork to control accelerators
engineers to measure within trillionths of a Over the next five years, IBM will provide
used in atomic particle studies.
second the speeds of integrated circuits. more than $30 million in products and support
A compact scanning tunneling microscope to a supercomputer facility established at Cornell
developed by scientists at IBM'S Zurich research
laboratory in Switzerland lets researchers view

===== PAGE 19 =====
company called SEIAF. The joint venture will Reorganization
market products for flexible and integrated auto- IBM announced a major reorganization of
mation of manufacturing processes. The joint its U.S. marketing divisions during the fall of
venture firm also will address approaches 1985. The new structure, which began operations
for connecting and integrating various areas on January i, 1986, is designed to provide
of factory automation. customers quality support and service while
making efficient use of the company's resources.
European Networking Center Under the realignment, divisions that mar-
IBM Europe has established a European keted IBM's products to traditional customer
Networking Center in Heidelberg, Germany, to accounts were reorganized into two geographic
carry out advanced systems communications marketing divisions that will market the com-
projects. The center will permit I BM engineers, pany's product line to customers within their
working with other European scientists, to respective geographic areas.
perform studies in telecommunications and Field service operations were realigned to
networking with particular focus on Open Sys- be symmetrical with the new marketing
tems Interconnection (OSI) applications. organizations. The division which directs the
Automated manufacturing equipment is helping Based on a reference model for computers company's marketing efforts through alternate
IBM's Boigny, France, plant reduce the cost and improve developed by the International Organization of channels realigned its value-added remarketing
the quality of print ribbons produced at the plant.
Standardization, OSI is designed to permit sys- and authorized dealer operations into a single
tems operating under different architectures to sales organization.
geometry is based on the principle that natural exchange data. IBM has been a major contributor The company continued its efforts to
forms tend to repeat themselves. It is being to the development of OSI and has implemented decentralize decision-making and improve
applied across a spectrum of scientific disciplines. OSI standards in several recent product offerings. efficiency, realigning one of its major business
groups into two new groups. One is responsible
Joint ventures for developing and manufacturing large
IBM Japan and Nippon Telegraph and processors, storage systems and associated pro-
Telephone Corporation, Japan's domestic tele- gramming; the other, logic, memory and
phone company, established a joint venture other semiconductor devices and packaging.
company in Japan to market telecommunica-
tions products and services. The firm has been New facilities
named Nippon Information and Communica- In line with IBM's goals of growing with
tion Corporation. Among planned products is a the industry and being the low-cost producer,
telecommunications system that will provide the company continued to invest in new
customers access to remotely located computers manufacturing and development facilities.
via telephone lines for exchange of text, graphics One of the newest facilities, a state-of-the-
and computerized images. art production plant in Charlotte, N.C., is designed
In June, IBM, Aetna Life & Casualty and specifically for volume production of high-quality,
MCI Communications Corporation announced low-cost products. The facility, which recently
an agreement under which MCI would acquire began manufacturing the IBM Proprinter, makes
substantially all the assets and operations of use of automation throughout its manufacturing
Satellite Business Systems, SBS had been owned operations. A series of special control programs
jointly by IBM and Aetna Life & Casualty. directs the production process, which was
In September, IBM Italy and the ELSAG-Stet
Group completed the formation of a joint venture
Staff at IBM s European Networking Center in
Heidelberg (iermatiy, revieius early results of an
experimental netiuorking study.

===== PAGE 20 =====
designed to eliminate the need to maintain a Cameras magnify print samples at IBM's typewriter
parts inventory. andpriyiter manufacturing plant in Lexington, Ky.
Character images are compared with those stored
During the year, IBM invested $ 6.i bilhon in
in a computer system., ensuring the detection
new plant, property and equipment. More than
of flaws in print quality.
5 million square feet of additional plant and lab-
oratory space were completed. Another 4.8 mil-
lion square feet of space were under construction.
Projects completed during 1985 included a
semiconductor manufacturing building in Education support curricula, faculty development and
East Fishkill, N.Y.; manufacturing buildings in IBM increased its support for education, and research into methods for making more efficient
Kingston, N.Y., and Rochester, Minn.; a particularly for programs designed to help uni- use of information systems in industry.
laboratory facility in Yamato, Japan; and expan- versities keep pace with evolving technologies. Planning grants were awarded to another 36
sions of the Greenock, Scotland, plant and The company also increased its support to U. S. universities to assist them in developing pro-
the Zurich Research Laboratory. educational institutions with large minority and posals for research and graduate-level curricula
disadvantaged enrollments, and to efforts aimed in the materials and processing sciences. This
Employee suggestions at increasing computer literacy among school- spring, up to 12 schools will be selected to receive
The IBM Suggestion Plan again had a posi- children. grants of cash and i BM equipment to support their
tive impact on the company's productivity in Donations of cash and equipment were proposed research and instructional programs.
1985 as cost-saving ideas submitted under the awarded to 13 universities in the U. S. for More than 100 IBM employees were granted
plan yielded savings of more than $125 million. programs to enhance graduate-level education Faculty Loan leaves last fall to teach or give
Approximately 30,000 employees whose ideas in the management of information systems. full-time administrative assistance to colleges,
were implemented under the Suggestion Plan Under the program, each university will receive universities and high schools with large minority,
also shared the benefits, earning more than a cash grant and IBM equipment and software to handicapped or disadvantaged enrollments,
$18 million in cash awards.
Affirmative action
IBM continued its commitment to
affirmative action in employment and advance-
ment in 1985. Of the more than 10,250 new
employees hired in the U. S. last year, over 45
percent were women and over 22 percent were
minorities. About 5,200 women and 3,600
minority employees held management positions
at year end, and of these almost 500 women
and 500 minorities were in the top 20 percent
of U.S. management jobs.
The company also continued its support to
minority-owned businesses, purchasing more
than $125 million in products and services from
some 850 minority-owned firms in 1985. IBM
also made purchases totaling over $70 million A school in Hong Kong uses a Personal Computer
cluster network provided by IBM to enable students
from more than 700 firms owned primarily by
and teachers to share instruction programs and
women, and over $17 million from more than 70
equipment. The networking software supporting the
companies employing handicapped workers.
cluster luas developed by the University of Waterloo
in Canada.

===== PAGE 21 =====
or with programs geared to those students. Queensland in Brisbane in support of university been disrupted. With assistance from ibm
In the 14 years since the Faculty Loan Program programs and research in the field of advanced stafTin the U.S., ibm Mexico also helped coordi-
was initiated, more than 600 employees have control systems. nate two airlifts of medical supplies and rescue
been granted leaves to serve institutions request- IBM Europe awarded its first IBM Europe equipment.
ing assistance. Science and Technology Prize to Professor IBM announced it will help underwrite a
IBM Europe has established a new scientific Fritz Schaefer of the Max Planck Institute for new television mathematics series being devel-
computing facility at the company's scientific Biophysical Chemistry in Goettingen, Germany oped by the Children's Television Workshop,
for his pioneering work in laser research. The creators of the highly acclaimed "Sesame Street."
prize is designed to recognize an individual The series, aimed at 8 to 12 year-olds, is
outside the company for significant and inno- designed to promote interest in mathematics.
vative contributions to science and technology It is scheduled to debut in January 1987.
in Europe. The company also was corporate under-
writer for a major science series that premiered
IBM and the community on the Public Broadcasting Service in January.
IBM's commitment to responsible corporate The program, "Planet Earth," is a seven-
citizenship resulted in the strengthening of pro- part series on geophysics. IBM distributed
grams benefiting people around the globe. In all, related materials to schools across the U.S. to
the company's contributions of cash, equip- enable students to benefit from the series'
ment and other resources to social, cultural and educational content.
educational programs worldwide amounted to
more than $188 million in 1985.
Visitors view a major Renoir retrospective at the
IBM continued its efforts in support ofjob
Boston Museum of Fine Art. Sponsored by IBM, the
training centers, adding 10 new centers exhibit luas also shown in Paris and London.
in the U.S. Since IBM began its affiliation with
IBM Australia, contributed computer equipment community job training centers in 1968, more
and softiuare to the University of Queensland than 14,000 people have gained information
in Brishaiie, Australia, for teaching and research in
processing and office skills through 57 ibm-
advanced control systems. Here, a lecturer instructs
supported centers. Similar programs through-
students using one of the university's process
out Europe have proven equally successful.
control installations.
An IBM-initiated program helped create
center in Rome. The center provides the jobs for about 400 disadvantaged youths in
European academic and scientific communities several U. S. metropolitan areas last summer.
the free use of advanced computing tools for The Summer Youth Employment Program
experimental work in computation-intensive provided grants to 20 community-based
science and engineering research. organizations in 18 cities with sizable youth
A major grant from IBM Canada and unemployment to help develop jobs for high
supporting funding from the government of school students. In addition to the employment
Alberta are enabling the University of Alberta experience, the program offered an educational
to establish a new educational computer network component designed to encourage partici-
serving students and teachers in Edmonton, pants to complete their high-school education.
Calgary and Lethbridge. Under the agreement, When Mexico City was rocked by two
IBM is providing software and equipment, in- devastating earthquakes in September,
cluding more than 160 IBM Personal Computers. IBM personnel assisted in providing disaster
IBM Australia has contributed equipment, relief IBM Mexico concentrated its efforts on
software and training to the Department locating and assisting employees affected by the
of Chemical Engineering at the University of quakes and providing support to customers
whose information processing operations had

===== PAGE 22 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity IBM Business Conduct Guidelines.These guide-
of the financial information presented in this lines, translated into numerous languages, are
Annual Report rests with IBM management. distributed to employees throughout the world,
The accompanying financial statements have and reemphasized through internal programs to
been prepared in conformity with generally assure that they are understood and followed.
accepted accounting principles, applying cer- Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
tain estimates and judgments as required. tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial
IBM maintains an effective system of statements. Their accompanying report is based
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, on an examination conducted in accordance
of organizational arrangements with clearly with generally accepted auditing standards, in-
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of cluding a review of internal accounting controls
authority. We believe this system provides reason- and tests of accounting procedures and records.
able assurance that transactions are executed in The Audit Committee of the Board of
accordance with management authorization, Directors is composed solely of outside direc-
and that they are appropriately recorded, in tors, and is responsible for recommending to the
order to permit preparation of financial state- Board the independent accounting firm to
ments in conformity with generally accepted be retained for the coming year, subject to stock-
accounting principles and to adequately safe- holder approval. The Audit Committee meets
guard, verify and maintain accountability periodically and privately with the independent
of assets. An important element of the system accountants, with our internal auditors, as well
is an ongoing internal audit program. as with IBM management, to review accounting,
To assure the effective administration auditing, internal accounting controls and finan-
of internal control, we carefully select and train cial reporting matters.
our employees, develop and disseminate writ-
ten policies and procedures, provide appro-
priate communication channels, and foster an John E Akers President and
environment conducive to the effective func- Chief Executive Officer
tioning of controls. We continue to believe that
it is essential for the company to conduct
its business affairs in accordance with the Allen J. Krowe Senior Vice President,
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the Einance & Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of January 28,1986
International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated were made in accordance with generally
financial statements, appearing on pages 26, accepted auditing standards and accordingly in-
28, 30, and 33 through 43, present fairly the cluded such tests of the accounting records and
financial position of International Business such other auditing procedures as we considered
Machines Corporation and its subsidiary com- necessary in the circumstances.
panies at December 31,1985, and 1984, and the
results of their operations and changes in funds
for each of the three years in the period ended
December 31,1985, in conformity with generally Price Waterhouse
accepted accounting principles consistently 153 East 53rd Street
applied. Our examinations of these statements New York, N.Y. 10022

===== PAGE 23 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1985 1984
Gross Income:
Sales $34,404 29,753 23,274
Services 11,536 9,605 7,676
Rentals 4,116 6,579 9,230
$50,056 $ 45,937 $ 40,180
Cost of sales 14,911 12,374 9,748
Cost of services 4,689 4,347 3,506
Cost of rentals 1,503 2,198 3,141
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . 13,000 11,587 10,614
Research, development and engineering expenses 4,723 4,200 3,582
Interest expense 443 390
39,269 35,114 30,981
10,787 10,823 9,199
Other income, principally interest 832 800 741
Earnings before income taxes 11,619 11,623 9,940
4,455
Provision for income taxes 5,064 5,041
Net Earnings $ 6,555 $ 6,582 5,485
Per share iio.67 10.77 $ 9.04
Average number of shares outstanding:
1985—614,084,568
1984—611,426,324
1983—606,769,848

===== PAGE 24 =====
Results of Operations
The past year was a difficult one for the infor- Conversely, gross income from rentals to bear on gross profit margins. This transition
mation-handUng industry in North America. An declined 37.4 percent to $4.1 billion. Rental gross is largely behind us now, and the downward
uncertain economy and sluggish capital spend- income was 8.2 percent of total gross income in pressure on the margin from this will be less
ing by our customers in the U. S. caused an 1985, down from 14.3 percent a year ago. severe in the future.
adverse impact on IBM's performance for the full Gross income from services continued to In 1985 gross profit from services increased
year 1985. Despite this, IBM achieved record grow in 1985 and increased as a percentage 30.2 percent to $6.8 billion. Program products
worldwide shipments, introduced major new of total gross income. Revenue from services were the primary contributor to this increase.
products and, in addition, had excellent financial reached $11.5 billion in 1985, a 20.1 percent increase Selling, general and administrative expense
results from its operations outside the U.S. over the preceding year. The major increase as a ratio to gross income increased slightly
Worldwide gross income in 1985 totaled came from program products which increased in 1985 to 26.0 percent from 25.2 percent in 1984.
$50.1 billion, an increase of 9.0 percent over 1984. 30.3 percent to $4.2 billion. Maintenance services Rigorous expense and resource controls were
Non-U. S. operations showed strong business increased 15.9 percent over 1984 to $6.1 billion. implemented throughout the business in 1985;
growth, with gross income increasing by 16.0 per- Information on industry segments and these will continue in 1986 as the company
cent to $21.5 billion. Revenue growth for U.S. classes of similar products or services is maintains a focus on efficiency and productivity.
operations was a modest 4.2 percent, with 1985 presented on page 43. Sales of peripheral equip- Investments in research, development and
gross income reaching $28.5 billion. ment showed a significant improvement over engineering have resulted in a strong and com-
Early in 1985 our customers paused to 1984, increasing 28.0 percent. This improvement, petitive product line. This investment amounted
evaluate the advisability of installing IBM 308X evident in both the U. S. and non-U. S. oper- to $4.7 billion in 1985, an increase of 12.5 percent
processors or waiting for the availability of the ations, was primarily the result of strong growth over 1984.
new IBM 3090 processors. Volume shipments of in shipments of magnetic tape subsystems and Other income, which is principally interest,
the 3090 model 200 began in the third quarter. direct access storage devices. Total processor increased 4.0 percent to $832 million.
The high quality of this product, brought sales showed only modest worldwide growth and IBM's overall business health is sound, and
about by engineering and manufacturing excel- declined in the U.S. Sales of office systems/ the company is well positioned to share in the
lence, contributed to the company's ability to workstations increased by 15.1 percent, mostly in continued growth of the information-handling
deliver it earlier than expected. non-US. operations. industry.
Moderation in the strength of the dollar Worldwide gross profit was $29.0 billion, an
began to be reflected in the company's financial increase of 7.2 percent over 1984. IBM Consolidated Gross Income:
results in the last two quarters of the year. Efficiencies derived from the major $55,000 (In millions)
Although full-year results were still affected investments over the past several years in plant
unfavorably by currency fluctuations, the effect capacity and new machinery and equipment
in the second half of the year was positive. continue to result in improved manufacturing
Worldwide net earnings were essentially ffat cost. Despite this continuing improvement
year-to-year, reflecting the company's resilient in productivity, gross profit margins declined
response to the adverse North American i.o percentage point to 578 percent. There
economic conditions. Worldwide net earnings are two basic reasons for this decline.
of $6,555 million were 0.4 percent below the Gross profit margins on low-priced,
1984 record of $6,582 million. high-volume products are less than on high-end
Gross income from sales was $34.4 billion, processors. As relatively more of our revenues
an increase of 15.6 percent over 1984. Sales gross are derived from sales of these low-priced,
income includes sales to customers who have high-volume products, the total gross profit
exercised their option to purchase installed rental margin is reduced.
equipment. Sales gross income, excluding sales of In addition, gross profit margins from
installed equipment, increased 24.6 percent rentals and from installed rental equipment con-
over 1984, reflecting the purchase of products verted to purchase are higher than gross profit
shipped to our customers during 1985. margins on sales of new equipment. Conse-
quently, as IBM's business shifts more to outright
sales and away from rental and conversion Rentals
income, a second downward pressure is brought

===== PAGE 25 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31;
(Dollarsin millions) 1985 1984
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash $ 896 $ 600
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 4,726 3,762
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 9,757 7,393
Other accounts receivable 809 718
Inventories 8,579 6,598
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,303 1,304
«
;26,070 $ 20,375
Rental Machines and Parts 4,637 6,375
Less: Accumulated depreciation 2,804 3,425
1,833 2,950
Plant and Other Property 29,846 23,048
Less: Accumulated depreciation 11,999 9,635
17,847 13,413
Investments and Other Assets 6,884 6,070
$; 52,634 $ 42,808
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes $ 3,089 $ 2,668
Loans payable 1,293 834
Accounts payable 1,823 1,618
Compensation and benefits 2,460 2,223
Deferred income 391 340
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 2,377 1,957
1i 11,433 1 9,640
Long-Term Debt 3,955 3,269
Other Liabilities 1,606 1,353
Deferred Income Taxes 3,650 2,057
Stockholders' Equity:
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 6,267 5,998
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1985—615,741,687; 1984—613,076,500
Retained earnings 27,234 23,486
Translation adjustments (1,466) (2,948)
32,035 26,536
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 45 47
Shares: 1985—323,425; 1984—390,961
31,990 26,489
t 52,634 $ 42,808
The notes on pages 34 through 43 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Financial Condition
During 1985, IBM maintained its strong financial Corporation. Each of these joint ventures is exchange rates. The cumulative effect of this cur-
position while continuing to make significant designed to help capitalize on specific market rency translation is included in the equity section
investments in research, development and opportunities. of the consolidated statement of financial
engineering, and plant and other property. Over As part of the ROLM Corporation acquisi- position as "translation adjustments."
the last five years, these investments totaled tion, ROLM's Mil-Spec division was sold on June The moderation in the strength of the U.S.
$38.3 billion. 28,1985, to Loral Corporation. dollar during 1985 caused a significant reduction
In 1985, $4.7 billion were directed to IBM's working capital increased by $3.9 in the "translation adjustments," from $2,948
research, development and engineering. These billion during the year. This increase was caused million at year-end 1984 to $1,466 million at
expenditures sustained IBM'S efforts to maintain by a $2.4 billion growth in notes and accounts year-end 1985. This year-to-year change of $ 1,482
its technical leadership, ensured a continuing receivable, $2.0 billion in inventories, and $1.3 million is the result of valuing non-US. net
flow of competitive products to the marketplace, billion in cash and marketable securities. These assets at the relatively higher foreign currency
and provided the company with the ability to increases were offset by a rise in current liabili- exchange rates at year-end 1985, and is not a
pursue new growth opportunities. ties of $ 1.8 billion. The growth in accounts result of the operational performance of the
Investments in plant and other property in receivable was primarily caused by the substan- company. The effect of the year-to-year change
1985 amounted to $6.1 billion, an increase of 32.5 tial increase in shipments to customers during is to increase stockholders' equity.
percent over 1984. These investments were made the fourth quarter. Inventory growth occurred in Dividends of $2,703 million were paid
to ensure that IBM continues to reduce unit work in process, as continued stocking was during the year, up $ 196 million from 1984, or
manufacturing costs, maintains industry leader- required to satisfy demand for volume increases 78 percent.
ship in quality and achieves its goal of being the throughout the product line. In addition, shelf During the year, management stressed
industry's low-cost producer. A significant stock for high-volume products was increased as improvements in all key areas of operations as
part of that investment includes IBM products demand and the distribution system for these well as asset management, while investing in
used internally that have helped the company to products expanded. areas promising the best possible growth for the
improve productivity and efficiency in all areas During 1985, $12.8 billion, or 82 percent of future. Competition continues to be keen in all
of its business. Manufacturing capacity has total funds provided, were generated from oper- areas of the information-handling industry.
also been added and modernized to provide ations. These funds, coupled with an increase in Remaining competitive in product cost requires
efficient facilities for producing the growing ship- long-term debt, were used to finance IBM's investment in new equipment and modern
ment volumes of IBM's expanding product line. investments in the future. The company added facilities as well as a low-cost, high-quality
In addition, IBM has continued its $1,614 million to long-term debt from various manufacturing process. Sustaining a broad,
investment in program products. Part of this new issues during 1985. Long-term obligations competitive product line requires expenditures
investment, $785 million in 1985, was capitalized from prior years were reduced by $928 million, in research, development and engineering,
and will be amortized over the revenue produc- resulting in a net increase of $686 million along with proper management controls
ing lives of the products. in long-term debt, IBM'S credit rating remains to ensure an adequate return. These factors have
IBM's investment in finance subsidiaries and strong, and its long-term debt-to-equity ratio is been stressed in all IBM operating units with
sales-type leases reflects the company's growing 12.4 percent. positive results.
participation in financing products purchased by In 1985, the company continued open- IBM continues to manage its costs,
its customers. In 1985, customers financed market acquisition of shares to meet most expenses and other resources carefully. Product
approximately $5 billion in purchase value of IBM requirements of i BM'S stockholder and costs and expenses in 1985 reflect increases in
equipment through the IBM Credit Corporation employee stock plans. productivity over the prior year, and this direction
and similar IBM activities around the world. Deferred income taxes increased by $1.6 is expected to continue throughout 1986. Manage-
Two additional actions were taken in 1985 billion during 1985. This is attributable to tax ment remains optimistic about the future of IBM
that affected IBM's investments and other assets. timing differences related to sales-type leases, and the overall computer industry. The company's
The company sold its $503 million of U. S. installment sales, depreciation, and the deferral continuing investments in its business, coupled
fixed-income securities, and increased its invest- of investment tax credits. In addition, one-time with the skills and loyalty of its employees, have
ment in Satellite Business Systems (SBS). events that occurred in 1985 in conjunction with positioned it for future growth.
Investments were also made in joint ven- the acquisition of ROLM and SBS also served to
tures such as International MarketNet,Trintex reduce the company's current tax liability.
and Nippon Information and Communication The accounting method for translating the
majority of non-U. S. net assets into U. S. dollars
requires such items to be translated at current

===== PAGE 27 =====
(Dollars in millions) 1985 1984 1983
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January i $ 4,362 $5,536 $ 3,300
Provided from (used for) Operations:
Sources:
Net earnings $ 6,555 $ 6,582 $ 5,485
Items not requiring the current use of funds:
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 2,894 2,987 3,362
Net book value of rental machines and
other property retired or sold 867 1,483 2,108
Amortization of program products 425 486 311
Other (principally deferred income taxes) 1,880 1,004 749
12,621 12,542 12,01 5
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized . . . 157 228 265
12,778 12,770 12,280
Uses:
Investment in rental machines 313 858 1,41 2
Investment in plant and other property 6,117 4,615 3,518
6,430 5,473 4,930
Investment in program products 785 803 588
Increase in investments and other assets 454 1,764 1,887
Net change in working capital
(excluding cash, marketable securities
and loans payable) 3,101 4,043 855
10,770 12,083 8,260
Translation effects 677 (324) (147)
Net provided from operations 2,685 363 3,873
Provided from External Financing:
Net change in long-term debt 686 595 (177)
Net change in loans payable 459 302 3
Net provided from external financing 1,145 897 (174)
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 133 73 788
8,325 6,869 7,787
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 2,703 2,507 2,251
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December ji $ 5,622 $4,362 $5,536
The notes on pages 34 through 43 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions)
Working Capital $3,101
Reduction of Long-Term Debt
$454 Investments and Other Assets
$313 Rental Machines
,614 New Long-Term Debt
$785 Program Products
$459 Loans Payable
$ 133 Stock Plans
$2,703 Cash Dividends
Plant and Other Property $6,117
Operations $i3,455t
tincludes Translation Effects of $677
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property
$22,000 (In millions)
Over the past five years, the company
has invested over $20 billion in land, buildings,
machinery and equipment, and internally
installed IBM manufactured equipment
required to meet customer demand, maintain
technological leadership and improve pro-
ductivity. These recent additions represent
68 percent of the gross asset value of plant and
other property as of December 31,1985.
Continuous upgrading of our facilities is
essential to achieve our objectives. Large
investments will continue to be required in
future years.
1981 ^ '82 '83 '84 1985
Annual •• Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 29 =====
Percentage Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U.S. Dollar
British pound Canadian dollar French franc German mark Italian lira Japanese yen
+ 17%
-l8%
J L
-355?-
1983 1984 1985 1983 1984 1985 1983 1984 1985 1983 1984 1985 1983 1984 1985 1983 1984 1985
Base—as of January i, 1983
In 1985, U. S. gross income increased by The graph to the right depicts the aggregate Six Major Countries—
4.2 percent, and non-U. S. gross income revenue growth from 1982 through 1985 for the Combined Gross Income by Year
increased by 16.0 percent as reported in U. S. same six countries, as reported in U. S. dollars. 100% (Percent change over 1982)
dollars. It is estimated that had currency rates The graph also shows the local currency
90%
remained constant with those of 1984, gross revenue growth rates calculated using 1982 U S.
income would have been $400 million greater dollar exchange rates. Management believes
80%.
than that reported in 1985, and gross income that this composite growth rate, as measured in
from non-U. S. operations would have grown by local currency, is illustrative of the health of
18.2 percent. IBM's non-U. S. business and reflects the strong
As the dollar strengthens, net assets, worldwide demand for its products.
revenue, costs and expenses, recorded in local To the degree that profits from these non-
currencies, are translated to fewer U. S. dollars U. S. operations are not repatriated in the form
than they would have been at the previous of dividends or other payments, the currency
year's exchange rates. The graphs above illustrate effects are deferred to future periods, since these
the movement, in relation to the dollar, of the resources continue to be invested in the country.
six major currencies in which IBM conducts most IBM manufactures products throughout the
of its non-U S. business. world, and there is little dependence on U. S.
11
The dollar, which had continued to exports in most of the major non-U. S. operations.
10%
strengthen during 1983 and 1984, began to The company has been able to compete 11 11
weaken in 1985. However, for the full year 1985, effectively and profitably outside the U.S. as well
0% 1983 '84 '85 1983 84 85
IBM's gross income was still adversely affected as in the U. S.
by currency rates. I Combined I Combined
revenues revenues
as reported as measured
in U.S. dollars in local currency

===== PAGE 30 =====
Translation
(Dollarsin millions) Capital Stock Retained Earnings Adjustments Treasury Stock Total
1983 Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1983 . . . $ 5,008 $ 16,259 $(1,307) 19,960
Net earnings 5,485 5,485
Cash dividends declared (2,251) (2,251)
Capital stock issued under employee and
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) . . 741 741
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired
and sold under employee plans . . . . (4) (4)
Tax reductions—employee plans . . .. 51 51
Translation adjustments (763) (763)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 . . 5,800 19,489 (2,070) 23,219
1984 Net earnings 6,582 6,582
Cash dividends declared (2,507)
(2,507)
Capital stock issued under employee
plans (2,351,859 shares) 154
154
Purchases (6,711,522 shares) and sales
(6,320,561 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . (78) (47) (125)
Tax reductions—employee plans . . .. 44 44
Translation adjustments (878) (878)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1984 . . 5,' 23,486 (2,948) (47) 26,489
1985 Net earnings 6,555 6,555
Cash dividends declared (2,703)
(2,703)
Capital stock issued under employee
plans (2,664,869 shares) 173
173
Purchases (6,346,223 shares) and sales
(6,413,759 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . (104) (102)
Other (principally tax reductions-
employee plans) 96 96
Translation adjustments 1,482 1,482
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1985 . . $ 6,267 27,234 $(1,466) $(45) 31,990

===== PAGE 31 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements:
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and its
of Consolidation: U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned i BM Credit Corporation and non-U. S. finance
subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. I nvestments in joint ventures, and other companies in which i BM has a
20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method. Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted
for by the cost method.
Translation of For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to
Non-U. S. Currency AmountsU: . S. dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevaiHng
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S.
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired.
All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and
depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of
exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which resuh from remeasurement are included in earnings.
Gross Income: Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services over
the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period.
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM'S finance subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales.
Program Products: Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development.
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally
capitalized as program products assets. The assets are amortized based on the estimated revenue distribution over their
revenue-producing lives, but not in excess of six years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed.
Depreciation: Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives.
Depreciation of assets acquired subsequent to December 31,1983 is computed using the straight-line method. Depreciation
of assets acquired prior to January i, 1984 is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method for rental machines,
and either accelerated methods or the straight-line method for plant and other property.
Goodwill: The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and
amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. Goodwill related to equity investments is included in the investment
and amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years.
Retirement Plans and Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements
Other Postretirement Benefitisn: the plans are amortized generally over 15 years. Postretirement heahh care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued
when the employee retires.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing differences
between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable earnings in other
years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful
life of the applicable classes of property.
Inventories: Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process are included at the lower of average cost or market.

===== PAGE 32 =====
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 12,395 $ 8,583 $ 8,115
Current liabilities 6,629 4,636 4,585
Working capital 5,766 3,947 3,530
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 6,451 4,902 5,622
I nvestments and other assets 2,569 1,690 1,062
14,786 10,539 10,214
Long-term debt 645 222 466
Other liabilities 1,448 1,125 1,249
Deferred income taxes 805 346 27
2,898 1,693 1,742
Net assets employed $ 11,888 $ 8,846 $ 8,472
Number of employees 163,294 156,042 150,944
For the year:
Gross income from sales, services and rentals $ 21,545 $ 18,566 $ 17,053
Earnings before income taxes $ 5,546 $ 4,640 $ 3,841
Provision for income taxes 2,468 2,053 1,677
Net earnings $ 3,078 $ 2,587 $ 2,164
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 2,333 $ 1,807 $ 1,987
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local they would have at the previous year's rates. illustrate the movement, in relation to the dollar,
currency environment account for approxi- The dollar, which had continued to strengthen of the six major currencies in which IBM con-
mately 85% of the company's non-U. S. gross in- during 1983 and 1984, began to weaken in 1985. ducts most of its non-U. S. business.
come. The remaining 15% of the company's non- However, for the full year 1985, IBM's gross Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. sub-
U. S. gross income is from subsidiaries and income and net earnings were still adversely sidiaries included in consolidated retained earn-
branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose affected by currency rates. The translation ings amounted to $ 11,147 million at December
economic environment is highly inflationary. adjustments, resuhing from the translation of net 31,1985, $9,837 million at December 31,1984 and
For the years 1985,1984 and 1983, non-U. S. assets, amounted to $1,466 million at December $8,510 million at December 31,1983. These
financial results have been impacted by the 31,1985, $2,948 million at December 31,1984, earnings, which reflect full provision for non-
strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the curren- and $2,070 million at December 31,1983. The U. S. income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in
cies of many countries. As the dollar strengthens, reduction of the translation adjustments since non-U. S. operations. Accordingly, no provision
net assets and net earnings recorded in local the end of 1984 is a reflection of the weakening of has been made for taxes that might be payable
currencies translate into fewer U. S. dollars than the dollar during 1985. The graphs on page 32 upon remittance of such earnings.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Marketable Securities (Dollars in millions) December 31,1985 December 31,1984
U.S. Government securities $ 917 $ 616
Time deposits and other bank obligations 2,183 1,837
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations. 1,626 1,309
Total $ 4,726 $ 3,762
Market value. $ 4,729 1 3,774
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1985 December 31,1984
Current inventories:
Finished goods 2,576 $ 1,619
Work in process 5,714 4,676
Raw materials and operating supplies 289 303
Total current inventories 8,579 6,598
Work in process and field service parts included in:
Rental machines and parts 720 1,22 I
Plant, laboratory and office equipment . . . . 1,037 746
Total inventories $ 10,336 $ 8,565
Plant and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1985 December 31, 1984
Land and land improvements . . .. 1,049 823
Buildings 8,474 6,673
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 20,323 15,552
23,048
29.846
Less: Accumulated depreciation 9,635
Total 1 17 1 . , 8 9 4 9 7 9 13,413

===== PAGE 34 =====
Investments and Other Assets (Dollars in millions) December 31, 1985 December 31,1984
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1985, $1,765; 1984, $1,491) 1,964 $ 1,604
Investments in finance subsidiaries 1,09s 1,220
Goodwill, less accumulated amortization (1985, $49; 1984, $4) 852 882
Investment in Intel Corporation! 641 655
Net investment in sales-type leases 1,172 594
U. S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value: 1984, $510) 503
Other investments and sundry assets 1,160 612
Total $ 6,884 $6,070
tlndudesgoodwill of $375 million at December 31,1985 and $404 million at December 31,1984
(net of accumulated amortization of $48 million and $27 million, respectively).
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31, 1985 December 31,1984
U. S. Operations:
fh% convertible subordinated debentures due 2004$ 1,285 $ 1,285
io'/2% debentures due 2015 (with sinking fund payments 1996-2014) 500
io'/4% notes due 1995 500
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 442 450
9'/2% notes due 1986 500
Other, payable in:
(Average interest rate at December 31,1985, in parentheses)
U S. dollars, due 1986-2012 (11.6%) 372 666
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (4.3%) 243 247
German marks, due 1986-1988 (8.7%) 187 210
European currency units, due 1990 (8.25%) 133
3,662 3,358
Non-U S. Operations:
Various obligations, payable in:
(Average interest rate at December 31,1985, in parentheses)
French francs, due 1986-1997 (11.3%) 246 62
Japanese yen, due 1986-2015 (70%) 202 125
U. S. dollars, due 1986-1992 (8.5%) 171 123
Other currencies, due 1986-1999 (15.7%) lA 84
695 394
4,357
3,752
Less: Net unamortized discount, related principally to the 9%% and \oVi% debentures ^ i_o
4,345 3,742
Less: Current maturities 390 473
$ 3,955
Total $3,269
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1985, are as follows:
1986, $390; 1987, $274; 1988, $239; 1989, $53; 1990, $332; 1991 and beyond, $3,069.
tThe 7%% convertible subordinated debentures are unsecured subordinated obligations of IBM, which
are convertible into 1 BM capital stock at a conversion price of $ 153.6563 per share. They will be redeemable,
at the option of the company, starting in November 1988 at a price of 104.725% of the principal amount,
and at decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund payments starting in 1994 are intended to retire
75% of the debentures prior to maturity. During 1985, conversions of debentures resulted in the issuance
of 318 shares of IBM capital stock.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Earnings before income taxes:
U.S. operations $ 6,073 $ 6,983 $ 6,099
Non-US. operations 5,546 4,640 3,841
$ 11,619 $ I 1,623 $ 9,940
Provision for income taxes:
U. S. operations $ 2,596 $ 2,988 $2,778
Non-U. S. operations 2,468 2,053 1,677
5,064 5,041 4,455
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 1,753 1,636 1,550
Total $ 6,817 $ 6,677 $ 6,005
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
U.S. Federal:
Current $ 594 $ 1,406 $ 1,624
Net tax effects of timing differences 957 702 188
Net deferred investment tax credits 144 80 47
1,695 2,188 1,859
Non-US.:
Current 2,886 2,102 2,250
Net tax effects of timing differences 246 465 32
3,132 2,567 2,282
U.S. Stateand local:
Current 128 187 265
Net tax effects of timing differences 109 99 49
237 286 314
Total provision $ 5,064 $ 5,041 $4,455
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 43.6% in 1985,43.4% in 1984,
and 44.8% in 1983. The consoHdated net tax effects of timing differences
amounted to $1,312 milhon and $1,266 milhon in 1985 and 1984, respectively.
Amounts relating to sales-type leases and installment sales were $ 643
million in 1985 and $623 million in 1984. Depreciation timing differences
accounted for an additional $358 million in 1985. Of the remaining timing
differences, no individual item is material.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Accounting Change—Program Products Finance Subsidiaries IBM's consolidated statement of earnings.
On January i, 1985, the company changed The company's wholly owned unconsol- Summarized below is combined financial
the method of amortization of program product idated finance subsidiaries consist of IBM Credit information for these finance subsidiaries,
assets from the straight-line method to a method Corporation and several non-U. S. finance sub- of which IBM Credit Corporation accounts for
based on the estimated revenue distribution over sidiaries. ROLM Credit Corporation was merged more than 90% of the net earnings, IBM has
the products' revenue-producing lives. This with IBM Credit Corporation in July 1985. agreed to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to
change was applied as of January i, 1985 to the IBM Credit Corporation offers lease financing of have a positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit
remaining net book value of the existing assets, selected IBM products, finances receivables Corporation has $750 million of lines of credit
as well as to new assets. resulting from installment sales by IBM of available, in addition to $500 million shared
In the opinion of management, this change its products, and finances selected non-IBM with the IBM Corporation. Additional informa-
will result in a better matching of costs with equipment in the U. S. The non-U. S. finance tion is available in the 1985 Annual Report
revenue because it is reflective of the increasing subsidiaries offer leases in several European of the IBM Credit Corporation. Copies may be
diversity of product offerings and of their terms countries, and in some cases finance installment obtained by writing to:
and conditions. This change did not have a receivables, IBM'S investment in these sub- IBM Stockholder Relations Department
material effect on 1985 earnings. sidiaries is accounted for by the equity method 590 Madison Avenue
and earnings are included in other income in New York, N.Y. 10022
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering ex- Financial position at December 31:
penses amounted to $4,723 million in 1985, (Dollars in millions) 1985 1984 (Dollars in millions) 1985
S4,200 million in 1984 and $3,582 million in 1983. Assets: Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity:
Included in these amounts were expendi- Cash and marketable Short-term debt $ 1,509 1,031
tures of $3,457 million in 1985, $3,148 million in securities $ 306 $ 112 Deferred taxes and
Installment payment accruals 461 209
1984 and $2,514 million in 1983 for a broad pro-
agreement Due to IBM
gram of research and development covering receivables - net... . 1,868 1,619 and affiliates:
basic scientific research in a variety of fields and Net investment Current 538 293
the application of scientific advances to the in leases 3.101 1,577 Noncurrent 184 502
development of new and improved products Receivable from IBM Long-term debt 2,406 965
and affiliates 347 74 Stockholder's equity . . 720 499
and their uses. In addition, expenditures
Other 196 117
for product related engineering amounted to Total Liabilities
and Stockholder's
$1,266 million, $1,052 million and $1,068 million
Total Assets $5,818 $ 3,499 Equity $5,818 $ 3,499
for the same three years.
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments Earnings for the years ended December 31: (Dollars in millions) 1985 1984 1983
Rental expense amounted to $963 million Finance and other income $ 539 $ 305 $ 164
in 1985, $713 million in 1984 and $567 million Interest and other expenses 404 230 118
in 1983. Minimum rental commitments, in Provision for income taxes 24 7 4
millions of dollars, under noncancelable leases NNeett eeaarrnniinnggss $ III $ 68 $ 42
for 1986 and thereafter are as follows: 1986,
$886; 1987, $752; 1988, $545; 1989, $383; 1990, Total purchases from IBM: (Dollars in millions) 1985 1984 1983
$303: and after 1990, $1,293. These leases are
IIBBMM pprroodduuccttss ffoorr tteerrmm lleeaassee ccuussttoommeerrss $$ 11,,772233 $$ 11,,221122 $$ 336699
principally for the rental of office premises. IInnssttaallllmmeenntt ppaayymmeenntt rreecceeiivvaabblleess $$ 11,,111122 $$ 11,,114433 $$ 885522

===== PAGE 37 =====
Interest Cost Retirement Plans time of a plan amendment, and amortized
Interest on borrowings of the company and The company and its subsidiaries have over 15 years in equal annual amounts.
its consolidated subsidiaries amounted to $532 retirement plans covering substantially all em- The principal actuarial assumptions used
million in 1985, $456 million in 1984 and $429 ployees. The total cost of all plans for 1985,1984 to determine cost are: rate of return on fund
million in 1983. Of these amounts, $ 89 million in and 1983 was $868 million, $1,096 million and assets, future compensation levels, retirement
1985, $48 million in 1984 and $39 million in 1983 $1,180 million, respectively. ages, employee turnover and mortality rates.
were capitalized, resulting in interest expense U. S. regular and part-time employees Variances between actual and assumed plan
of $443 million, $408 million and $390 million are covered by noncontributory plans which are experience (actuarial gains or losses) are
for the same three years. funded by company contributions to an irrevo- amortized over the remaining employee service
cable trust fund, which is held for the sole period and are included in the determination
Satellite Business Systems benefit of employees. Monthly retirement bene- of current cost.
MCI Communications Corporation and fits generally represent the greater of a fixed It is the company's policy to fund accrued
IBM have signed an agreement under which MCI amount per year of service, or a percent of career costs to the extent such costs are tax deductible.
will acquire substantially all of the assets and compensation. For plan purposes, annual Pertinent cost and contribution data for U. S. re-
operations of Satellite Business Systems in compensation for each year of service before tirement plans is presented below:
exchange for approximately 47 million shares of January i, 1984, is defined as the average annual
MCI common stock, which IBM agrees to compensation paid for the years 1974 through (Dollars in millions) 1985 1984 1983
retain for a minimum of three years. At Decem- 1983. Actual compensation is used thereafter. Pension cost:
ber 31,1985, the value of the SBS assets to be Benefits become vested upon completion of 10 Current cost $ 391 $490 $55'
Amortization of prior
exchanged was $418 million. Completion of the years of service.
transaction is subject to approval by the Federal The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter- service costs 63 160 151
Total cost $ 454 $ 650 $702
Communications Commission and review mined using an actuarial cost method known as
Pension cost as a % of 9.7%
under provisions of the Hart/Scott/Rodino Act. the Frozen Initial Liability method. Under this
compensation 5.0% 8.2%
In addition, IBM has agreed that it will, under method, annual pension cost comprises both
Unamortized prior service
certain conditions, invest an additional $400 current cost and the amortization of prior
costs at December 31. $ 3 81 413 $532
million in MCI between September i, 1986 and service costs which generally result from plan
December 31,1988. amendments. Current cost is determined by Contributions $520 650 $ 644
1BM and Aetna Life & Casualty had pre- relating the present value of future benefits
viously reached agreement for IBM to acquire (excluding benefits related to prior service costs), The decrease in pension costs in both 1985
Aetna's interest in SBS, effective June 30,1985. In less fund assets, to the present value of future and 1984 resulted principally from favorable
addition to certain cash payments and other compensation and applying the resulting per- returns on plan investments. Consistent with this
considerations, Aetna may receive a future pay- centage to current compensation. Prior experience, the rate of return assumption was
ment from IBM which is dependent on the service costs are determined and frozen at the increased in both years. Additionally, 1985 cost
market value of MCI common stock at the time also decreased as a result of changing the
the MCI transaction is concluded, up to a max- prior service cost amortization period from
imum of $ 98.6 million. Had this transaction 10 to 15 years.
taken place on December 31,1985, the contingent The following table provides information
payment would have been approximately on the status of the U. S. retirement plans. The
$30 million. actuarial present value of plan benefits provides
IBM's investment in SBS is accounted for by
the equity method, and is included in invest-
ments and other assets in the consolidated state-
ment of financial position.

===== PAGE 38 =====
an estimate of that portion of the total prospec- Postretirement Benefits a maximum duration of 10 years and may
tive benefit obligation applicable to employee The company and its U. S. subsidiaries be exercised in up to four annual installments,
service to date and assumes the same rates of have medical, dental and life insurance plans commencing one year from date of grant.
return on fund assets as were used to determine for retirees, the estimated costs of which are The plans are administered by the Execu-
pension cost. In 1985, these rates were 8.0% for fully accrued and funded with an independent tive Compensation Committee of the Board of
benefits payable in the following 10 years, and 6.0% trustee at the time an employee retires. These Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion,
for benefits payable thereafter. In 1984, these costs amounted to $12 million, $222 million grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to hold-
rates were 7.5% and 5.5% for the respective periods. and $129 million in 1985,1984 and 1983, respec- ers of options. Such rights offer optionees the
tively. Costs in 1985 were lower than in 1984 alternative of electing not to exercise the related
At December 31 primarily because significantly fewer employees stock option, but to receive instead an amount
(Dollarsin millions) 1985 1984 retired in 1985. Favorable investment fund in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and
Actuarial present value performance also contributed to the reduction stock equivalent to the difference between the
of plan benefits: in costs. option price and the average market price of
Earned to date:
Certain of the company's non-U. S. IBM stock on the date of exercising the right.
Vested $ 7,064 $ 7,016
subsidiaries have similar plans for retirees. The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
Nonvested 319 280
However, many retirees outside the U. S. are tee approval, that payment by the optionee
$ 7,383 $ 7,296
covered by government sponsored and adminis- upon exercise of an option may be made using
Including effect of pro-
tered programs. As a result, the costs of com- IBM stock as well as cash.
jected future compen-
sation levels $ 10,463 $ 10,296 pany sponsored programs outside the U. S. are The following table summarizes stock
not significant. option transactions during 1985:
Plan net assets (estimated
market value) $ 14,842 $ 11,444
Other Liabilities Number of Shares
Number of individuals
Available
receiving benefits . . . 22,650 20,937 Other liabilities consist principally of Under Option for Option
indemnity and retirement plan reserves for non-
Balance at
U S. employees.
A comparison of plan net assets to these January i, 1985.... 14,104,664 3,454,935
estimates provides an indication of the com- Options granted .... 2,970,001 (2,970,001)
Stock Purchase Plan
pany's progress toward meeting its future com- Options terminated . 99,318
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan Options cancelled— (149,569)
mitment to pay benefits when due. However, it
enables employees who are not participants in a SARs exercised .. .
must be recognized that the market value of plan
stock option plan to purchase IBM'S capital Options exercised . . . (329,405)
net assets available for benefits will fluctuate.
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% Balance at
Non-U S. subsidiaries have plans under of eligible compensation. The price an employee December 31,1985. (2,680,043) 584,252
which funds are deposited under various
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average Exercisable at
fiduciary-type arrangements, annuities are pur-
market price on the date the employee has accu- December 31,1985. 13,915,648
chased under group contracts, or reserves are
mulated enough money to buy a share. During
provided. At December 31,1985 and December
1985, employees purchased 5,095,810 shares, 8,758,604
31,1984, it is estimated that the market value of The options exercised during 1985 were at
all of which were treasury shares, for which
fund assets and reserves of individual non-US. an average option price of $ 63.13 per share.
$560 million was paid to IBM. At December 31,
subsidiaries exceeded or approximated the The 13,915,648 shares under option at December
1985,13,566,470 reserved unissued shares
actuarial present value of plan benefits earned 31,1985, are at option prices ranging from $40.28
remain available for purchase under the Plan.
to date. to $130.82 per share.
Stock Option Plans
The stock option plans provide for grant-
ing officers and other key employees options to
purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the
market price on the day of grant. Options have

===== PAGE 39 =====
Segment Information
IBM operates primarily in the single industry income by industry segments and by classes of operations. Material interdependencies and
segment encompassing information-handling similar products or services within the informa- overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and,
systems, equipment and services. This segment tion-handling segment. therefore, the information may not be indica-
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross Financial information by geographic area tive of the financial results of, or investments in,
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. for the years 1985,1984 and 1983 is summarized the reported areas were they independent
The schedule on the next page shows gross below to provide a better understanding of IBM'S organizations.
Geographic Areas (Dollarsin millions) 1985 1984 1983
United States
Gross income-Customers $ 28,511 $ 27,371 $ 23,127
Interarea transfers 3,487 3,074 2,275
Total $ 31,998 $ 30,445 $ 25,402
Net earnings 3,450 3,981 3,296
Assets at December 31 31,886 28,394 23,322
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Gross income-Customers $ 14,065 $ 11,996 $ 11,324
Interarea transfers 520 363 235
Total $ 14,585 $ 12,359 $ 11,559
Net earnings 2,104 1,873 1,580
Assets at December 31 14,341 9,864 9,958
Americas/Far East
Gross income-Customers $ 7,480 $ 6,570 $ 5,729
Interarea transfers 1,173 1,124 728
Total $ 8,653 $ 7,694 $ 6,457
Net earnings 980 719 562
Assets at December 31 7,392 5,600 5,142
Eliminations
Gross income $ (5,180) $ (4,561) $ (3,238)
Net earnings 21 9 47
Assets (985) (1,050) (961)
Consolidated
Gross income $ 50,056 $ 45,937 $ 40,1 80
Net earnings $ 6,555 $ 6,582 $ 5,485
Assets at December 31 $ 52,634 $ 42,808 $ 37,461
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, world. The cost and service charges that relate
currency environment account for approximately European operations accounted for approximately to asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. 95% of gross income in 1985,1984 and 1983. or amortized by the importing area. Interarea
The remaining 15% is from subsidiaries and Interarea transfers, consisting principally of accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
branches, predominantly in the Americas/Far completed machines, subassemblies and parts, service charges, and the net change during
East area, which operate in U. S. dollars or whose are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate the year in unamortized service charges have
economic environment is highly inflationary. service charge, applied consistently throughout the been eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services
Consolidated US. Only
(Dollarsin millions) 1985 I984t i983t 1985 19841 19831
Information-Handling:
Processors:
Sales $ 11,647 $ I 1,014 $ 9,002 $ 5,649 $ 6,066 $ 4,910
Rentals 488 905 1,651 145 346 685
12,135 11,919 10,653 5,794 6,41 2 5,595
Peripherals:
Sales 10,325 8,068 6,418 6,110 5,015 3,841
Rentals 2,351 3,584 4,717 1,227 1,940 2,547
12,676 I 1,652 11,135 7,337 6,955 6,388
OOffffiiccee SSyysstteemmss//WWoorrkkssttaattiioonnss::
Sales 9,557 8,300 5,659 5,656 5,415 3,578
Rentals 976 1,655 2,256 489 889 1,254
10,533 9,955 7,915 6,145 6,304 4,832
Program Products 4,165 3,197 2,302 2,176 1,708 1,288
Maintenance Services . . .. 6,103 5,266 4,577 3,666 3,106 2,633
Other:
Sales 1,363 1,180 1,105 895 762 693
Services 650 620 648 198 167 135
Rentals 301 435 606 178 252 331
2,314 2,235 2,359 1,271 1,181 1,159
47,926 44,224 38,941 26,389 25,666 21,895
Federal Systems:
Sales 1,439 1,123 1,028 1,439 1,123 1,028
Services 618 522 148 618 522 148
2,057 1,645 1,176 2,057 1,645 1,176
Other Business:
Sales 73 68 63 65 60 56
Total $ 50,056 $ 45,937 $ 40,180 $ 28,511 $ 27,371 $ 23,127
tReclassified to conform with 1985 presentation.
While IBM operates primarily in a single Office Systems/Workstations. Peripherals in- market demand may create requirements for tech-
industry segment and manages its worldwide clude printers, copiers, storage and telecommu- nological enhancements to permit a peripheral
business as such, gross income has been nication devices. Peripheral functions embedded product (e.g., printer), to be functionally integrated
categorized into major classes of product. in processors are classified with Processors. with a display, telecommunication device and
For purposes of classifying similar Program Products include both applications and a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
products of the Information-Handling industry systems software. Maintenance Services consist changeability and technological progress tend to
segment, user programmable equipment having of separately billed charges for maintenance. make year to year comparisons less valid than they
the capability of manipulating data arithmeti- Other consists principally of supplies and unit would be in an industry less subject to rapid change.
cally or logically and making calculations, in a record equipment. Federal Systems consists of specialized
manner directly addressable by the user through Some products logically fit in more than one information-handling products and services pri-
the operation of a stored program, has been class and are assigned to a specific class based on marily for the United States defense, space and
classified as Processors, except that small busi- a variety of factors. Over time, products tend to other agencies.
ness computers and intelligent workstations are overlap, merge into or split from existing classes Other Business consists of training
included under Office Systems/Workstations. as a result of changing technologies, market and testing materials for school, home and
Typewriters have also been classified under perceptions, and/or customer use. For example, industrial use.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1985 1984 1983 1982 1981
For the year:
Gross income from sales.
services and rentals $ 50,056 $45,937 $ 40,180 $34,364 $ 29,070
Net earnings 6,555 6,582 5,485 4,409 3,610
Per share 10.67 10.77 9.04 7-39 6.14
Cash dividends paid 2,703 2,507 2,251 2,053 2,023
Per share 4.40 4.10 3-71 3-44 3-44
Investment in rental machines 313 858 1,412 3,293 4,146
Investmentin plant and other property . . . 6,117 4,615 3,518 3,392 2,699
Return on stockholders' equity 22.4% 26.5% 25.4% 23.4% 21, r
At end of year:
Total assets $ 52,634 $42,808 $ 37,461 $ 32,541 $ 29,-107
Net investment in rental machines . . .. 1,833 2,950 4,866 7,599 8,220
Net investment in plant and
other property 17,847 13,413 I 1,276 9,964 8,577
Working capital 14,637 10,735 8,168 5,080 3,195
Long-term debt 3,955 3,269 2,674 2,851 2,669
Stockholders'equity 31,990 26,489 23,219 19,960 17,676
Selected Quarterly Data
Per Share Stock Prices
Gross Gross Net
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) Income Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
1985 First Quarter $ 9,769 $ 5,591 $ 986 $ 1,61 $1.10 $138.25 $ 119.00
Second Quarter 11,434 6,497 1,414 2.30 1.10 133-25 117.38
Third Quarter 11,698 6,726 1,474 2.40 1.10 132.75 120.00
Fourth Quarter 17,155 10,139 2,681 4.36 1.10 158.75 122.88
Total $ 50,056 $ 28,953 $ 6,555 $ 10.67 $4.40
1984 First Quarter $ 9,585 $ 5,630 $ 1,202 $ 1.97 1 -95 $ 125.00 $ 106.50
Second Quarter 11,199 6,666 1,623 2.65 •95 117-25 99.00
Third Quarter 10,657 6,312 1,585 2.60 I.IO 128.50 104.00
Fourth Quarter 14,496 8,410 2,172 3-55 I.IO 127.75 116.00
Total $ 45,937 $ 27,018 $ 6,582 $ 10.77 $ 4.10
There were 798,152 stockholders of record at The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low prices
December 31,1985. During 1985, stockholders March 10,1986, will be at the rate of $ i.io for I BM'S capital stock on the New York Stock
received $2,703 million in cash dividends. per share. This dividend will be IBM's 284th Exchange composite tape for the last two years.
consecutive quarterly cash dividend.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices
Although inflation-adjusted information is an on earnings and stockholders' equity resulting Companies which retain monetary assets
imprecise estimate, there are circumstances in from using estimated changes in specific or liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains
which it can serve to emphasize the debilitating prices to restate the value of inventories and and losses in purchasing power during periods
effects of inflation. It points out the importance other properties at currently prevailing of inflation. IBM's net monetary asset position
of keeping inflation under control and sustain- prices (current cost). resulted in a purchasing power loss of $ 124
ing public policy initiatives to encourage The estimates are based upon latest pro- million in 1985.
capital investment. duction costs, published price indexes, current The effects of translation on the changes
Rates of inflation continued to moderate suppliers' prices and appraised valuations. Cost in specific prices of IBM's net assets have been
in the United States and in many other coun- of sales and depreciation expense are restated estimated without any attempt to adjust the
tries throughout 1985. Despite this current pos- to reflect the change in the related asset values. data for general rate of inflation differences
itive trend, the cumulative effect of inflation among various countries. The translation
over the past several years has generally eroded Discussion of Financial Results adjustments reflect changes in the valuation
industry's ability to fund the replacement IBM's 1985 financial results, when adjusted of assets denominated in currencies other
and expansion of productive capacity. This has for changing prices, show a reduction of than the U. S. dollar which result from exchange
not been the case with IBM. $246 million from reported net earnings and rate fluctuations.
The following supplemental information, an increase in stockholders' equity of $2,648 In dollars of average 1985 purchasing power,
which has been prepared in accordance with million. The decrease in earnings results prin- the increase in current costs that might have
standards established by the Financial Account- cipally from increased depreciation expense been expected from general inflation exceeded
ing Standards Board, is intended to assist of $270 million on plant, rental machines and IBM's specific price level changes by $ 838 mil-
users of financial statements in understanding other property that have been valued at $22,487 lion. Management views this positively, in that
the impact of changing prices on the company's million to approximate current cost. Current technology and productivity improvements
operations. inventories have been valued at $ 8,480 million substantially offset inflation. Similar patterns
The data presented below reflect the effects on a current cost basis. are reflected in the prior years.
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost)
As Reported in
Financial Statements In Average 1985 Dollars
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1985 1985 1984 1983 1982 1981
Gross income from sales, services and rentals. $ 50,056 $ 50,056 $ 47,576 1 43,385 $ 38,298 $ 34,384
Cost of sales, services and rentals 21,103 21,156 19,762 17,916 15,355 14,151
Expenses and other income 17,334 17,527 16,084 15,118 14,038 13,001
Provision for income taxes 5,064 5,064 5,221 4,811 4,251 3,371
Net earnings $ 6,555 $ 6,309 $ 6,509 $ 5,540 1 4,654 $ 3,861
Loss from decline in purchasing power of
net monetary assets $ 124 $ 130 $ 83 $ I $ 74
Translation adjustments $ 1,482 $ 1,597 $ (1,075) $ (976) $ (866) $ (1,178)
Change in specific prices—
1 net of general inflation $ (838) $ (707) $ (78) 1 (342) $ (1,373)
Stockholders' equity (net assets) at December 31 . $ 31,990 $ 34,638 $ 30,241 $ 28,156 $ 25,272 $ 23,360
Per share information:
Earnings per share $ 10.67 $ 10,27 $ 10.65 $ 9-13 $ 7-8I $ 6.57
Cash dividends per share $ 4.40 $ 4-40 $ 4-25 $ 4.01 $ 3-83 $ 4-07
Market price at December 31 $ 155-50 $ 127.52 $ 131-73 $ 107.28 $ 67.28
Average Consumer Price Index for
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 322.2 311.1 298.4 289.1 272.4
The actual market price of i BM stock at December 31, for years 1981
to 1985 was $56.88, $96.25, $ 122.00, $ 123.13 and $ 155.50, respectively.

===== PAGE 43 =====
IBM Corporation John F. Akers President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Board Committees:
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Cahf-engineering and construction Executive
George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM FrankT. Cary, Chairman
Harold Brown Chairman, Foreign Pohcy Institute, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. John F. Akers
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N. J.- health care products Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Frank T. Cary Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM Amory Houghton, Jr.
William T. Coleman, Jr Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif, and Paris, France- William H. Moore
attorneys at law John R.Opel
Thomas F Frist, Jr Chairman of the Board, HCA, Nashville, Tenn.-health services Paul J. Rizzo
Carla Anderson Hills Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles. Calif- Irving S.Shapiro
attorneys at law Retirement Plans
Amory Houghton, Jr Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.- Dean P. Phypers, Chairman
glass products George B. Beitzel
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President, IBM Harold Brown
*Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President, IBM William T. Coleman, Jr.
Richard W. Lyman President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. Carla Anderson Hills
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. Compensation
J. Richard Munro President and Chief Executive Officer,Time, Inc., New York, N.Y- publishing Cyrus R. Vance, Chairman
John R.Opel Chairman of the Board, IBM Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Dean P. Phypers Senior Vice President, IBM James E. Burke
Paul J. Rizzo Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM William W. Scranton
William W. Scranton Former U. S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania Irving S.Shapiro
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom- attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance
Audit
Committee, E. I.du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.- chemical products
Richard W. Lyman, Chairman
Cyrus R. Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N. Y-attorneys at law
Thomas F.Frist, Jr.
•Elected 1/28/86 Amory Houghton, Jr.
J. Richard Munro
Advisory Board: John M. Fox Retired Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services
G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y-attorneys at law
JohnN.Irwin 11 OfCounsel,Patterson,Belknap,Webb&Tyler,NewYork,N.Y-attorneysat law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y.
T.Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
WilliamMcChesney Martin, Jr. .Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Chief Executive Officer, A. P. Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark- owners of the Maersk Fleet
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Thomas J. Watson, Jr Chairman Emeritus, IBM
Officers: John F Akers President and Charles P. Biggar Vice President Paul R. Low Vice President
Chief Executive Officer James A. Bitonti Vice President * William C. Lowe Vice President
John R.Opel Chairman of the Board Charles E. Branscomb Vice President Edward E. Lucente Vice President
Paul J. Rizzo Vice Chairman of the Board Lewis M. Branscomb — Vice President Victor R. Macdonald Vice President
Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President Walton E. Burdick Vice President Marvin L. Mann Vice President
C. Michael Armstrong Senior Vice President Ronald F Casella Vice President James F Manning Vice President
& Group Executive Vincent N.Cook Vice President David E. McKinney Vice President
George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President Kenneth W. Dam Vice President Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. Vice President
John E. Bertram Senior Vice President Edward M. Davis Vice President fM. Kenneth Oshman Vice President
& Group Executive William W. Eggleston Vice President Theodore C. Papes, Jr. ... Vice President
Kaspar V. Cassani Senior Vice President Donato A. Evangelista Vice President Jon W. Rotenstreich Vice President
Ralph E. Gomory Senior Vice President & General Counsel & Treasurer
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Senior Vice President Howard G. Figueroa Vice President Stephen B. Schwartz Vice President
Allen J. Krowe Senior Vice President, P. Martin Foley Vice President Charles H.Swall Vice President
Finance & Planning
James J. Forese Vice President Patrick A.Toole Vice President
Frank A. Metz, Jr Senior Vice President & Controller H. Mitchell Watson, Jr.... Vice President
& Group Executive
Richard T. Gerstner Vice President Earl F Wheeler Vice President
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr Senior Vice President
Victor J. Goldberg Vice President Robert E. Bonchick Assistant Controller
Dean P. Phypers Senior Vice President
William O. Grabe Vice President Harry L. Kavetas Assistant Controller
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr Senior Vice President
John H. Grady Vice President Jonathan G. Powers Assistant Controller
& Group Executive
& Secretary Edward F Rogers Assistant Controller
George H.Conrades Vice President
Lewis W.Gray Vice President Thomas C. Irwin Assistant Secretary
& Group Executive
Ellen M. Hancock Vice President Sidney Handler Assistant Treasurer
Carl J. Conti Vice President
& Group Executive Paul J. Kofmehl Vice President Bruce E. Langton Assistant Treasurer
Terry R. Lautenbach Vice President John H. Stewart Assistant Treasurer
Thomas M. Liptak Vice President •Elected 1/28/86 fResigned 1/14/86

===== PAGE 44 =====
Division and Subsidiary Ray S. AbuZayyad President, General Products Division Terry R. Lautenbach President, Communication Products
Chief Executives: Charles P. Biggar.. President, National Service Division Division
Kaspar V. Cassani. Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ Paul R. Low President, General Technology Division
Middle East/Africa Corporation William C. Lowe President, Entry Systems Division
Vincent N.Cook.. President, Federal Systems Division Edward E. Lucente President, Information Products Division
Edward M. Davis. President, Data Systems Division Dennis D. Paboojian President, ROLM Corporation
David A. Finley ... President, IBM Credit Corporation Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr Chairman, IBM World Trade
Victor J. Goldberg. President, National Distribution Division Americas/Far East Corporation, and
Ralph E.Gomory . Director of Research Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation
Lewis W Gray President, South-West Marketing Division Michael J. Quinlan President, North-Central Marketing
JohnE.Guth.Jr. .. President, Science Research Division
Associates, Inc. Stephen B. Schwartz President, System Products Division
Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. President, Real Estate and Charles H. Swall President, Systems Technology Division
Construction Division Robert A.Young President, IBM Instruments, Inc.
IBM World Trade C. Michael Armstrong Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM
Americas /Far East George H. Conrades .. Vice President and Group Executive, IBM
Corporation Jill K.Conway Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., and former President, Smith College,
Board of EHrectors: Northampton, Mass.
Keith Crane Chairman, Colgate-Palmolive Company, New York, N.Y
Morton Ehrlich Executive Vice President,Trans World Aidines, New York, N.Y.
Ralph E.Gomory... Senior Vice President and Director of Research, IBM
Thomas Moving — President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N.Y, and Editor-in-Chief,T/!^ Cwirwisseur
Ryoichi Kawai Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan
Donald R. Keough .. President,The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga.
David E.McKinney. Vice President, IBM, and President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Raymond G. O'Neill Retired Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr.. Senior Vice President, IBM; Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation; and Chairman
of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM
TakeoShiina President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan, Limited
Stephen T. Vehslage ... Vice President, Management Services, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation
Paulo D.Villares Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. Vollmer Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela
IBM World Trade Lewis M. Branscomb Vice President and ChiefScientist, IBM
Europe / Middle East / Tore Browaldh Vice Chairman, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden
Africa Corporation Kaspar V. Cassani Senior Vice President, IBM; President, IBM World Trade Corporation; President, IBM Europe;
Board of Directors: and Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation
Pierre L. Gousseland. Chairman, AMAX, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Paul J. Kofmehl Vice President, IBM; Directeur General, IBM Europe; and President, IBM WorldTrade
Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation
Jack D. Kuehler Senior Vice President, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge. Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Frank A.Metz, Jr Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM
Umberto Nordio Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy
*M. Kenneth Oshman ... Former President, ROLM Corporation
Frank G. Petersen Country General Manager, IBM Denmark
Georges Savy Vice President, IBM WorldTrade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation
Sir Philip Shelbourne ... Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England
Robert M. Stephenson .. Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe
OttoSturzenegger Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y.
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBELGmbH, Darmstadt,Germany
•Elected 1/14/86
Science Research Joseph H. Allen Retired Group President and Director, McGraw-Mill, Inc., New York, N.Y.
Associates, Inc. George B. Beitzel Senior Vice President, IBM
Board of Directors: Patricia AIbjerg Graham Dean, Marvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass.
JohnE.Guth,Jr President, Science Research Associates, Inc.
Wayne M. Moltzman President,The Mogg Foundation for Mental Mealth, Austin,Tex.

===== PAGE 45 =====
'
ii
*
s
r
m J. •>