

===== PAGE 1 =====
i
%
mrni
mm
is
i-
II
I III \ \
1
-mm

===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: IBM's operations:
1 Financial Highlights IBM is in the business of applying advanced
information technology to solve the problems
2 Letter to Stockholders
of business, government, science, space
5 The Competitive Edge exploration, defense, education, medicine and
16 A Marketing Perspective other areas of human activity IBM offers
customers solutions that incorporate informa-
19 IBM's New Look
tion processing systems, software, commu-
32 IBM in the Community nications systems and other products and
services to address specific needs. These solu-
33 Financial Report
tions are provided by IBM's worldwicie
Report of Management
marketing organizations, as well as through
Report of Independent Accountants
the company's Business Partners, including
Earnings
authorized dealers and remarketers.
Financial Position
Cash Flows
Stockholders' Equity
Management Discussion
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
54 Directors and Officers
56 Stockholder Information
Cover and left: Four-year-old Benjamin
Ruffieux of Le Mont, Switzerland, probably
doesn't know — or care — that IBM com-
puters helped him get that scrumptious cone
filled with Nestles ice cream. Swiss-based
Nestle, longf amous for its chocolate, milk and
coffee products, is today the world's largest
food company, offeringf rozen foods, culinary,
dietetic and other products. Nestle and
IBM have worked together for many years in
countries around the world to pursue the
same goal: customer satisfaction.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
for the year ended December 31, i<
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1988 I987tt
Highlights of the year:
Revenue 59,681 55,256
Earnings before income taxes 9,033 8,630
Income taxes 3,542 3,372
Net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change. 5,491 5,258
Per share 9.27 8.72
Cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxest 315
Per share .53
Net earnings 5,806 5,258
Per share 9.80 8.72
Cash dividends paid 2,609 2,654
Per share 4.40 4.40
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 5,431 4,312
Average number of shares outstanding (in millions) . . .. 592 603
Return on stockholders' equity 14.9% 14.5%
At end of year:
Total assets 73,037 $ 70,029
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 23,426 $ 22,967
Working capital 17,956 $ 18,430
Long-term debt 8,518 $ 7,108
Stockholders' equity 39,509 $ 38,263
Number of employees 387,112 389,348
Number of stockholders 833,785 787,988
fRestated in accordance with SFAS 94,
"Consolidation of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries."
^Sce accounting change note on page 44.
Revenue Net Earnings/Dividends Earnings Per Share
59,681
55,256 10.77 10.67
52,160 9.80
50,718 6,582 6,555
46,309
5,806 8.72
5,258 781
4,789
2,703 2,654 2,609
2,507
1984 '85 '86 '87 1984 '85 '87 195 1984 '85 '86 '87
Dividends Net Earnings

===== PAGE 4 =====
Letter to Stockholders
For the fourth quarter —and for 1988 as a tive effect of SFAS 96) were $4.1 billion in Emerging technologies such as image
whole —IBM's shipments, revenue and earn- 1988, an increase of 23.3 percent over com- processing and artificial intelligence offer
ings surpassed 1987 levels. Our customers parable 1987 net earnings of $3.3 billion. great promise for the future.
have responded positively to improved prod- For the quarter ended December 31, Competition is more intense and diverse
ucts in every segment of our business, worldwide net earnings were $2.3 billion, than ever before. Worldwide, the industry
and we have increased our etficiency signifi- compared with $2.1 billion for the same can count some 75,000 participants.They
cantly. These actions have served to further period last year, an increase of 12.4 percent. range from large, long-established hardware,
strengthen IBM's competitive position. Earnings per share were $3.97, compared software and service companies to suppliers
Worldwide net earnings for the year with $3.47 for the fourth quarter of 1987. of single components. New competitors
ended December 31,1988, were $5.8 billion, Revenue was $20.0 billion, compared with appear every day, from all points of the com-
up 10.4 percent from IBM's 1987 earnings $18.3 billion for the 1987 period. pass, many of them entrepreneurs focused
of $5.3 billion. Earnings per share were $9.80 IBM's fourth-quarter results include an on highly specialized market opportunities
in 1988, compared with $8.72 per share for additional one-time charge resulting from or niches.
1987. The after-tax margin was 9.7 percent in greater-than-forecast personnel departures Most important, customers today expect
1988, compared with 9.5 percent in 1987. associated with successful manufacturing more of their informatfon systems invest-
Average shares outstanding were 592.4 and headquarters consolidations. Approxi- ments, and of the companies —and people-
million in 1988 and 603.0 million in 1987. mately 6,500 employees have chosen to leave competing for their business.
Earnings before income taxes were $9.0 IBM. Fourth-quarter results also include the For many customers, information tech-
billion in 1988 and $8.6 billion in 1987. payment made by Fujitsu to IBM as a result of nology is evoh'ing from a productivity tool
Before-tax margins were 15. i percent in 1988 arbitration between the two companies. to a strategic competiti\'e adxantage.They
and 15.6 percent in 1987. The IBM company is continuing to arc applying information systems across the
The results reflect IBM's implementation shov/ improvement in its product line, its range of their operations —to anticipate new
of Statement of Financial Accounting Stan- relationships with customers and its markets, to speed product development,
dards Number 94 (SFAS 94),"Consolidation financial performance. We are managing for or to be first to the marketplace with entirely
of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries." the long term and, with the steps we new services.
Previously released quarterly data for 1987 are taking, we remain confident about the As they choose a supplier, customers
and 1988 have been restated to reflect this future of our business. expect more than technical proficiency,
accounting change, which aflects some line quality and competitive cost. They look for
items but not net earnings. Net earnings for Rapidly Changing Environment consistency, simiplicity and ease of use,
1988 include the effects of Statement of The worldwide information industry contin- whether they are connecting a worldwide
Financial Accounting Standards Number 96 ues to be marked by rapid change: in information network or running a small
(SFAS 96), "Accounting for Income Taxes." expanding markets and new opportunities; business. And they want solutions —
Worldwide revenue was $59.7 billion in in the pace of innovation; and in ever- hardware, software, support, financing —
1988, up 8.0 percent from the prior year's increasing competition. tailored to the specific needs of their indus-
$55.3 billion. Revenue from non-U.S. opera- There is great opportunity in the growth try, their organization, or for individuals
tions in 1988, included in consolidated of global information networks, in medium- at a desktop. In short, customers want to do
results, was $34.4 billion, up 15.5 percent and smaller-sized businesses, and in the business with companies prepared to con-
from $29.8 billion in 1987. Non-U.S. net needs of operating departments and individ- tribute as a partner in helping to solve their
earnings (before adjustment for the cumula- uals in larger organizations. Software and serv- business problems.
ices continue to lead the industry's growth.
In technology, there are no limits
in sight for improvements in performance,
function and value, and the race is on to
make computers simpler and easier to use.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Focus on Solutions
Understanding customers' needs in greater
detail enables us to deliver the solutions they
want, protect their investments and provide
a clear path for growth. In 1988, we intro-
duced or delivered new offerings which give
customers a clear reason for choosing solu-
tions from IBM.
m We announced the Enterprise System/
3090 S series, the industry's most powerful
general-purpose processor; our new
Enterprise Systems Architecture/370 is the
industry's most advanced.
• Introduction of the midrange Application
SystemZ-oo family was the result of a world-
John F. Akers, IBM Chairman of the Board, with Vice Chairmen Jack D. Kuehler (center)
wide eftbrt combining IBM teams working
and Kaspar V. Cassani.
closely with customers and IBM Business
Partners in marketing and software develop-
IBM's Continuing Transformation Responsive to Customers ment. By the time of the first shipment,
Our objective is to be the customer's first Customers tell us they can see the differences more than 2,500 applications were available,
choice as a partner. That is why, over the past in IBM: along with unprecedented support, edu-
three years and more, we have undertaken a • In a three-year increase of 20 percent in cation and follow-on products.The response
comprehensive transformation of our com- the number of IBM people available to work from both current and new customers has
pany. In making these changes, we have with them in solving their problems; been extremely positive.
three continuing objectives: to improve our m In the investments we are making to m We added new, higher-performance mod-
responsiveness, sharpen our competitiveness support our people with industry solutions els to our Personal System/2 (PS/2) family of
and increase our efficiency. and applications knowledge, so they can products and delivered enhancements
Moving more IBM resources close to cus- bring significant value to a business relation- to Operating System/2 software that allow
tomers is a cornerstone of this transforma- ship with IBM; customers to take advantage of the PS/2's
tion. To that end, in 1988 we undertook the ii In simplified contracts, reduced paperwork Micro Channel Architecture.
most significant restructuring of our and greater flexibility and responsiveness, m New communications products improve
business in more than 30 years, estabhshing from financing customers' purchases to help- customers' ability to connect IBM products
seven lines of business and a new organi- ing maintain their systems and networks. and those of other companies; with a
zation—IBM United States. Each line As we participate with customers in their higher-speed Token-Ring Network and
of business is described more fully on pages operations, we are asking them to come improvements to our NetView software, IBM
19 to 30 of this year's report. to our development laboratories, review our strengthened its leadership in network
We have delegated significant decision- plans and programs, and help us to be management solutions.
making and authority to these units, to our sure we are responding to their real needs 19 Our range of operating system software
World Trade country organizations and to and wants. In this, as in other actions we are provides a platform for customers to plan
area managers in our marketing and services taking, we want to be of genuine service. their growth into the 1990s. Key to that
growth is IBM's Systems Application Archi-
operations in the U.S. This new structure
tecture (SAA), which will allow users to look
is enabling us to respond better to the mar-
at and work with applications in a consistent
ketplace, accelerate technological innovation
way across IBM's product line. In 1988,
anci compete more vigorously in every
market we serve.

===== PAGE 6 =====
we introduced SAA-supported data base and New Markets and New Partners brought distinction to him and to the com-
communications software products and Growth in our industry continues to create pany he has served so well for 37 years, most
continued to provide customers and software new opportunities and potential customers. of them in Europe. Kap made especially
developers with clear direction for their One way IBM is reaching them is through significant long-term contributions to IBM's
own development work. alliances and joint ventures around the international growth and success as head of
While managing the business efficiently, world, with companies including Fiat and our World Trade Europe/Middle East/
we are making significant investments for Ericsson in Europe; Nippon Telegraph Africa operations. His keen insight and wise
the long term in solutions, especially soft- and Telephone and Mitsubishi Bank in Japan; counsel were never more valuable than in his
ware, as well as to assure IBM's leadership in Sears, NeXT and Supercomputer Systems, most recent assignment in the United States,
technology. Last year, investments in Inc., in the United States. With them, we are where he led our worldwide marketing
research, development and engineering developing or marketing offerings that and services organizations. As he returns to
were more than $5.9 billion. range from value-added network services, to Europe and prepares to retire, he has our
advanced manufacturing systems, to infor- every good wish and heartfelt thanks.
More Efficient mation, shopping and banking services for
So we can provide the most value to cus- the home. Confidence in the Future
tomers, we continue our drive to increase During 1988, we announced an agree- We compete in a global marketplace,
efficiency, control cost and expense, and ment with Siemens — Europe's largest and IBM is uniquely positioned to bring
streamline IBM. While maintaining full electronics company — under which our worldwide resources to bear on solving cus-
employment, we have trimmed staffs, ROLM Systems development and manufac- tomers' specific problems and achieving
reduced layers of management and elimi- turing operations will become part of their individual goals. We can call on
nated nonessential work, Siemens Information Systems, Inc. A mar- an unmatched technology base, sustained
a To sharpen our focus on IBM's core busi- keting and services company — ROLM— investment and exceptional financial
nesses of computers and communications, will be jointly owned by IBM and Siemens, strength —all essential for growth in the
we have sold our copier sales and service and will market the products of ROLM years ahead.
operations, as well as our educational pub- Systems, Inc., in the United States. We Above all, we are confident because of
lishing subsidiary. expect this new arrangement will provide the talent, loyalty and energy of the
• Through redeployments from staff and telecommunications customers with people of IBM. During these very demand-
support positions, we are nearing our goal of improved product choices and support. ing times, their hard work is preparing
having 50,000 more people directly involved To further extend market coverage, we IBM for continued leadership in our industry.
in developing, marketing or supporting are strengthening relationships with IBM While we are changing much about IBM,
our products than we had in 1986. Business Partners: agents, dealers, industry we have more to do. We are determined to
• Advances in technology and manufac- and applications specialists whose resources keep customers at the center of our business
turing processes allowed us to further con- and skills complement our own. These part- — to be the very best in the world at serving
solidate manufacturing operations and ners, who add nearly 50 percent to our them.The actions we are taking have greatly
reduce the number of IBM plants in the U.S. direct sales force, are increasingly important strengthened our ability to achieve that goal.
from 19 to 14, while retaining the capacity to IBM; we rely on them to reach and support
January 31,1989, by order of the
for future growth. the majority of Personal System/2 and Appli-
Board of Directors
These actions are paying off in shorter cation System/4oo customers worldwide.
product cycles and a better balance between
revenue and profit growth. Since 1986, for Kaspar V. Cassani to Retire
John F. Akers
example, net earnings per employee have In December, Kap Cassani relinquished his
Chairman of the Board
increased by 26 percent. position as Vice Chairman of the Board in
anticipation of his retirement in 1989. His
career as an international business leader

===== PAGE 7 =====
The Competitive Edge
Throughout its history, IBM has enjoyed its greatest
success in the marketplace by transforming advanced infor-
mation technologies into products and services that provide
customers with innovative solutions to their varied needs.
Equally important have been the company's traditional
strengths — a commitment to superior customer service
through a dedicated worldwide support organization, a broad
product line which leads the industry, and the continuous
pursuit of excellence in all endeavors. In the hands of IBM
people, these strengths provide customers with value
that differentiates IBM products and services from those
of the competition.
As the company competes in the computer and commu-
nications marketplace today and in the future, IBM is
committed to these business fundamentals and to deliver-
ing solutions that customers will continue to value.
Bergen Brunswig, a wholesale pharmaceutical
distributor in Orange, California, links its auto-
mated warehouse to IBM systems to speed delivery of
drug and medical supplies to independent
drugstores and hospitals in the Los Angeles area.
The automated facility is a prototype for the
company's distribution centers across the country.

===== PAGE 8 =====
1 VklHs
"imm
i
i mm
Satisfied Customers...
Satisfied customers provide the
foundation on which a sound business
is built, for these customers become
MINS loyal and long-term participants in the
company's success.
I
IBMers throughout the business
IR^GME recognize the value of such customer
loyalty and are working diligently
fOOR to continually earn it.. .by developing
a keener understanding of their special
needs.. .by being responsive to those
mawdes needs... and by using IBM's expertise,
experience and resources to deliver
solutions that, in turn, help customers
to be more productive in their
endeavors.
IBM people also are working to ensure
they deliver a consistently superior
level of service in every relationship
with the customer.. .to make sure ever)
involvement with IBM is a satisfying
experience... and one the customer
will want to repeat.
Peugeot dealers throughout France
can place orders for everything
from parts to interior colors using
IBM personal systems installed
in each dealership. The computers an
tied via a network of System/^6s to
r Peuseot headauarters in Paris.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Competitive Products...
Leadership hardware, programming
and support services make possible
comprehensive solutions that respond
to customers' information needs.
An IBM system has helped Thailand's In the last year, IBM has made major
largest tapioca processor increase strides in refreshing its product offerings
its business by enabling the company ... extending the connectivity and ease
to offer better service, quicker
of use of operating systems and
turnaround and next-day payments
application programs... adding new
to local farmers supplying the
raw root. Chao Phya Company has function and flexibility across its
seen its productivity increase by computer families... and introducing
percent. enhanced support services. These
offerings will respond to customers'
needs for many years to come.
To ensure that future products reflect
customers' changing needs and
expectations, IBM has invited customers
into its product planning process.
Their participation is already helping
the company to deliver more
responsive solutions, while protecting
customers' current investments in
IBM information products.
The Hongkong and Shanghai
Banking Corporation in
Hong Kong employs a network of
IBM systems to maintain its
Children in Prince George's
competitive position in the inter-
County, Maryland, are receiving
national money markets.
individualized, self paced
instruction with the assistance of
nearly 1,^00 PS/2s in the
county's elementary schools.

===== PAGE 10 =====


===== PAGE 11 =====
7 J 4#/,| # ' sW^^i g
f ?3>, /j
mrtvlt**-^ rM---?^
^ - - . lLirt>s«i '
t!
M
^ A
% s-.
Spectators view Sanyo Securities impressive,
new trading room in Tokyo. Working with IBM,
Sanyo has developed one of the world's most
advanced portfolio management systems to bettei
advise its customers on financial decisions.

===== PAGE 12 =====
nmsa
V
•f': /
/
J®" 'S&'^Sl^'*

===== PAGE 13 =====
A W o r l d w i de S c o p e . ..
IBM's customers — current and
potential — range from individuals
considering a first computer to
multinational companies looking
for solutions on a global scale.
What they share, however, is the
need for a tailored solution that meets
their specific needs.
Of all the firms in the information
industry, IBM is the company uniquely
able to provide solutions for both...
and all those in between.
Customers can take advantage of
solutions that require IBM's full range
of products — from personal systems
through the industry's largest general-
purpose computers — as well as
IBM computers at the University
communications networks, program-
of Wisconsin are helping researchers
ming, peripherals and numerous
analyze vast amounts of meteor-
ological data. The information is support services. A worldwide support
used by the National Weather organization, including IBM Business
Service, NASA, universities and Partners, delivers these solutions
companies like Federal Express.
in more than 130 countries around
the world.
The National Park Service of
France at Mercantour is using IBM
personal systems for applications
ranging from monitoring and track-
ing movements of the endangered
ibex to developing educational
and informational programs for
park visitors.
El Corte Ingles, a Spanish depart-
ment store chain headquartered
in Madrid, relies on IBM retail systems
and nearly 6,^00 point-of-sale
terminals to manage its inventory,
billing and credit checks.

===== PAGE 14 =====
•
•I ! ^
j'AlT^. V ^ -1 industry Leadership...
• -y -It
! Businesses around the world have
grown to reahze that information tech-
nology is crucial in today's marketplace.
It improves their efficiency, reduces
their cost structure, and opens whole
new markets and opportunities. Many
find IBM solutions have given them
a decided competitive advantage.
IBM has long enjoyed a reputation for
technological leadership in the industry
... in semiconductors... in storage
technology... and in communications
architectures that have become
important templates for emerging
worldwide standards.
To maintain its leadership, the compan)
is quickening the pace of techno-
logical advances and speeding them
from the laboratory into the product
line, so customers continue to see
, mm ™ a difference in IBM function and value.
V
IBM will aim to be the industry leader
ratmi
in every market it enters, and be the
front-runner in quality, efficiency and
competitiveness.
Schneider National, Inc., a coast-
to-coast truckload organization,
is installing an innovative two-way
r satellite data communications
link between an IBM 30^0 at the
company's Green Bay, Wisconsin,
headquarters and each of its 5,500
tractors. This allows Schneider
to improve customer service and
automate routing.
IRM mfl Annual Report I
iiv t JWi V".' J^ «

===== PAGE 15 =====
A Marketing Perspective
IBM's marketing and services operations
around the world continued to enhance the
company's working relationships with
customers in 1988, focusing on better under-
standing their needs and responding
to them with comprehensive and innova-
tive solutions.
Global marketing efforts continued
to show steady progress in 1988, both in the
U.S. and the World Trade organizations.
The Systems Integration Division,
for example, was awarded a major contract to
upgrade the U.S. air traffic control system.
The $3.5 billion multi-year contract calls for
IBM to develop, install and service the
advanced air traffic system.
In Europe, a joint venture involving ten
leading companies in the airline and
travel industries placed an order for products
and services that is among the largest
ever signed by IBM in Europe. IBM systems
will be used in a network designed to
handle high-speed transactions, including
ticketing, car reservations and other
worldwide services.
Continuing the dialogue it began
in 1987, the company extended its series
of forums for customers around the world.
These forums provide IBM executives
IBM Around the World
with an opportunity to discuss current prod-
IBM currently does business with more
uct strategies and business directions,
than 3 million customers in more
and to get feedback and suggestions from
than 1^0 countries through its U.S. and
customer executives. Regional forums
World Trade organizations. The geo-
and local meetings also were held to involve
graphic organizations and their areas
additional customers.
of responsibility are:
IBM further expanded its field marketing
force to increase the company's coverage in IBM United States
customer accounts. Worldwide, the company IBM World Trade Americas Group
has added more than 15,000 marketing IBM World Trade Asia/Pacific Group
representatives and systems engineers in the IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/
last two years through redeployment Africa Corporation

===== PAGE 16 =====
programs and new hiring. With this added
resource, the company has seen a dramatic
increase in the amount of time marketing
representatives are able to devote to their
customers and prospects, both in the United
States and World Trade countries.
The company also ran education pro-
grams throughout the world to sharpen spe-
cialized skills of its marketing personnel.
These programs, coupled with the sales
training program, made 1988 one of the most
extensive years of marketing education in
the company's history.
To increase its coverage in new accounts
and in those with special requirements,
the company expanded its Business Partners
program in 1988. IBM Business Partners
include remarketers, dealers and agents who
sell selected IBM products, or complement
IBM products and services with their own
products to address specific customer needs.
To promote the development of applica-
tion programs for IBM products, the com-
pany created software development institutes
in ten Latin American countries. These
organizations provide special offerings —
including financial incentives, hardware and
systems engineering expertise —to help
third-party agents and software companies
develop computer applications for the Latin
American marketplace.
In 1988, IBM purchased Spectrum
Services from PacTel Communications Com-
panies, a subsidiary of Pacific Telesis Group.
Spectrum Services, now part of the National
Service Division (NSD), helps customers
manage a wide range of devices and associ-
ated communications lines.
The company further broadened its
support services to customers, announcing
that it will coordinate and manage

===== PAGE 17 =====
hardware maintenance on non-IBM equip-
ment through a new service offering.
The announcement estabhshes IBM as a single
service source for its customers.
Taking advantage of the rapid growth of
information processing throughout the
Asia-Pacific area, IBM's Asia/Pacific Group
(A/PG) is actively pursuing joint ventures
and alliances. IBM Japan, for example, is
involved in i8 alliances with Japanese com-
panies. Other alliances in Taiwan, Korea
and Singapore are expected to contribute to
A/PG's performance.
IBM's World Trade Europe/Middle
East/Africa Corporation also continued to
An Italian clothing manufacturer relies on an IBM
address customers' needs through alliances
computer to help manage orders and client lists,
and joint ventures. These relationships allow
and to estimatefabric needs. Thefirm purchased the
IBM to combine its information-handling
system from SESA, an IBM agent in Florence.
capabilities with other firms' special skills
and market access. Together they can provide
highly specialized products and services that In many parts of the world, account
would be uneconomical for IBM to develop executives dealing with larger customers are
and market itself using a valuable new sales aid. With the
Recognizing the growth potential help of a special computer program, market-
of the software and services business, IBM ing personnel can analyze customers'
Canada is focusing on joint development application portfolios, business goals and
programs with customers involving lead- competitive position. They then can show
ing-edge applications. To date, it has how investments in information systems
entered more than 75 joint projects. These will improve the customers' return on equity
programs will provide customers with and earnings per share.
early access to advanced applications, while The company also continued to focus on
IBM gains valuable product experience making it easier for customers to do
under real business conditions. business with IBM. For example, IBMLink, an
Twenty application development centers on-line electronic support service announced
have been established in countries served in May, makes it easier for customers to
by A/PG.These centers bring customers, IBM find information such as product and software
Business Partners and IBM account teams specifications and functions, prices and
together to customize and develop new appli- delivery dates.
cations for use on IBM systems. As part of To improve customer service and speed
this effort, country operations have direct transactions, the company continued to
access to application data bases in A/PG, the simplify contracts and terms and conditions.
U.S. and the U.K., making thousands of IBM also worked to develop approaches
applications available to customers through- to make it easier for multinational customers to
out the Asia-Pacific area. do business with a single worldwide company.

===== PAGE 18 =====
IBM's New Look
In order to enhance responsiveness to customers, IBM
restructured its operations in 1988 and established seven Une
of business organizations. Working together, the hnes
of business are responsible for meeting customers' needs for
increased computing power, connectivity and ease of use,
and for solutions to their business problems.
To achieve these aims, the lines of business were given
responsibility for worldwide development and manufacturing
operations in the U.S., as well as for the revenue and profit-
ability goals of their products and services. These new organi-
zations — along with US Marketing and Services —
report to IBM United States, which is now headquarters for
all of IBM's day-to-day business operations in the U.S.
Each line of business is described in the following pages.
An ADP/IBM alliance utilizing ADP application
software and IBM Personal System/2s enables
Merrill Lynch & Co. and other brokerage firms to
process securities transactions with increased
productivity, while providing a higher level of
service to their clients.

===== PAGE 19 =====
IBM's New Look Application Solutions
R
Application Solutions works with egardless of the environment —the aid them in meeting their goals. The plans
IBM's customers to develop office, plant, laboratory, university or that are prepared demonstrate IBM's commit-
solutions for their total informa- U.S. federal government —customers ment to a partnership with customers.
tion processing requirements. want solutions from IBM that make them Finally, the industry marketing units
This line of business unites more productive. and the market development organizations
application development, systems Application Solutions' first priority is within Application Solutions work with
integration, professional to understand the customer's business thor- enterprises to identify new opportunities for
services and market development oughly and then devise a solution. That applying information technology. The
activities, and also focuses on solution could come from IBM's broad range increase in multinational financial transac-
furthering IBM's ties with compa- of information-handling products and tions, computer-integrated manufacturing
nies that develop, market and services, or could be a unique system that and the use of image processing are examples
install IBM products. combines IBM's offerings with those of of areas where Application Solutions is
other companies. creating state-of-the-art systems that lead
For example, IBM led an industry team the industry.
that won a $3.5 billion contract to modern- In all these areas, Application Solutions
ize the U.S. air traffic control system puts the customers' needs first. This line
nationwide. Developing, deploying and of business marshals IBM's uniquely broad
servicing this Advanced Automation System resources and skill base to put information-
(AAS) for the Federal Aviation Administra- handling solutions at the customers' disposal.
tion will be one of the largest projects ever
undertaken by IBM. AAS has many unique NBC is using a two-way satellite communications
requirements, but the lessons learned in cre- system to improve communications with affiliated
ating such an advanced system can be stations. The satellite system features two IBM
applied to the needs of complex, commer- Application System/400 computers at its hub.
cial enterprises, too.
Ned Lautenbach
The individual user represents the
General Manager
other end of the customer spectrum.
Application Solutions
Here, Application Solutions also is busy
fulfilling needs. For anyone working at a
terminal, an application program can often
be the part of the system that is most im-
portant to getting the job done. Application
Solutions is rapidly expanding the number
of programs that are available from IBM,
or from other companies that provide soft-
ware to run with IBM equipment. This line
of business assists software development
companies through technical seminars
and guidance to make it easier for them to
create new solutions for IBM customers.
In addition, consulting services are
offered to help organizations define their
information-handling requirements and
determine how computing technology can

===== PAGE 20 =====
Programming Systems
C
Programming Systems is ustomers need rapid access to levels of data security while executing
responsible for development of data and applications no matter 50 percent more work than the earlier version.
data management software, where they are stored within their The company also agreed to license
programming languages and networks.They also want to be able to call selected application development and expert
application development up that information in a uniform fashion on system technologies from Transform Logic
software. The line of business all their equipment. Systems Application Corporation of Scottsdale, Arizona. IBM
also is responsible for the Architecture™ (SAA) ensures that applica- will use the technology to enhance Cross
development and implemen- tion software is consistent so that it can be System Product (CSP), a software tool cus-
tation of Systems Application run on different systems. tomers can use to create application pro-
Architecture. SAA is part of IBM's ongoing commit- grams under SAA. For those customers who
ment to software leadership in the industry. want to write their own computer code,
Programming Systems ensures it is imple- software like CSP substantially speeds up
mented across IBM's product line. program development cycles.
SAA development efforts are concen- Programming Systems will continue to
trated on three basic customer requirements. enhance SAA and ensure that it is uniformly
First, users want a uniform view of applica- and efficiently implemented across the IBM
tions across multiple systems. Second, appli- product line, giving the customer the
cation program interfaces —incluciing tools, benefits of reduced software development
languages and services —should be consis- time and expense.
tent in all environments. Finally, standards
should be consistent to facilitate the exchange
of applications across different systems.
Under SAA, applications written for one
computer can be shifted without difficulty
to a different system and run efficiently.
Earl Wheeler
Since the Programming Systems line of
General Manager
business was formed, two new SAA-sup-
Programming Systems
ported operating systems —Operating Sys-
tem/2 (OS/2)™ and Operating System/^oo
(OS/i-oo)™ — were introduced, and new
versions of COBOL were shipped. In June, an
SAA-supported relational data base was
announced for the Application System/^oo!"
A new version of DATABASE 2 (DB2™),
one of IBM's relational data base manage-
A joint development effort involving Bankers
ment systems, also was introduced. This
Trust Company and IBM gives the bank's cor-
version provides customers with advanced
porate customers greater access to theirfinancial
records through IBM personal systems linked
to the bank's information systems.

===== PAGE 21 =====
IBM's New Look Communication Systems
C
Communication Systems is ustomers must be able to manage Network management software like
responsible for IBM's communica- and distribute information through NetView™ and NetView/PC™ enables
tions products, including con- all levels of their business in a customers to manage global networks effi-
trollers, modems, connectivity and timely, reliable and cost-efficient manner. ciently from a central site and provides
network management soft- Ensuring that customers have the tools the channels for communication between
ware, and for Systems Network to do this is the mission of the Communica- IBM and non-IBM information products.
Architecture. The line of business tion Systems line of business. Enhancements to IBM NetView, for example,
also oversees IBM Information Communication Systems provides the assist customers in automating many
Network services, as well as products that enable systems to com- aspects of their network operations. A new
internal telecommunications municate with each other and share infor- version of NetView/PC uses the acivanced
in the U.S. mation and applications. The line of business Micro Channel™ Architecture of the
also produces many telecommunications Personal System/2® to enable NetView
devices designed to speed the flow of to function more effectively during periods
information through networks. of intense network activity. NetView/PC
Controllers, for example, provide an allows the customer to analyze problems
efficient means of managing and distribut- and take action more quickly.
ing data among processors and peripherals. IBM Token-Ring networks permit
The IBM 3745, a high-availability, high- groups of personal computers and processors
performance communications controller, to share information, files and printers.
features twice as many channels as earlier
models, vastly increasing the system's
capacity and flexibility.
Among the software products intro-
duced in 1988 were several advanced connec-
tivity offerings, including three new Open
Ellen Hancock
Systems Interconnection (OSI) products.
General Manager
They make it easier for computers operating
Communication Systems
in networks containing several manu-
facturers' equipment to communicate with
each other and share information.
IBM continued to enhance Systems
Network Architecture (SNA) in 1988. SNA
provides the rules and structure that
enable users to establish and manage infor-
mation networks.
Representatives of IBM and an independent
consulting firm are working with the staff of the
Rheinische Post to install an electronic page-
layout system at the newspaper. The system is part
of an integrated approach for automating the
DiXsseldorf newspaper's operations.

===== PAGE 22 =====
70 countries, including the U.S., Canada, IBM's success in the rapidly growing
Japan and countries throughout Europe, telecommunications market rests on increased
IBM's Information Network has become one connectivity, including linking IBM equip-
of the industry's premier value-added net- ment to that of other vendors. Because
works, offering reliable around-the-clock customers are building increasingly large and
national and international connectivity with complex networks, IBM is working with
a high level of data security. industry-wide groups and government agen-
In December, IBM and Siemens announced cies to help formulate international standards.
an agreement under which ROLM Systems The intent of these efforts is to ensure
will become part of Siemens. Communication IBM continues to be a superior supplier in the
Systems will be responsible for coordinat- worldwide telecommunications marketplace.
ing telecommunications development efforts
with ROLM Systems. A marketing and
services company— ROLM —also was estab-
lished. It will be jointly owned by IBM
A computer-aided dispatch system used by thea nd Siemens. ROLM will market voice tele-
Baltimore police speeds handling of emergency ccaolmlsm. unications products in the United
The system, which features a high-availability States. In addition, IBM subsidiaries will
IBM computer, verifies the caller's address and
market the 9750 Business Communications
determines which patrol car should respond.
System in Canada, Hong Kong, Japan
and other countries, and Siemens-manufac-
IBM strengthened its support of local tured PBX products in Europe.This new
area network (LAN) environments, announc- arrangement strengthens IBM's offerings
ing new high-speed LAN products that to its customers.
enable customers to handle advanced applica-
tions and communicate more eftectively.
Token-Ring enhancements quadruple the
speed at which a LAN can handle infor-
mation. This speed is made possible by the
industry's first one-micron, combined
analog/digital chip.
The IBM Information Network
ofters customers a single worldwide network
connection to communicate with other
companies and organizations, improving
both efficiency and productivity. Network
services include electronic mail and
data interchanges such as purchase orders
and invoices. Now offered in more than
Steelcase Inc., a manufacturer of office furniture
in Grand Rapids, Michigan, employs a sophisticated
network of IBM products to link its plants, head-
quarters and development sites.

===== PAGE 23 =====
IBM's New Look Enterprise Systems
C
Efiterprise Systems is responsible ustomers today are calling upon
for all of IBM's System/^jo Enterprise Systems' family
products, including the company's of System/370™ products to handle
most advanced processors and increasingly complex tasks such as managing
their operating systems and global networks consisting of thousands
storage subsystems. System/^jo of terminals, rapid processing of millions of
processors include the industry's transactions, and manipulating very large
most powerful general-purpose data bases.These systems provide IBM's great-
computer, as well as IBM's est information-handling capabilities, offer-
supercomputer offering. Enter- ing vast amounts of storage capacity, advanced
prise Systems also produces programming and extensive application
IBM's high-volume printers and libraries to help meet customers' needs.
software products. At the top of the System/370 product
line is the IBM Enterprise System/3090™S
family of computers. Announced in July,
these processors provide the largest span of
application processing power available today.
In addition, they establish a platform for
developing solutions to meet very broad
information processing requirements.
Contel Corporation, an Atlanta-based communi-
The S series also offers customers the
cations company, manages its domestic telephone
flexibility to easily upgrade smaller processors
and communications services using applications
into more powerful models as customers'
run on a network of IBM computers.
needs grow.
IBM's mid-sized System/370 offerings
Carl Conti
consist of the widely used IBM £8/^381™ increased substantially during the year.
General Manager
series, which is often used for distributed data A range of powerful operating systems
Enterprise Systems
processing, or as a smaller stand-alone system. can be run on these System/370 processors.
The entry point into the System/370 Multiple Virtual Storage (MVS) is the pre-
line is the IBM Enterprise System/9370™ mier operating environment for IBM's largest
Designed for customers who need the power and most complex systems, especially
of a mainframe in a compact processor, where maximum performance is required.
the ES/9370™ allows the advantages of the Virtual Machine (VM) is IBM's most widely
System/370 family to be distributed to used operating system for developing new
an office environment. software applications. In addition, these sys-
The ES/9370 was strengthened in 1988 tems can run the popular Virtual Storage
with the debut of three new models offering Extended (VSE) and Transaction Processing
improved price/performance when com- Facility, commonly used in high-volume
pared with earlier models. The number of applications such as airline reservation
applications available with the ES/9370 also systems. IBM also will offer AIX/370, IBM's
version of the UNIX® operating system.
The System/370 family, initially introduced
in 1970, continues to evolve, enabling
customers to add new function and power,

===== PAGE 24 =====
while protecting their investments in
programming and applications.
In 1988, IBM continued to add to the
value of the System/370 line, announcing
Enterprise Systems Architecture/370
(ESA/37o)y" The most advanced architecture
in the industry, ESA/370 provides customers
with as much as 8,000 times more virtual
storage than IBM's previous architecture.
Also introduced were the MVS/ESA™ oper-
ating system and related software subsystems
that enable customers to take advantage of
the architecture to effectively handle
ever-increasing amounts of information.
In the engineering and scientific com-
Engineers at Parker Hannifin Corporation in
puting arena, IBM introduced an enhanced
Cleveland, Ohio, are using IBM processors and design
vector facility for mathematically inten-
software to produce precise motion control systems
sive workloads.The vector facility increases
for the aerospace and automotive industries.
the speed at which complex calculations
can be done.The larger ES/3090 S models, The prospects for the growth of large
for example, provide supercomputer perform- processors remain strong because customers
ance when equipped with multiple vector continue to search for ways to increase the
facilities. IBM is the only company in the power and flexibility of their systems.
industry which is manufacturing supercom- Demand for these systems also will be
puters in volume. driven by the growth of networks. As per-
Enterprise Systems also produces sonal systems and workstations are installed
the IBM 3380 Direct Access Storage Device, in more offices, schools and homes, they
IBM 3990 Storage Control units and increasingly will be tied to networks in
storage management software. These subsys- which central host computers act as the link
tems enhance a processor's data-handling to data bases and applications from all
capabilities by providing added storage over the world.
capacity, fast access times and high reliabil- In addition, emerging technologies like
ity. System printers, including the new IBM image processing, which requires very
6262 line printer, add a rapid and flexible large amounts of storage, and knowledge-
means of generating output on paper. based systems, which codify the skills of
To further its efforts in supercomputers, human experts, will augment today's infor-
IBM signed an agreement with Supercom- mation-handling systems. The processing
puter Systems, Inc. (SSI) for the development power for these new capabilities will come
of advanced computing systems. The goal from IBM's large systems.
ConAgra Poultry Company of El Dorado,
is to achieve accelerated development of
Arkansas, coordinates its growing houses, feed
supercomputers, using IBM's and SSI's com-
mills, processing plants and distribution facilities
bined strengths in high-performance
with the aid of a network of IBM computers.
technology and system design.

===== PAGE 25 =====
IBM's New Look Application Business Systems
M
Application Business Systems idrange systems represent a sub-
is responsible for IBM's midrange stantial opportunity for growth for
processors and related software IBM. Estimates show that in the
and operating systems, including U.S. there are about 3 milhon estabUshments
the Application System/400, with information-handhng requirements
and for the IBM System/^6 and that justify the purchase of a midrange
System/^8, which are the computer.There are an additional 9 milhon
most widely used midrange proces- projected establishments worldwicie.
sors in the industry. This Many of the midrange systems sold each
line of business also develops year are bought by large companies for
storage devices for IBM's use as departmental systems or as part of dis-
midrange and Personal System/2 tributed configurations. However, about
product families. two-thirds of these systems are purchaseci by
small- and intermediate-sized businesses.
Their data processing requirements are
growing dramatically —as much as 2.5 times
faster than those of large enterprises.
To address this emerging opportunity,
the company introduced the IBM Applica-
tion Systern4-oo (AS/4oo) — one of the most
extensive product development undertakings In Japan, Nippon Life Insurance Company's sales
ever. More than 170,000 people around the force uses the computing power of IBM systems
and customized software to develop comprehensive
world attended the announcement meetings.
financial plans for its customers.
IBM and its Business Partners also
unveiled more than 1,000 software packages
Stephen Schwartz
for use with the AS/^00 on announcement such diverse fields as retailing, manufactur-
General Manager
day. These Business Partners included ing, finance, distribution, health, legal,
Application Business Systems
software developers who create and market transportation, insurance and education.
new application programs authorized by The six new AS/4oo models and Operat-
IBM. IBM provides technical assistance and ing System/4oo are designed to grow as
guidance to help them bring solutions to users' requirements change.
market faster. By the end of 1988, more The AS/4oo's integrated relational data
than 4,000 software applications were avail- base means that users only have to learn one
able, enabling users to put the AS/4oo set of system functions or commands
into operation quickly. to manipulate and store data. In addition, the
These applications — many of them systems' advanced architecture assures cus-
custom-tailored for specific industries — tomers that their processor will be able to
allow the AS/4oo family to help users in accommodate emerging hardware and soft-
ware technologies such as optical storage,
expert systems, image processing, voice-data
integration and advanced communications.

===== PAGE 26 =====
The AS/4OO also makes use of the best
features of two of IBM's most successful
products: the IBM System/36, recognized
for its ease of use and connectivity — and the
System/38, acclaimed for its program
development productivity. Both are recog-
nized in the industry for their excellent price/
performance and are perennially ranked
at the top of customer satisfaction surveys.
In June, enhancements to the entry-
level IBM System/36 Model 5363 doubled
the memory and direct access storage,
and increased the communications speed of
earlier models.The 5363 also expanded
local area network support for personal com-
puters and added optical file capability. Walker Williams Lumber Company of Hatchechub-
bee, Alabama, has installed an IBM Application
The year also included two techno-
System/400 to help manage its accounting
logical firsts for storage products. One was
operations. Eventually the company plans to use
IBM's first thin-film media file, announced
the computer to analyze production data.
with the low-end AS/^00 system. The
thin-film file permits users to store more
information in much less space. In addi-
tion, the company began the industry's first
volume shipments of 3^/2-inch disk files
with a capacity of more than 100 million
bytes of information. The 3y2-inch files
are used with the Personal System/2.
IBM's success in midrange products
depends on the company's ability to deliver
solutions. IBM and its Business Partners
are committed to developing application solu-
tions faster than ever before for midrange
products, putting processing power in the
hands of customers without the need for
extensive training and system start-up costs.
IBM also plans to continue efforts to
enhance the price/performance, connectiv-
ity and function of these popular and
versatile processors.
Horizon Hobby Distributors, a wholesaler of
radio-controlled products in Champaign, Illinois,
uses an IBM Application System/400 to provide
24-hour-a-day service to its customers. Hobby stores
with personal computers can link into Horizon
Hobby's computer via telephone to check prices and
availability, and place orders.

===== PAGE 27 =====
IBM's New Look Personal Systems
I
Personal Systems is responsible nformation has become a critical asset
for IBM's desktop systems, includ- in today's business world. The abihty to
ing the IBM Personal System/2, access and manipulate data quickly
the high-performance IBM RT and easily is essential to business managers
workstation, and their operating and professionals at every level. Personal
systems software and supplies. computers and workstation products put
This line of business also oversees information on the desktop, greatly
typewriters, displays and IBM's enhancing people's productivity.
printers for desktop and mid- Growth in desktop computer products
range systems. has been dramatic. In October, the company
shipped its three-millionth Personal
System/2 (PS/2®) to a customer in Australia,
just 18 months after the PS/2 family was
announced.
More than half of all the PS/2s sold
Greyhound Lines of Canada, Ltd., a Canadian
have the company's advanced Micro Channel
bus company, has installed IBM Personal System/Is
Architecture. Micro Channel provides the
in its offices to assist its busiest ticket agents.
pathway to move large amounts of data
Supplied by IBM Canada and ComputerLand
more efficiently than previous IBM personal
Alberta, the application captures ridership, desti-
computers, resulting in improved function
nation and fare information as it generates tickets.
and reliability
IBM continued its efforts to make its per-
sonal computers more powerful and eas- IBM also introduced the Personal
ier to use, and refreshed its Personal System/2 System/2 Model 50 z, which provides cus-
family with seven new desktop models tomers with up to 35 percent better perfor-
Richard Gerstner
that allow business professionals to process mance than the earlier Model 50. It offers faster
General Manager
and share large, complex applications faster memory, as well as more and faster storage.
Personal Systems
and more easily than ever before. With DOS, OS/2 and Advanced Interac-
One of the new models, the PS/2 tive Executive (AIX™), IBM has a multiple
Model 70 386, available in three configura- operating system strategy for its desktop
tions, is now IBM's fastest PS/2. One version computers that gives customers a choice of
of this desktop model provides customers solutions for addressing their information-
with up to 1V2 times faster system handling needs.
throughput, or program execution, than OS/2 is the company's flagship product
was available on IBM's previous top-of- for Systems Application Architecture. It
the-line PS/2 model. offers users improved productivity and ease
of use, and enables the system to run several
different programs simultaneously. PS/2,
along with OS/2, provides the company's SAA
platform for desktop processing into the
next decade.
IBM shipped several software products
that enhance the performance and flexibility
of the PS/2 family OS/2 Extended Edition

===== PAGE 28 =====
and OS/2 LAN server, for example, pro-
vide users with the abihty to communicate
with other computers, manage vast amounts
of data more easily, and share information
across a local area network. In addition, IBM
introduced Presentation Manager™ a rich
graphical interface for OS/2 users. For entry
level users, the PS/2's DOS operating system
was made easier to use.
AIX, IBM's version of the UNIX oper-
ating system, will be extended to the
company's largest computers with AIX/370.
With the PS/2, the IBM RT® system and
System/370 versions, AIX will offer the
broadest growth path in its class. IBM is a
founding sponsor of the Open Software When Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., opened its first
hypermart in Garland, Texas, the company selected
Foundation, formed to develop a standard
IBM RT systems to help manage the large amounts
operating system for customers.
of data generated by the store.
Peavey Electronics, a musical and^ sound
equipment manufacturer in Meridian, Mississippi, The RT system, IBM's Reduced Instruc- per hour. IBM's newer typewriter models
relies on IBM systems and software to design tion Set Computer (RISC) technology incorporate some of the functions of
and produce guitars and amplifiers, and markewt orkstation, is a full-function, 32-bit work- personal computers, while maintaining the
them around the world. station that can perform complex informa- typewriter's familiar look and feel.
tion processing tasks that normally require The potential of the desktop market will
much larger computers. It can be used for grow further as the performance, capacity
manufacturing tasks and for engineering/ and ease of use of personal systems and work-
scientific applications, as well as for a variety stations continue to improve. IBM is strength-
of business and administrative applications, ening its position as the unquestioned
including general business publishing, leader in personal computing and the vendor
project management, accounting, financial of choice for technology on the desktop.
analysis and data base management. IBM Personal Systems will continue to
IBM announced three new models of the enhance the performance and application of
RT system during 1988.These workstations its desktop computers by offering a wide
offer up to 25 percent faster performance range of products to serve the diverse com-
than previous RT models. puting needs of customers in all segments
Printers, typewriters and displays are of the market.
other important elements of the Personal
Systems product line. IBM offers the broadest
range of printers in the industry. Personal
Systems is responsible for printers ranging
from small models for individual users and
departments to midrange printers capable of
producing thousands of pages of output

===== PAGE 29 =====
IBM's New Look Technology Products
T
Technology Products is responsi- echnology Products provides IBM's and include high-performance chips in
ble for the worldwide develop- manufacturing and development sites IBM's Enterprise System/3090 S processors
me7it and U.S. manufacturing of with leading-edge semiconductors that are four times denser and operate twice
logic and memory technology, and circuit packaging used in the company's as fast as their predecessors.
and the electronic packaging used information systems and products. Significant advances are ahead. The
throughout the entire IBM Over the years, the company has pio- Advanced Technology Center under con-
product line. neered many of the major advances in circuit struction in East Fishkill, New York, will
technology.These have given IBM systems explore innovative techniques for designing
exceptional performance and reliability. and manufacturing the next generation of
During 1988, for example, the IBM microchips at IBM's semiconductor facilities
plant in Burlington, Vermont, became the around the world. The center also will
first in the industry to produce semicon- continue investigations into advanced
ductor chips from eight-inch wafers.The packaging design.
larger wafer yields three times as many The trencis in microelectronics are clear
chips as the five-inch wafer that has become — chip technology will continue to become
the industry standard. It provides nearly faster, denser and smaller. Keeping IBM at
twice the yield of six-inch wafers. the technological forefront of the industry is
IBM was also the first company in the the responsibility of this line of business.
industry to use one-million-bit memory IBM's advanced semiconductors make it
technology in high-end computer products. possible to put significantly more power and
In 1988, the company started producing function in smaller processors. Similarly,
four-mil lion-bit memory chips and began these advances in technology also are mak-
fabricating a i6-million-bit chip. ing computing power more aftbrdable to
Advances in logic have been as impressive more customers.
Patrick Toole
General Manager
Technology Products
Employees at IBM's Burlington, Vermont, manu-
facturing facility prepare eight-inch wafers
containing one-million-bit chips used extensively
in IBM products.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Other Organizations
I
n addition to its United States and World with a material containing the elements thal-
Trade organizations, IBM maintains a lium, barium, calcium, copper and oxygen.
Research Division whicli focuses on basic IBM researchers and the University
research and de\'elopment of technologies of California, Davis, are collaborating on the
of long-range importance to the company. development of a state-of-the-art robotic
IBM also operates IBM Credit Corporation and system that may someday assist surgeons in
participates in Prodigy Services Company replacing natural hip joints with metal
in partnership with Sears, Roebuck and Co. and plastic implants.The robotic system may
help ensure a more precise fit and accurate
Research Division alignment of implants.
Scientists at IBM's research laboratories
IBM Credit Corporation
made several important advances in semi-
conductor technology during 1988.The IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned
researchers tested the world's smallest and subsidiary of IBM, primarily offers financing
fastest silicon circuits, made from parts of IBM products to customers through
that arc a tenth of a micron (one thousand flexible offerings at competitive rates. In
times smaller than the width of a human 1988, IBM Credit introduced several new
hair) and able to switch on or off 75 billion innovative programs.
times per second. One of these, the Total System Lease,
Later in the year, researchers extended was developed to support IBM's mid range
The PRODIGY service brings people with personal
their work in miniaturization to CMOS product line. It enables customers to finance
computers a broad range of services including news,
(Complementary Metal Oxide Semicon- their entire data processing needs — hard-
travel reservations and electronic mail and shopping.
ductor) technology by developing circuits ware, software and maintenance — under one
made from parts only a quarter-micron wide. agreement for a single monthly payment.
CMOS is predicted to be the dominant The lease includes several end-of-lease Members also can conduct a wide variety of
semiconductor technology into the options, including purchase of equipment, transactions, including banking, making
next decade. lease extensions or return of equipment. airline reservations, buying and selling secu-
IBM researchers also were the first The new Flexible Exchange Lease rities, and ordering merchandise and
to use X-ray lithography to make ad\'anced allows customers to exercise several options services from dozens of national marketers.
computer chips. The successful fabrication to exchange equipment under lease The PRODIGY service is distinguished
of these experimental semiconductors opens for new IBM technology in the future. For from traditional "videotex" services
the tioor to future memory chips holding example, companies with an IBM 3090 by its flat monthly fee, its simplicity, and its
more than 64 million bits of information. on a five-year Flexible Exchange Lease may consumer - marketing focus.
Scientists at the Almaden Research replace it with new IBM technology at a In 1988, the PRODIGY service was
Center set another record in high-tempera- pre-specified charge after 36 months. introduced in Atlanta, San Francisco, San
ture superconductivity. The group demon- Jose, Los Angeles, San Diego, Santa Barbara,
strated zero electrical resistance at 125 degrees Prodigy Sacramento and most of Connecticut.
Kelvin (minus 234 degrees Fahrenheit) Prodigy Services Company, formerly In 1989, it will become available in other
TRINTEX, is a partnership between IBM and major metropolitan areas across the U.S.
Sears, Roebuck and Co. The PRODIGY^"
interactive personal service allows families
with personal computers to obtain
news, sports and weather information; send
electronic mail, and check stock quotes.

===== PAGE 31 =====
I
n keeping with its commitment to Screen Reader is first in the new IBM Inde-
support the countries and communities pendence Series™ of products for
where its employees Hve and work, IBM customers with special needs.
j l l i p p p ^^
gave more than $135 milHon in 1988 to social, The United Nations Environment Pro-
cultural and educational programs through- gram (UNEP) received equipment worth
out the world. Contributions included $6.5 million from the IBM World Trade
cash, equipment and other resources. Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation.
IBM's affirmative action programs for The equipment is being used for UNEP's
employment and advancement continued in Global Resource Information Database,
1988. Of the nearly 7,300 people hired in the which channels environmental data from a
U.S. during the year, about 36 percent were variety of sources to people who investi-
women and 24 percent were minorities. At gate the health of the planet. The data
the end of the year, women held 20 percent includes information on climate and atmo-
of U.S. management positions and minorities sphere, natural resources and pollutants.
held 12 percent. Women held nearly 11 The World Health Organization (WHO)
percent of the senior management positions, of the United Nations received a $ i .5 million Office workers in Singapore receive training in
basic computer applications at IBM's Information
while minorities held almost 9 percent. grant of equipment, software and support
Technology Training Center. The IT program
The company did business with over 800 for its efforts against AIDS. WHO will use the
was established by IBM Singapore and the National
minority-owned firms in 1988, purchasing donation to link the Global Program on
Productivity Board.
goods and services in excess of $155 million. AIDS with its six regional agencies, the 34
IBM also purchased goods and services collaborating centers on AIDS, other United
worth over $90 million from some 1,000 Nations agencies and various scientific UCLA's diverse multivendor computer
firms owned primarily by women and institutions around the world.The equip- systems and functions. Ultimately, the new
over $25 million from more than 70 compa- ment also will assist in the creation of an campus network will extend to 10,000 work-
nies whose work force is comprised of AIDS data base, office systems support and stations and all buildings on campus.
primarily handicapped workers. in-house publishing. In the Asia/Pacific Group, IBM Japan's
1988 marked the 20th anniversary of To improve child health in Latin America, Braille Forum project has become a model
the IBM US. job training program. Designed the IBM World Trade Americas Group for using information technology to
to teach basic data- and word-processing made a grant to the International Child assist the handicapped. Researchers at the
skills, the program has prepared nearly 20,000 Health Foundation and established a IBM Tokyo Research Laboratory, including
U.S. graduates since its inception. IBM partnership with the Instituto de Investi- a blind researcher, have developed a
also supports job training programs in many gacion Nutricional in Lima, Peru.The objec- software system which converts English or
other countries where it does business. tive is to train public health experts in the use Japanese katakana characters into braille
In January 1988, the company intro- of IBM computers to coordinate diarrheal far faster than previously existing systems.
duced the IBM Screen Reader™ designed disease programs, and to provide health edu- Because the new system also permits
to give blind and visually impaired computer cation for parents in poor and rural areas. shared editing and data base facilities,
users greater access to the IBM Personal IBM is providing cash, computers, software translation work is made even more efficient.
System/2. The product, which combines and systems engineering expertise. Thus, translation of a book that previously
hardware and software, allows users to hear IBM entered into joint projects to advance might have taken several months can now be
text as it is displayed on the screen. Capable technology and aid institutions of learning. done in a matter of weeks.
of monitoring up to 20 areas of the screen, In one such program, IBM and the
the product reads aloud changes as they University of California at Los Angeles em-
occur, and allows the user to control the pace barked on a two-year $5 million project to
and manner in which text is spoken. The develop an advanced network to integrate

===== PAGE 32 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the numerous languages, are distributed to employees
financial information presented in this Annual Report throughout the world, and reemphasized through inter-
rests with IBM management. The accompanying financial nal programs to assure that they are understood
statements have been prepared in conformity with and followed.
generally accepted accounting principles, applying certain Price Waterhouse, independent accountants,
estimates and judgments as required. are retained to examine IBM's financial statements. Their
IBM maintains an effective system of internal accompanying report is based on an examination con-
accounting control. It consists, in part, of organizational ducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing
arrangements with clearly defined lines of responsibility standards, including a review of internal accounting con-
and delegation of authority. We believe this system trols and tests of accounting procedures and records.
provides reasonable assurance that transactions are exe- The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is
cuted in accordance with management authorization, composed solely of outside directors, and is responsible
and that they are appropriately recorded, in order to per- for recommending to the Board the independent
mit preparation of financial statements in conformity accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, sub-
with generally accepted accounting principles and to ject to stockholder approval. The Audit Committee meets
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain accountability periodically and privately with the independent accoun-
of assets. An important element of the system is an tants, with our internal auditors, as well as with IBM
ongoing internal audit program. management, to review accounting, auditing, internal
To assure the effective administration of internal accounting controls and financial reporting matters.
control, we carefully select and train our employees,
develop and disseminate written policies and procedures,
provide appropriate communication channels, and foster
John F. Akers Chairman of the Board
an environment conducive to the effective functioning
of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Frank A. Metz, Jr Senior Vice President,
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into Finance & Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of January 31,1989
International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures
statements, appearing on pages 34, 35, 36, 38 and in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
42 through 52, present fairly in all material respects the principles used and significant estimates made by manage-
financial position of International Business Machines ment, and evaluating the overall financial statement
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31,1988 presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reason-
and 1987, and the results of their operations and their cash able basis for the opinion expressed above.
flows for each of the three years in the period ended As discussed in the note on Accounting and Report-
December 31,1988, in conformity with generally accepted ing Changes on page 44, the company changed its methods
accounting principles. These financial statements are the of accounting for income taxes and certain wholly owned
responsibility of the company's management; our respon- subsidiaries in 1988. We concur with these changes.
sibility is to express an opinion thereon based on our
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with gen-
erally accepted auditing standards which require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assur- Price Waterhouse
ance about whether such statements are free of material 153 East 53rd Street
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test New York, N.Y. 10022

===== PAGE 33 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1988 I987t I986t
Revenue:
Sales 39,959 36,424 34,323
Support services 9,285 9,297 8,787
Software 7,927 6,836 5,514
Rentals and financing 2,510 2,699 3,536
$ 59,681 $ 55,256 $ 52,160
Cost:
Sales 17,499 17,368 16,220
Support services 4,971 4,686 4,060
Software 2,110 1,957 1,519
Rentals and financing 1,068 1,111 1,354
25,648 25,122 23,153
Gross Profit 34,033 30,134 29,007
Operating Expenses:
Selling, general and administrative 19,362 16,540 15,550
Research, development and engineering 5,925 5,434 5,221
25,287 21,974 20,771
Operating Income 8,746 8,160 8,236
Other Income, principally interest 996 955 646
Interest Expense 709 485 475
Earnings before Income Taxes 9,033 8,630 8,407
Provision for Income Taxes 3,542 3,372 3,618
Net Earnings before Cumulative Effect of Accounting Change . 5,491 5,258 4,789
Cumulative Effect of Change in Accounting for Income Taxes . 315
Net Earnings $ 5,806 $ 5,258 $ 4,789
Per share amounts:
Before cumulative effect of accounting change $ 9.27 $ 8.72 $ 7.81
Cumulative effect of change in accounting
for income taxes ^
Net earnings $ 9.80 $ 8.72 $ 7.81
Average number of shares outstanding:
1988 — 592,444,409
1987—602,961,63 I
1986—612,838,531
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 44.
The notes on pages 42 through 52 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1988 I987t
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash $ 1,072 782
Cash equivalents 3,103 2,685
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 1,948 3,954
Notes and accounts receivable—trade, net of allowances 17,086 15,649
Other accounts receivable 1,014 1,092
Inventories 9,565 8,659
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,555 1,548
$ 35,343 $ 34,369
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property 44,882 43,075
Less: Accumulated depreciation 21,456 20,108
23,426 22,967
Investments and Other Assets:
Software, less accumulated amortization (1988, $3,783; 1987, $3,013) 2,809 2,384
Investments and sundry assets 11,459 10,309
14,268 12,693
$ 73,037 $ 70,029
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes 2,225 2,574
Loans payable 4,862 3,971
Accounts payable 2,702 2,632
Compensation and benefits 2,624 2,632
Deferred income 844 553
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,130 3,577
17,387 $ 15,939
Long-Term Debt 8,518 7,108
Other Liabilities 3,000 3,045
Deferred Income Taxes 4,623 5,674
Stockholders' Equity:
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 6,442 6,417
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1988—590,037,328; 1987—597,326,059
Retained earnings 31,186 29,016
Translation adjustments 1,917 2,865
39,545 38,298
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 36 35
Shares: 1988—296,820; 1987—274,315
39,509 38,263
73,037 $ 70,029
fRestated. See accounting change note on page 44.
The notes on pages 42 through 52 are an integral part of this statement.

===== PAGE 35 =====
(Dollars in millions) 1987
Cash Flow from Operating Activities:
i>
$ 5,806 $ 5,258 $ 4,789
Net earnings
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash
provided from operating activities:
3,871 3,534 3,331
Depreciation
893 863 672
Amortization of software
(133) (128) (68)
(Gain) on disposition of investment assets
(2,322) (2,542) (275)
(Increase) in accounts receivable
(1,232) 129 1,120
(Increase) decrease in inventory
(1,587) (808) (1,626)
(Increase) in other assets
265 300 (394)
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable
519 134 1,690
Increase in other liabilities
$6,080 $ 6,740 $9,239
Net cash provided from operating activities
Cash Flow from Investing Activities:
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property . . (5,390) (4,195) (4,639)
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines
and other property 409 353 672
Investment in software (1,318) (1,048) (907)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (2,555) (4,815) (7,239)
Proceeds from marketable securities and other investments. 4,734 5,900 5,362
Net cash used in investing activities (4,120) (3,805) (6,751)
Cash Flow from Financing Activities:
Proceeds from new debt 4,540 2,963 3,069
Payments to settle debt (3,007) (1,980) (2,340)
Short-term borrowings less than 90 days—net 1,028 (399) 150
Proceeds from employee stock plans—net (11) 105 23
Payments to purchase and retire capital stock (992) (1,425) (1,488)
Cash dividends paid (2,609) (2,654) (2,698)
Net cash used in financing activities (1,051) (3,390) (3,284)
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
(201) 330 234
on Cash and Cash Equivalents
708 (125) (562)
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents
3,467 3,592 4,154
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January 1
$4,175 $ 3,467 $3,592
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31

===== PAGE 36 =====
Summary of Cash Inflows Summary of Cash Outflows
(Dollars in billions) (Dollars in billions)
Collections from Payments to Suppliers and
Customers and Employees $46.4'''
Others $57.1
Interest Paid $1.4
Income Taxes Paid $3.4
A U.y-- -i*»> f^'.:'*•• S
J , f t - - / - .-
J
- V - -.J ••
Payments for Plant,
Rental Machines and
Proceeds from ., » s ,, J. . Other Property $5.4
Disposition of Investment
Assets $5.1 * + * iU -n i - 1 t J. Investments in Software $1.3
1 '*.'"{• I - • V ^^ Purchase of
Marketable Securities and
* w> r i ^;, fman^mg ^ Other Investments $2.5
i"." • ' • • • • * - - - t... "
V'.-f.« • « ^ ' f'-.^-i 'Wfe '•jf
Proceeds from Payments to Settle Debt $3.0
Debt $5.5
Capital Stock Purchased
and Retired $1.0
Cash Dividends $ 2.6
^Includes Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
on Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investment in Plant and Other Property
$27,000 (In millions)
Continuous upgrading of our facilities is essential
to achieve our objectives to maintain techno-
logical leadership, improve productivity and meet 24,000
customer demand. Over the past five years,
the company has invested approximately $24 billion 21,000
in land, buildings, machinery and equipment,
and internally installed IBM manufactured equip- 18,000
ment. These recent additions represent 57 percent
of the gross asset value of plant and other 15,000
property as of December 31,1988.
12,000
9,000
6,000 1 1
11 1
?,ooo ii
o 1984 '85 86 -87 1988
Annual II Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 37 =====
Retained Translation
(Dollars in millions) Capital Stock Earnings Adjustments Treasury Stock Total
1986 Stockholders'Equity, January 1,1986 $ 6,267 $ 27,234 $ (1,466) $(45) 31,990
Net earnings 4,789 4,789
Cash dividends declared (2,698) (2,698)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(1,965,505 shares) 141 141
Purchases (7,033,465 shares) and sales
(6,665,471 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . (118) (43) (161)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(11,094,900 shares) (115) (1,373) (1,488)
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . (17) (17)
Other (principally tax reductions—employee plans) 45 45
Translation adjustments 1,773 1,773
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1986 6,321 27,834 307 (88) 34,374
1987 Net earnings 5,258 5,258
Cash dividends declared (2,654) (2,654)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(1,766,488 shares) 139 139
Purchases (6,275,092 shares) and sales
(6,692,196 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . (117) 53 (64)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(11,252,000 shares) (120) (1,305) (1,425)
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . 17 17
Conversion of debentures (197,203 shares).... 30 30
Tax reductions—employee plans 30 30
Translation adjustments 2,558 2,558
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1987 6,417 29,016 2,865 (35) 38,263
1988 Net earnings 5,806 5,806
Cash dividends declared (2,609) (2,609)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(1,321,697 shares) 92 92
Purchases (8,140,101 shares) and sales
(8,117,596 shares) of treasury stock under
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . (128) (1) (129)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(8,611,396 shares) (93) (899) (992)
Tax reductions—employee plans 26 26
Translation adjustments (948) (948)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1988 $ 6,442 $31,186 1,917 $(36) 39,509

===== PAGE 38 =====
Results of Operations Revenue from sales was $40.0 billion, an in- Revenue
In 1988, the company continued its efforts crease of 9.7 percent over 1987, after a 6.1 percent
to improve its responsiveness, sharpen its compe- increase in 1987. Sales revenue remained the $60,000 (In millions) 4%
titiveness, and increase its efficiency. As a largest single category of revenue at 67.0 percent
5 5,000 5%
result, IBM's business results have continued to of total revenue. Software revenue continued to 1 7%
improve and management is pleased with the show strong performance although the rate 50,000 12%
^^^ ^1 110% 16%
positive customer response to the company's new of growth in 1988 was slower than the growth
45,000 15% 17%
products and services. rate in 1987 and in 1986 due to product transitions. 1
Worldwide revenue increased 8.0 percent in Revenue from support services was essentially 40,000 7%
1988 to $59.7 billion, following an increase of flat year to year, although maintenance services
35,000
14%
5.9 percent in 1987. Non-U.S. operations produced revenue declined 4.5 percent to $73 billion.
strong business growth, with revenue increas- This decline was all in U.S. operations. Revenue 30,000
67%
ing by 15.5 percent to $34.4 billion while revenue from rentals and financing in 1988 was 7.0 percent 25,000 66%
from U.S. operations declined slightly to lower than in 1987. Although financing revenue 66%
$25.3 billion. Non-US. operations accounted for increased, this increase was more than offset by a 20,000 64% 68%
57.6 percent of total revenue in 1988 compared continued decline in rental revenue. 15,000
with 53.8 percent in 1987 and 50.3 percent in 1986. Information on industry segments and classes
10,000
The Asia/Pacific area was 14.8 percent of of similar products or services is presented on
total revenue, and showed the highest rate of in- page 51. Revenue from processors increased 5,000
crease in revenue outside the United States 8.5 percent in 1988 over 1987. This increase is
at 27.7 percent. Revenue from the Europe/Middle attributable to the top-of-the-line 3090 system 1984 '85 '86 '87
East/Africa area, which grew 10.3 percent and the mid range Application System/i-oo.The J Rentals and Financing
from 1987, amounted to $21.6 billion in 1988 3090 S family of computers announced in July {Software
which represents 36.2 percent of total worldwide 1988 provides the largest span of application proc- Support Services
revenue. The Americas area also enjoyed signifi- essing power available today and offers customers Sales
cant revenue growth in 1988 with a 21.0 percent the flexibility to easily upgrade smaller processors
increase and now represents 6.6 percent of into more powerful models as customers' needs
total revenue. grow Introduced in June 1988, the Application
Net earnings for the year were $5.8 billion, System/4oo provides solutions and growth paths
up 10.4 percent. These earnings reflect the imple- for small and intermediate size businesses. This
mentation in 1988 of Statement of Financial product is also attractive to larger businesses for
Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96, "Accounting for use by departments and remote locations. Rev-
Income Taxes." Before the cumulative effect of enue from peripherals increased 10.7 percent in
this accounting change, net earnings from non- 1988 over 1987, following a 5.7 percent decline in
US. operations amounted to $4.1 billion, while 1987. These changes are primarily driven by stor-
net earnings from U.S. operations amounted to age products.The 1988 increase reflects the strong
$ 1.4 billion. U.S. operations were impacted by performance of the IBM 3380 storage device and
the costs of the manufacturing and headquarters the IBM 3990 storage controller. These subsys-
consolidations announced in June 1988. tems enhance a processor's data-handling capabil-
ities by providing added storage capacity and fast
access times. Worldwide revenue from work-
stations increased 9.1 percent in 1988 over 1987
despite a decline in U.S. operations. Revenue from
personal computer processors grew worldwide,
driven by the success of the Personal System/2.
The growth in these processors in the U.S.
was more than offset by declines in revenue of
other equipment.

===== PAGE 39 =====
During 1988, gross profit increased 12.9 per- The effective tax rate for 1988 of 39.2 to expand the range of products and services offered
cent to $34.0 billion, and the gross profit margin percent was essentially equal to that of 1987 and to customers. Under the agreement, IBM's ROLM
improved to 57.0 percent from 54.5 percent the was positively impacted by the decline in the development and manufacturing operations will
previous year. The improvement in gross profit U.S. statutory tax rate from 40 percent to become part of Siemens Information Systems,
margins is due to the 3.9 percentage point 34 percent. However, it is anticipated that lower Inc. A marketing and service company will be
increase in sales gross profit margin. This increase tax credits will increase the tax rate in 1989. formed and jointly owned by IBM and Siemens. It
primarily results from continuing manufacturing For the quarter ended December 31,1988, is expected that the agreement, which is subject to
cost efficiencies. Improvement in sales and total worldwide net earnings were $2.3 billion, com- regulatory approval, will be finalized in 1989.
gross profit margins was evident in both the pared with $2.1 billion for the same period in 1987, Consequently, there was no effect on 1988 results,
U.S. and non-U.S. operations. an increase of 12.4 percent. Fourth quarter revenue and management does not expect a material
Selling, general and administrative expenses was $20.0 billion, compared with $ 18.3 billion effect on 1989 financial results.
for 1988, as reported, showed an increase of for the 1987 period, an increase of 9.3 percent. Also in 1988, IBM sold its copier sales and
17.1 percent over 1987. Decreases in general and IBM's fourth quarter results include an service operations to Eastman Kodak Company.
administrative expenses were more than offset by additional one-time charge of $270 million result- Additionally, Science Research Associates, a
added selling expense as the company continued ing from greater-than-forecast personnel depar- wholly owned subsidiary which publishes educa-
to expand its field marketing staff to enhance tures associated with the successful manufacturing tional materials, was sold to Maxwell Com-
its working relationships with customers. After and headquarters consolidations. The total charge munications Corporation. These actions, which
removing the impact to U.S. operations of the for the year was $870 million. Approximately will help to sharpen management's focus on
charge for the previously announced consolida- 6,500 employees have chosen to leave IBM. As a IBM's core business, did not have a material effect
tions, IBM's selling, general and administrative result of arbitration between the two companies, on earnings for 1988.
expenses increased 11.8 percent in 1988 over 1987. fourth quarter results also include a $220 million In response to a changing industry, manage-
The information industry continues to be payment made by Fujitsu to IBM for past and ment began a major transformation of the
marked by rapid change: in expanding markets continued use of IBM software. company in 1985. This transformation is marked
and new opportunities, in the pace of innovation, IBM implemented SFAS 96 in the second by a continual drive to become even more respon-
and in ever-increasing competition. In this quarter of 1988, effective as of January i, 1988, sive to customers and to produce the products
environment, investments in research, develop- changing the accounting for income taxes. and solutions they need more quickly, efficiently,
ment and engineering are a vital factor in A significant feature of the standard requires and cost-effectively.These initiatives will continue
ensuring a continuing flow of competitive prod- recorded deferred taxes to be adjusted for changes in the future as the company moves to become
ucts to the marketplace. In 1988, IBM invested in tax rates. Under the previous standard, deferred even more market driven.
$5.9 billion in this activity, bringing the total for taxes were provided at current tax rates and were
the last five years to $25.5 billion. not adjusted for subsequent changes in those
Interest expense increased 46.3 percent rates. The cumulative effect of adopting SFAS 96
in 1988 over 1987, primarily as a result of for periods ending prior to January i, 1988
government-mandated interest rate increases on amounted to a benefit of $315 million, which has
short-term borrowings in subsidiaries whose been included in 1988 net earnings. Income taxes
economic environment is highly inflationary. The for 1987 and 1986 are not restated for this change.
high interest rates in those operations are The company also implemented SFAS 94
mitigated by the effects of inflation on the funds which required the consolidation of its wholly
borrowed. Interest expense also increased because owned finance subsidiaries. These subsidiaries
of higher borrowings and a smaller amount were previously accounted for by the equity
of interest expense being capitalized in 1988 ver- method. Prior years' financial statements have
sus 1987. been restated to reflect this change. Since the net
earnings of these subsidiaries were previously
included in other income, this change had no
effect on net earnings.
During 1988, IBM announced an agreement
with Siemens AG to establish joint activities in the
field of telecommunications, which is expected

===== PAGE 40 =====
Financial Condition newer products. These increases were partially Research, Development
During 1988, IBM continued to make significant offset by declines in marketable securities in and Engineering Expenses
investments for the long term. non-US. operations. Current liabilities increased $6,000 (In millions)
In addition to the $5.9 billion expenditure $ 1.4 billion, primarily as a result of increased
for research, development and engineering, the short-term borrowings in non-U.S. subsidiaries.
5,000
company invested $4.4 billion in plant and As mentioned previously, the adoption
other property. Over the past five years, IBM has of SFAS 94 had no effect on IBM's net earnings.
invested approximately $24 billion in these assets However, on the statement of financial position,
4,000
(see graph on page 37). These investments in the consolidation of IBM's wholly owned finance
plant and other property have provided the com- subsidiaries had the effect of increasing both
pany with the technology, capacity for growth assets and liabilities by approximately $7 billion;
3,000
and the highly automated facilities which allow it the assets being primarily term-lease agreements,
to compete effectively and to satisfy customers' and the liabilities primarily short- and long-
needs for the very latest in information technology. term debt. As a result, certain balance sheet ratios
2,000
IBM invested $1.3 billion in capitalized have increased: for instance, the long-term
production costs of software products in 1988, debt-to-equity ratio of 21.6 percent would have
bringing total investments in this activity to been 13.4 percent prior to consolidations.
1,000
$4.9 billion over the last five years.The unamor- The consolidation should have no effect on
tized portion of this investment amounted to IBM's AAA credit rating.
$2.8 billion at the end of 1988. Software revenue During 1988, worldwide long-term debt
1984 '87 1988
for the year was $7.9 billion, up 16.0 percent from increased by $ 1.4 billion, from a total of $7.1
1987. Increasing investment in software products billion at year-end 1987 to $8.5 billion at year-end
reflects management's view that this activity 1988.The new long-term debt included a U.S.
will continue the significant growth that has been public debt offering of $ 500 million, and a num-
experienced in recent years. ber of non-U.S. borrowings directly related to
At year-end 1988, IBM's long-term net invest- the financing of customers' long-term leases of
ment in sales-type leases was $6.5 billion, an IBM equipment in IBM's non-U.S. operations.
increase of 19.2 percent over 1987. These invest- Deferred income taxes decreased $1.1 billion
ments, which are the primary reason for the year- reflecting the lower U.S. federal income tax rates
to-year change in investments and sundry assets, and the adoption of SFAS 96, including the
reflect IBM's growing participation in the financ- classification changes required by that statement.
ing of products purchased by our customers. In 1986 and 1987, IBM announced stock
Working capital at year-end 1988 was repurchase programs totaling 28.0 million shares
$ 18.0 billion, a 2.6 percent decrease from the at a cost of $3,550 million. These programs were
$18.4 billion at year-end 1987. Current assets completed in May 1988. In September 1988,
increased $1.0 billion primarily due to increases IBM's Board of Directors authorized the company
in accounts receivable and inventories. The to purchase, from time to time, additional shares
increase in accounts receivable is consistent with of its capital stock up to a total expenditure
the higher levels of shipments in the fourth of $2 billion. As of December 31,1988, the com-
quarter of 1988 compared to the same period pany had purchased a total of approximately
in 1987. Inventory growth is primarily in work in 3.0 million shares at a cost of $355 million under
process and reflects customers' demand for this latest authorization. Shares purchased
under these programs were retired. Also during
1988, the company continued open-market
acquisition of shares to meet most requirements
of IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans.
The combination of IBM's strong financial
position and its skilled and dedicated employees
underlies management's confidence in the future.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consoHdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and
of Consolidation: its U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies. Investments in joint ventures and other companies in which
IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership are accounted for by the equity method. Investments of less than 20 percent
are accounted for by the cost method.
Translation of For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S.
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S.
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, invento-
ries and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. All
other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and depreciation
are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange
prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are included in earnings.
Revenue: Revenue is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, from software when the program
is shipped or as monthly license fees accrue, from support services (primarily maintenance services) over the contractual
period or as the services are performed, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and
from financing at level rates of return over the term of the lease or receivable.
Software: Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development.
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally
capitalized. The annual amortization of the capitalized amounts is the greater of the amount computed based on the
estimated revenue distribution over the products' revenue-producing lives or the straight-line method, but not
in excess of six years. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged against income as incurred or when
related revenue is recognized, whichever occurs first.
Depreciation: Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using
the straight-line method.
Goodwill: The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and amortized
on a straight-line basis over 20 years.
Retirement Plans and Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting frorrr improvements in
Other Postretirement Benefits: the plans are amortized over the average remaining service period of employees expected to receive benefits.
Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued when the employee retires.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of
temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and such
amounts recognized for tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws.
In years prior to 1988, deferred taxes were accounted for at the tax rates in effect when the asset or liability was recorded,
with no adjustment for subsequent rate changes. Deferred investment tax credits are being amortized as a reduction
of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property.
Inventories: Raw materials, finished goods and work in process are stated at the lower of average cost or market.
Cash Equivalents: All highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at date of purchase are considered to be
cash equivalents.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Non-U.S. Operations (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 1986
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 20,005 $ 20,777 $ 15,813
Current liabilities 11,481 9,818 7,940
Working capital 8,524 10,959 7,873
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 9,354 9,411 7,834
Investments and other assets 5,251 4,626 4,148
23,129 24,996 19,855
Long-term debt 2,340 1,575 1,355
Other liabilities 2,505 2,668 1,921
Deferred income taxes 1,580 1,540 1,288
6,425 5,783 4,564
Net assets employed $ 16,704 $ 19,213 $ 15,291
Number of employees 163,904 161,399 166,234
For the year:
Revenue $ 34,361 $ 29,752 $ 26,244
Earnings before income taxes $ 7,088 $ 5,680 $ 5,870
Provision for income taxes 3,009 2,371 2,677
Net earnings (1988 before cumulative effect of accounting change) $ 4,079 $ 3,309 $ 3,193
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 2,389 $ 1,847 $ 1,970
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a adjustments, resulting from the translation of net non-US. operations or will be remitted sub-
local currency environment account for approxi- assets, amounted to $1,917 million at December stantially free of additional tax. Accordingly, no
mately 90% of the company's non-US. revenue. 31,1988, $2,865 million at December 31,1987, provision has been made for taxes that might be
The remaining 10% of the company's non-U. S. and $307 million at December 31,1986. The payable upon remittance of such earnings.
revenue is from subsidiaries and branches which changes in translation adjustments since the end It is extremely improbable that all these earnings
operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic of 1986 are a reflection of the weakening of the would be remitted to the U.S. Nevertheless, SFAS
environment is highly inflationary. dollar in 1987 and the strengthening in 1988. 96, "Accounting for Income Taxes," requires
As the value of the dollar weakens, net assets Undistributed earnings of non-US. subsid- disclosure of the amount of withholding taxes
recorded in local currencies translate into more iaries included in consolidated retained earnings that would be payable were this unlikely event to
U.S. dollars than they would have at the previous amounted to $12,374 million at December 31, occur. Therefore in response to that requirement,
year's rates. Conversely, as the dollar becomes 1988, $13,076 million at December 31,1987, and it is estimated that such withholding taxes
stronger, net assets recorded in local currencies $12,108 million at December 31,1986. These would be as much as $ 1,200 million.
translate into fewer U.S. dollars than they would earnings, which reflect full provision for non-
have at the previous year's rates. The translation US. income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in

===== PAGE 43 =====
Accounting and Reporting Changes
In 1988, the company implemented several State- income, this change had no effect on net earnings. effective as of January i, 1988.The cumulative
ments of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS). Information regarding these previously uncon- effect of this change on prior years was $315 mil-
In accordance with SFAS 94—"Consoli- solidated subsidiaries is shown on page 48. lion, or $.53 per share, and has been reflected in
dation of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries," the The company adopted SFAS 95—"Statement the first quarter of 1988. Prior years' financial
company has consolidated its wholly owned of Cash Flows," which requires presentation statements have not been restated. Income
finance subsidiaries, which were previously of a statement of cash flows in place of the state- tax accounting is discussed further on page 47.
accounted for by the equity method. Prior years' ment of changes in financial position. Prior In addition, certain prior year amounts
financial statements, as well as the selected years' statements have been reclassified to conform on the consolidated statements of earnings and
quarteriy information, have been restated to to the new presentation. financial position have been reclassified to
reflect this change. Since the net earnings of these SFAS 96—"Accounting for Income Taxes" conform to the 1988 presentation.
subsidiaries were previously included in other was implemented in the second quarter of 1988,
Marl<etable Securities (Dollars in millions) December 31,1988 December 31,1987
U. S. Government securities $ 642 $ 680
Time deposits and other bank obligations 504 2,282
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 802 992
Total $ 1,948 $ 3,954
Market value $ 1,944 $ 3,951
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1988 December 31,1987
Current inventories:
Finished goods $ 2,972 $ 2,576
Work in process 6,444 5,877
Raw materials 149 206
Total current inventories 9,565 8,659
Work in process and field service parts included in
plant, rental machines and other property . 1,108 897
Total inventories $10,673 $ 9,556

===== PAGE 44 =====
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1988 December 31,1987
Land and land improvements $ 1,493 $ 1,457
Buildings 11,590 11,360
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 28,678 27,503
41,761 40,320
Less: Accumulated depreciation 19,711 18,234
22,050 22,086
Rental machines and parts 3,121 2,755
Less: Accumulated depreciation 1,745 1,874
1,376 881
Total $ 23,426 $ 22,967
Investments and Sundry Assets (Dollars in millions) December 31,1988 December 31,1987
Net investment in sales-type leasest $ 10,121 $ 8,705
Less: Current portion classified as notes and accounts receivable—trade. 3,640 3,269
6,481 5,436
Installment payment receivables 1,036 1,171
Goodwill, less accumulated amortization (1988, $184; 1987, $139). 717 762
Prepaid pension cost 551 496
Mortgage investments 460 233
Investment in MCI Communications Corporation^ 400 528
Other investments and sundry assets 1,814 1,683
Total $ 11,459 $ 10,309
tThese leases relate to IBM equipment and are for stock in exchange for substantially all the assets The preferred stock is not convertible, nor is it
terms generally ranging from three to five years, and operations of Satellite Business Systems. planned to be publicly traded. MCI has the
tin 1986, IBM entered into agreements with In 1988, MCI repurchased these shares for $677 option to redeem all or part of the new issue at
MCI under which IBM received approximately million. In a separate transaction IBM acquired any time. These investments have been accounted
47 million unregistered shares of MCI common $400 million of MCI 7.35% preferred stock. for by the cost method.

===== PAGE 45 =====
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31,1988 December 31,1987
U.S. dollars:
778% convertible subordinated debentures due 2004t. 1,254 $ 1,254
6%% notes due 1990 500 500
ioV4% notes due 1995 500 500
9% notes due 1998 500
8%% notes due 1992 450
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 363 370
io%% extendable notes, initial maturity 1989 300
7V8% notes due 1989 300 300
8%% notes due 1990 300 300
7%% notes due 1991 250
8%% notes due 1991 250
8%% notes due 1991 250
9.32% notes due 2000 205
6%% notes due 1989 200 200
8% notes due 1990 200 200
12^4% notes due 1992 200 200
200
9% notes due 1988
200
9%% extendable notes, initial maturity 1988
200
9%% notes due 1990
Medium-term note program, payable 1989-2008 (6.9%-10.1%) 667 435
Other U. S. dollars, due 1989-2012 (7.2%) 954 1,112
7,343 6,271
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1988, in parentheses), payable in:
French francs, due 1989-1999 (10.6%) 513 593
Australian dollars, due 1989-1992 (13.4%) 509 260
Japanese yen, due 1989-2018 (5.4%) 355 328
Canadian dollars, due 1991-1993 (9.3%) 261 85
Swiss francs, due 1996 (4.875%) 232 275
Other currencies, due 1989-1999 (10.5%) 437 532
9,650 8,344
Less: Net unamortized discount Tl
9,637 8,317
Less: Current maturities 1,119 1,209
Total 8,518 ; 7,108
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1988, are as follows:
1989, $1,119; 1990, $1,658; 1991, $1,395; 1992, $1,124; 1993, $878;
1994 and beyond, $3,476.
tThe 7%% convertible subordinated debentures They are redeemable, at the option of the ments starting in 1994 are intended to retire 75%
are unsecured subordinated obligations of company, as of November 1988 at a price of of the debentures prior to maturity. During
IBM, which are convertible into IBM capital stock 104.725% of the principal amount, and at 1988, conversions of debentures resulted in the
at a conversion price of $153.6563 per share. decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund pay- issuance of 968 shares of IBM capital stock.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Taxes (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 1986
Earnings before income taxes:
U. S. operations $ 1,945 $ 2,950 $ 2,537
Non-U. S. operations 7,088 5,680 5,870
$$ 99,,003333 $$ 88,,663300 $$ 88,,440077
Provision for income taxes:
U. S. operations $ 533 $ 1,001 $ 941
Non-U.S. operations 3,009 2,371 2,677
3,542 3,372 3,618
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 2,528 2,370 2,026
Total $ 6,070 $ 5,742 $ 5,644
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
U. S. Federal:
Current $ 79t $ (123)t $ (266)
Deferred (86) 177 345
Net deferred investment tax credits (125) (150) 44
(132) (96) 123
Non-U.S.:
Current 3,562 3,013 3,236
Deferred 87 320 170
33,,664499 33,,333333 33,,440066
U. S. State and local:
Current 12 23 124
Deferred 13 112 (35)
25 135 89
Total provision $ 3,542 $ 3,372 $ 3,618
tAs a result of the alternative minimum tax requirements which commenced in 1987,
actual tax payments related to the respective years have been, and may continue to be,
substantially higher.
In 1988, the company implemented Statement reporting purposes and such amounts recog- pany had unrecognized deferred tax assets of
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96. nized for tax purposes. The principal items making approximately $200 million, most of which have
This standard calls for adjustment of deferred tax up the deferred tax provision in 1988 included carryforwards for substantial periods. In addition,
assets and liabilities whenever there is a change $283 million for sales-type leases and installment the company has $388 million of deferred
in enacted tax rates, with a corresponding adjust- sales and $175 million for deferred software costs, investment tax credits for financial reporting
ment being reflected in income tax expense for that partially offset by $182 million of deferred tax purposes, which will reduce tax expense in
period. Previous rules called for recording these credits associated with the alternative mini- future years.
assets and liabilities at the current rate, with mum tax. In 1987, the principal item was $535 The consolidated effective income tax rate
no subsequent adjustment for tax rate changes. million for depreciation while in 1986 these was 39.2% in 1988, 39.1% in 1987, and 43.0% in
The cumulative effect of adopting SFAS 96 amounts were $371 million for depreciation and 1986. In 1988, the higher effective tax rate on
for periods ending prior to January i, 1988, $483 million for sales-type leases and install- earnings of non-U.S. operations accounts for 6.6
which amounted to a benefit of $ 315 million, has ment sales. No other individual item was percentage points of the difference between the
been included in 1988 net earnings.The effect material. effective rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate of
on the 1988 provision for income taxes was not Under the rules of SFAS 96, no financial 34.0%. In prior years, there were no individually
material. Income taxes for 1987 and 1986 have recognition is allowed for net deferred tax assets significant items which caused the effective rate
not been restated for this change. in excess of the amount that could be recovered to differ from the U.S. federal statutory rate.
Deferred income taxes reflect the impact as income tax refunds through existing loss Worldwide income tax payments amounted
of temporary differences between the amount of carryback or carryforward provisions. Conse- to $3,405 million, $2,186 million and $3,067
assets and liabilities recognized for financial quently, at December 31,1988, the com- million for 1988,1987 and 1986, respectively.

===== PAGE 47 =====
Research, Development and Engineering Other Liabilities installment sales by IBM of its products, and
Research, development and engineering expenses Other liabilities consist principally of indemnity finances selected non-IBM equipment in
amounted to $5,925 million in 1988, $5,434 and retirement plan reserves for non-U. S. the U S. The non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer
million in 1987 and $5,221 million in 1986. employees. leases and in some cases finance installment
Included in these amounts were expendi- receivables.
tures of $4,419 million in 1988, $3,998 million Lines of Credit Summarized below is combined financial
in 1987 and $3,975 million in 1986 for a broad At December 31,1988, the company and its information for these finance subsidiaries,
program of research and development covering subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit of which IBM Credit Corporation accounts
basic scientific research in a variety of fields with a number of U.S. and non-US. banks per- for more than 80% of the net earnings. In accor-
and the application of scientific advances to the mitting borrowings, primarily short-term, up dance with Statement of Financial Accounting
development of new and improved products to an aggregate of $5,800 million. Interest Standards 94, these wholly owned subsidiaries are
and their uses. In addition, expenditures rates on borrowings would vary from country to now consolidated in the accompanying financial
for product related engineering amounted to country depending on local market conditions. statements. Financing activity in countries in
$1,506 million, $1,436 million and $1,246 which the company does not have a finance
million for the same three years. Finance Subsidiaries subsidiary is not included below.
The company's wholly owned finance subsidiaries Additional information is available in the 1988
interest Cost consist of IBM Credit Corporation and several Annual Report of the IBM Credit Corporation.
Interest on borrowings of the company non-U. S. finance subsidiaries. IBM Credit Copies may be obtained by writing to:
and its subsidiaries amounted to $1,321 million Corporation offers lease financing of selected IBM Stockholder Relations Department
in 1988, $1,084 million in 1987 and $1,020 IBM products, finances receivables resulting from 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022
million in 1986. Of these amounts, $93 million
in 1988, $ 134 million in 1987 and $ 129 Financial position at December 31:
million in 1986 were capitalized. The remainder
(Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987
was charged to cost of rentals and financing and
Assets: Liabilities and
interest expense. Cash payments for interest
Cash and cash Stockholder's Equity:
during this period, including amounts capital-
equivalents $ 536 455 Short-term debt $ 3,007 $ 2,330
ized, were $1,440 million, $1,048 million Installment payment Deferred taxes and
and $962 million, respectively. receivables—net 1,271 1,606 accruals 1,092
Net investment in capital Due to IBM and
Rentai Expense and Lease Commitments leases 6,488 5,413 affiliates 1,796 1,200
Receivable from IBM Long-term debt 3,218 3,224
Rental expense, including amounts charged to
and affiliates 130 284 Stockholder's equity .... 997 925
inventories and fixed assets, amounted to $1,566 Other 1,685
—^ Total Liabilities and
million in 1988, $1,515 million in 1987 and
Total Assets $10,110 8,567 Stockholder's Equity . . $ 10,110 $ 8,567
$1,363 million in 1986. Minimum rental commit-
ments, in millions of dollars, under noncancelable
Earnings for the years ended December 31:
leases for 1989 and thereafter are as follows:
1989, $1,341; 1990, $1,105; 1991, $912; 1992, (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 1986
$761; 1993, $627; and after 1993, $2,543. Financing and other income $ 914 $ 876 $ 757
These leases are principally for the rental of Interest and other expenses 791 744 597
Provision for income taxes 26 27 22
office premises.
Net earnings (1988 before cumulative effect of accounting change). . . . $ 97 $ 105 $ 138

===== PAGE 48 =====
Retirement Plans The funded status at December 31 was as follows:
The company and its subsidiaries have retire- U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
ment plans covering substantially all employees. (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 1988 1987
The total cost of all plans for 1988,1987 and
Actuarial present value of benefit obligations:
1986 was $460 million, $289 million and $585
Vested benefit obligation (10,135) $ (9,072) $ (6,017) $ (5,851)
million, respectively.
Accumulated benefit obligation (10,473) $ (9,351) $ (6,898) $ (6,665)
Pension cost in 1988 was higher than
in 1987 principally due to the growth in service Projected benefit obligation (15,466) $ (14,185) $ (10,676) $ (10,701)
Plan assets at fair value 19,598 18,070 9,835 9,099
and interest cost exceeding the growth in the
Projected benefit obligation (in excess of)
expected return on plan assets, and the refine-
less than plan assets 4,132 3,885 (841) (1,602)
ment of translation techniques for non-U.S. plans
Unrecognized net (gain) loss (1,272) (928) (531) 105
in highly inflationary economic environments. Unrecognized prior service cost 846 898 239 276
These increases in cost were partially offset Unrecognized net asset established at January i, 1986 . . (3,155) (3,359) (176) (215)
by actuarial assumption changes in several non- (Accrued) prepaid pension cost recognized
U.S. plans. Pension cost in 1987 was lower in the statement of financial position 551 $ 496 $ (l,309)t $ (l,436)t
than in 1986 primarily because of a one-time tincludes accrued pension cost of $204 million in 1988
cost in 1986 for special termination benefits and $219 million in 1987 for one country where
associated with a 1986 amendment to the U.S. the accumulated benefit obligation exceeds plan assets
since this plan is financed by reserves only.
retirement plans, increased plan assets, and
changes in actuarial assumptions in U.S. and
several non-U.S. plans.These decreases in Net periodic pension cost for the years ended December 31 included the following components:
cost were partially offset by the effects of changes U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
in currency rates. (Dollars in millions) 1988 1987 1986 1988 1987 1986
Annual cost is determined using the Pro-
Service cost-
jected Unit Credit actuarial method. Prior benefits earned during
service cost is amortized on a straight-line basis the period Jg 579 $ 545 $ 575 $ 482 $ 445 $ 363
over the average remaining service period of Interest cost on the
projected benefit
employees expected to receive benefits. An
obligation 1,120 1,015 900 648 639 495
assumption is made for modified career average
Actual return
plans that the average earnings base period on plan assets (2,058) (846) (2,528) (1,003) (135) (701)
will be updated to the years prior to retirement. Net amortization
It is the company's practice to fund pen- and deferral 304 (856) 1,225 345 (580) 207
sion costs to the extent that such costs are tax Net periodic pension cost J5 (55) $ (142) $ 172 $ 472 $ 369 $ 364
deductible. Funding decisions made in 1987 Total net periodic pension
contributed towards the prepaid pension cost cost for all non-U.S. plans $ 515 $ 431 $ 413
in U.S. plans. The assets of the various plans
include corporate equities, government securi-
ties, corporate debt securities and income- U.S. Plans: U.S. regular and part-time used thereafter. Prior to January i, 1989, benefits
producing real estate. employees are covered by noncontributory plans became vested upon completion of 10 years of
The tables provide information on the which are funded by company contributions to service. Effective January i, 1989, benefits become
status of the U.S. retirement plans, and selected an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the vested upon the completion of five years of
non-U.S. plans which represent approximately sole benefit of employees. Monthly retirement service. The number of individuals receiving bene-
98% of the total non-U.S. accumulated benefit benefits generally represent the greater of a fixed fits at December 31,1988 and December 31,1987
obligations. amount per year of service, or a percent of was 40,567 and 38,207, respectively.
career compensation. For plan purposes, annual The expected long-term rate of return on
compensation before January i, 1987 is defined plan assets used in the calculation of net peri-
as the average annual compensation paid for the odic pension cost was 9% in 1988 and 1987, and
years 1977 through 1986. Actual compensation is 8%% in 1986. Measurement of the 1988 and

===== PAGE 49 =====
1987 projected benefit obligation was based on 1986. It is the company's practice to fund the option price and the average market price of
an 8% discount rate and a 5% long-term rate of postretirement benefits cost, with an indepen- IBM stock on the date of exercising the right.
compensation increase. dent trustee, to the extent it is tax deductible. The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
Non-U.S. Plans: Most subsidiaries and Certain of the company's non-U.S. sub- tee approval, that payment by the optionee upon
branches outside the U.S. have retirement plans sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However, exercise of an option may be made using IBM
covering substantially all employees, under many retirees outside the U.S. are covered stock as well as cash.
which funds are deposited under various fiduciary- by government sponsored and administered pro-
The following table summarizes stock option
type arrangements, annuities are purchased grams. As a result, the cost of company spon-
transactions during 1988:
under group contracts, or reserves are provided. sored programs outside the U.S. is not significant.
Retirement benefits are based on years of service Number of Shares
and the employee's compensation, generally Stock Purchase Plan
Under Available
during a fixed number of years immediately prior The employees stock purchase plan enables
Option for Option
to retirement. employees who are not participants in a stock
Balance at
The ranges of assumptions used for the option plan to purchase IBM's capital stock
January i,1988 . .. 15,567,174 6,017,355
non-U.S. plans reflect the different economic through payroll deductions of up to 10% of eli-
Options granted , . . . 4,054,929 (4,054,929)
environments within the various countries. The gible compensation. The price an employee Options terminated . (473,951) 318,962
expected long-term rates of return on plan pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average Options cancelled—
assets used in the calculation of net periodic market price on the date the employee has accu- SARs exercised. . . . (184,966)
Options exercised . . . (1,288,541)
pension cost ranged from 5% to 11% in 1988, mulated enough money to buy a share.
Balance at
from 6% to 11% in 1987, and from 5% to 11% in During 1988, employees purchased
December 31,1988 17,674,645 2,281,388
1986. Measurement of the projected benefit 7,097,290 shares, all of which were treasury
obligation was based on discount rates ranging shares, for which $702 million was paid to IBM. Exercisable at
December 31,1988 10,492,989
from 4^/2% to 10% in both 1988 and 1987, At December 31,1988, 9,672,337 reserved
and long-term rates of compensation increase unissued shares remain available for purchase.
ranging from 3% to %V2% in 1988, and from The options exercised during 1988 were at an
3% to 9V2% in 1987. Stock Option Plans average option price of $67.42 per share. The
The stock option plans provide for granting 17,674,645 shares under option at December 31,
Postretirement Benefits officers and other key employees options 1988, are at option prices ranging from $54.97
The company and its U.S. subsidiaries have med- to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the to $ 159.50 per share.
ical, dental and life insurance plans for retirees, market price on the date of grant. Options have
the estimated cost of which is fully accrued a maximum duration of 10 years and become Stock Repurchase Programs
at retirement. The cost amounted to $ 105 million, exercisable in up to four annual installments, Under programs for purchasing IBM stock,
$50 million and $201 million in 1988,1987 commencing one year from date of grant. 8,611,396 shares were repurchased during 1988 at
and 1986, respectively. Cost in 1988 and 1986 was The plans are administered by the Execu- a cost of $992 million, 11,252,000 shares during
higher than 1987 primarily because of an tive Compensation Committee of the Board of 1987 at a cost of $1,425 million and 11,094,900
increased number of retirees in those years. The Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, shares during 1986 at a cost of $ 1,488 million.
retiree increases were a result of the manufactur- grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs) to The repurchased shares were retired and restored
ing and headquarters consolidations in 1988, holders of options. Such rights offer optionees to the status of authorized but unissued shares.
and the retirement incentive program offered in the alternative of electing not to exercise the
related stock option, but to receive instead an
amount in cash, stock, or a combination of cash
and stock, equivalent to the difference between

===== PAGE 50 =====
Segment Information
IBM is in the field of advanced information of consolidated revenue, operating profit and better understanding of IBM's operations. Material
technology. The company operates primarily in identifiable assets. The schedule below shows rev- interdependencies and overlaps exist among
the single industry segment which offers cus- enue by industry segments and by classes of IBM's operating units and, therefore, the informa-
tomers solutions that incorporate information similar products or services within the informa- tion may not be indicative of the financial
processing systems, software, communica- tion technology segment. results of, or investments in, the reported areas
tions systems and other products and services. Financial information by geographic were they independent organizations.
This segment represents more than 90% area is summarized on the next page to provide j
Revenue by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services
Consolidated U.S. Only
((DDoollllaarrss iinn mmiilllliioonnss)) 1988 1987 + I986t 1988 I987t i986t
Information Technology:
Processors $ 15,239 $ 14,052 $ 13,161 $ 5,643 $ 5,531 $ 5,534
Peripherals 11,280 10,186 10,807 4,764 4,656 5,298
Workstations 11,315 10,370 9,436 4,685 4,954 4,659
Software 7,927 6,836 5,514 2,925 2,817 2,367
Maintenance Services . . .. 7,347 7,691 7,413 3,102 3,688 4,016
Other 4,477 3,816 3,640 2,110 1,562 1,861
57,585 52,951 49,971 23,229 23,208 23,735
Federal Systems 2,065 2,238 2,121 2,065 2,238 2,121
Other Business 31 67 68 26 58 60
Total $ 59,681 $ 55,256 $ 52,160 $ 25,320 $ 25,504 $ 25,916
tReclassified to conform with 1988 presentation.
While IBM operates primarily in a single storage and telecommunication devices. ments for technological enhancements to permit
industry segment and manages its worldwide Peripheral functions embedded in processors are a peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be func-
business as such, revenue has been categorized classified with Processors. Software includes tionally integrated with a display, a telecommuni-
into major classes of product. both applications and systems software. Mainte- cation device and a processor to form a work-
For purposes of classifying similar infor- nance Services consist of separately billed station. Such interchangeability and technological
mation technology products, user programmable charges for maintenance. Other consists princi- progress tend to make year-to-year comparisons
equipment having the capability of manipulat- pally of financing revenue, supplies and less valid than they would be in an industry
ing data arithmetically or logically and making miscellaneous support services. less subject to rapid change.
calculations, in a manner directly addressable Some products logically fit in more than Federal Systems consists of specialized
by the user through the operation of a stored one class and are assigned to a specific class information technology products and services pri-
program, has been classified as Processors, based on a variety of factors. Over time, prod- marily for the United States defense, space and
except that small business computers and intelli- ucts tend to overlap, merge into or split from other agencies.
gent workstations are included under Work- existing classes as a result of changing technolo- Other Business consists of training and test-
stations. Typewriters have also been classified gies, market perceptions, and/or customer use. ing materials for school, home and industrial use.
under Workstations. Peripherals include printers. For example, market demand may create require-

===== PAGE 51 =====
Geographic Areas (Dollars in millions) 19881 1987 1986
United States
Revenue-Customers $ 25,320 $ 25,504 $ 25,916
Interarea transfers 4,951 3,994 3,058
Total $ 30,271 $ 29,498 $ 28,974
Net earnings 1,408 1,936 1,603
Assets at December 31 39,245 36,026 35,945
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Revenue-Customers $21,600 $ 19,588 $ 17,310
Interarea transfers 955 1,008 696
Total $ 22,555 $ 20,596 $ 18,006
Net earnings 2,349 2,209 2,267
Assets at December 31 22,745 24,625 19,687
Asia/Pacific
Revenue-Customers $ 8,824 $ 6,910 $ 5,922
Interarea transfers 1,837 1,431 862
Total $ 10,661 $ 8,341 $ 6,784
^ ^
Net earnings 1,394
Assets at December 31 7,633 6,840 5,039
Americas
Revenue-Customers $ 3,937 $ 3,254 $ 3,012
Interarea transfers 1,290 850 738
Total $ 5,227 $ 4,104 $ 3,750
Net earnings S^ iu
Assets at December 31 4,915 4,188 3,613
Eliminations
Revenue $ (9,033) $ (7,283) $ (5,354)
Net earnings 12 (8) 2
Assets (1,501) (1,650) (1,264)
Consolidated
Revenue $59,681 $ 55,256 $ 52,160
Net earnings $ 5,491 $ 5,258 $ 4,789
Assets at December 31 $ 73,037 $ 70,029 $63,020
11988 net earnings excludes cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes.
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, The cost and service charges that relate to fixed
currency environment account for approxi- European operations accounted for approximately asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or
mately 90% of the company's non-U. S. revenue. 95% of revenue in 1988,1987 and 1986. amortized by the importing area. Interarea
The remaining 10% is from subsidiaries and Interarea transfers consist principally of accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
branches, predominantly in the Americas, completed machines, subassemblies and parts, service charges, and the net change during the
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose eco- and software. These transfers are generally priced year in unamortized service charges have been
nomic environment is highly inflationary. at cost plus an appropriate service charge. eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1988 ipSyt I986t 19851 I984t
For the year:
Revenue $ 59,681 $ 55,256 $52,160 $50,718 $46,309
Net earnings before cumulative
effect of accounting change 5,491 5,258 4,789 6,555 6,582
Per share 9.27 8.72 7.81 10.67 10.77
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting for income taxes 315 — — — .—
Per share .53 — — — —
Net earnings 5,806 5,258 4,789 6,555 6,582
Per share 9.80 8.72 7.81 10.67 10.77
Cash dividends paid 2,609 2,654 2,698 2,703 2,507
Per share 4.40 4.40 4.40 4.40 4.10
Investment in plant, rental machines
and other property 5,431 4,312 4,644 6,434 5,507
Return on stockholders' equity 14.9% 14.5% 14.4% 22.4% 26.59,
At end of year:
Total assets $ 73,037 $ 70,029 $63,020 $ 56,983 $ 44,989
Net investment in plant, rental
machines and other property 23,426 22,967 21,310 19,713 16,396
Working capital 17,956 18,430 15,546 14,958 10,751
Lx)ng-term debt 8,518 7,108 6,923 6,368 4,232
Stockholders' equity 39,509 38,263 34,374 31,990 26,489
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 44.
Selected Quarterly Data
Gross Net Per Share Stock Prices
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) Revenue Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
1988 First Quartert $12,058 $ 6,853 $1,248$ $2.10t $1.10 $124.00 $104.50
Second Quartert 13,907 7,936 964 1.63 1.10 128.38 105.63
Third Quartert 13,714 7,826 1,247 2.10 1.10 129.50 109.50
Fourth Quarter 20,002 11,418 2,347 3.97 1.10 125.00 112.75
Total $59,681 $34,033 $5,806 $9.80 $4.40
1987 First Quartert $ 10,927 $ 5,997 $ 785 1.30 $ 1.10 156.63 $115.75
Second Quartert 13,035 7,109 1,178 1.95 1.10 168.63 142.63
Third Quartert 12,992 7,033 1,208 2.00 1.10 175.88 148.50
Fourth Quartert 18,302 9,995 2,087 3.47 1.10 157.25 100.00
Total $ 55,256 $30,134 $5,258 $8.72 $4.40
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 44.
tlncludes $315 million, or $.53 per share, cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes.
There were 833,785 stockholders of record The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low prices
at December 31,1988. During 1988, stockhold- March 10,1989, will be at the rate of $1.10 for IBM's capital stock on the New York Stock
ers received $ 2,609 million in cash dividends. per share. This dividend will be IBM's 296th Exchange composite tape for the last two years.
consecutive quarterly cash dividend.

===== PAGE 53 =====
IBM Corporation John F. Akers Chairman of the Board, IBM Board Committees:
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, CaHf.-engineering and construction Executive Committee:
Harold Brown Chairman, Foreign PoHcy Institute,The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. John R. Opel, Chairman
James E. Burke Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J-health care products John F. Akers
FrankT. Cary Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Kaspar V Cassani* Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, James E. Burke
IBM World Trade Corporation FrankT. Cary
William T. Coleman, Jr Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C, New York, N.Y., London, England, Kaspar V. Cassani*
and Tokyo, Japan-attorneys at law J. Richard Munro
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. Chairman of the Board, HCA, Nashville, Tenn.-health services Retirement Plans Committee:
Carla Anderson Hills** Partner, Weil, Gotshal & Manges, Washington, D.C, New York, N.Y., Miami, Fla., Jack D. Kuehler, Chairman
Houston and DaIIas,Tex.-attorneys at law Harold Brown
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; Partner, Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland & Perretti, William T. Coleman, Jr.
Morristown, N.J-attorneys at law Carla Anderson Hills**
Nannerl O. Keohane President, Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass. Compensation Committee:
Jack D. Kuehler Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM James E. Burke, Chairman
Richard W. Lyman Director, Institute for International Studies, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr
J. Richard Munro Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Time Inc., New York, N.Y-publishing Thomas F. Frist, Jr.
Thomas S. Murphy Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., J Richard Munro
New York, N.Y.-broadcasting and publishing Thomas S. Murphy
John R.Opel Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM Audit Committee:
John B. Slaughter President, Occidental College, Los Angeles, Calif Richard W. Lyman,Chairman
Edgar S. Woolard, Jr. President, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.-chemical products Nicholas deB. Katzenbach
Nannerl O. Keohane
•Retired from the Board 12/31/88
John B. Slaughter
**Resigned from the Board 12/31/88
Advisory Board: George B. Beitzel Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y-attorneys at law
John N. Irwin II Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb ScTyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y.
Allen J. Krowe Retired Executive Vice President, IBM; Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Texaco Inc.
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge President du Conseil d'Administration, Centre Fran^ais du Commerce Exterieur, Paris, France
William McChesneyMartin, Jr Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Chief Executive Officer, A.P Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y.
Dean P Phypers Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Paul J. Rizzo Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Dean, Graduate School of Business Administration,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
William W. Scranton Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, Wilmington, Del.-attorneys at law
Cyrus R. Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y-attorneys at law
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman Emeritus, IBM
Officers: Chairman of the Board Vice Presidents James J. Forese David E. McDowell** Treasurer
John F. Akers Ray S. AbuZayyad Heinz K. Fridrich Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. David A. Finley
Vice Chairmen of the Board John A. Armstrong Richard T. Gerstner M. Bernard Puckett Assistant Controller
Kaspar V Cassani* Michael J. Attardo Victor J. Goldberg Michael J. Quinlan Michael H.Van Vranken
Jack D. Kuehler Walton E. Burdick William O. Grabe Renato Riverso Assistant Treasurers
James A. Cannavino Joseph M. Guglielmi Stephen B. Schwartz
Senior Vice Presidents Ralph W. Clark Lutz F. Hahne Robert M. Stephenson Joe Grills
C. Michael Armstrong Vincent N. Cook* Ellen M. Hancock Charles H.Swair Ira D. Hall
G Ca e r o l r g ]. e C H o . n t C i onrades K N e ic n h n o e l t a h s W M . . D D a o m n ofrio A Ed r w th a u r r d J J . . H K e f d o g u e r , y Jr. N H a .M nc i y t c H he .T ll e e W te a r t s s on, Jr. J R o o h b n e r H t . N S . t e M w a a t r t t s on
Ra S lp c h ie n E c . e G a o n m d o T r e y c , hnology G D e o r n a a ld to W A . . E E b v k a e n r g elista. R N o ed b e C rt . J L a L u a t B en a b n a t c * h * Earl E Wheeler
Terry R. Lautenbach General Counsel Paul R. Low Vice President and Controller
David E. McKinney Howard G. Figueroa Edward E. Lucente John P. Cunningham •Retiring in 1989
Frank A. Metz, Jr.,
Lucie J Fjeldstad Victor R, Macdonald* Secretary ^*Elected 1/31/89
Finance and Planning
Larry J. Ford Marvin L. Mann William W.K. Rich ^Deceased 1/21/89
Patrick A.Toole

===== PAGE 54 =====
IBM World Trade Sir Roderick Carnegie President, Business Council of Australia, Melbourne, Australia
Asia/Pacific Group Jill K.Conway Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.;
Board: former President of Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Kenneth W. Dam Vice President, IBM
Richard T. Gerstner Vice President, IBM; General Manager, Personal Systems
David K. P Li Director and Chief Executive,The Bank of East Asia, Ltd., Hong Kong
Edward E. Lucente Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM World Trade Asia/Pacific Group
Mohamed Noordin Soplee Director General, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; President, Equifax, Inc., Atlanta, Ga.
Takeo Shiina President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan Ltd.
Tan Chok Kian Executive Chairman, Stock Exchange of Singapore; Singapore's Trade Representative to Taiwan
Jiro Ushio Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ushio, Inc., Tokyo, Japan
IBM World Trade C. Michael Armstrong Senior Vice President, IBM; Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation
Europe/Middle East/Pierre Barazer President, IBM Erance
Africa Corporation Eric Bourdais de Charbonniere — Executive Vice President, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Paris, France
Board of Directors: Juan Antonio Garcia Diez Attorney; Chairman, URALITA S. A., Madrid, Spain
Pierre L. Gousseland Honorary Chairman, AMAX Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Lutz E Hahne Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Plans et Services Techniques, IBM Europe
Hans-Olaf Henkel President, IBM Germany
Jacques G. Maisonrouge President du Conseil dAdministration, Centre Fran^ais du Commerce Exterieur, Paris, France
David E. McKinney Senior Vice President, IBM; President Directeur General, IBM Europe;
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation
Umberto Nordio Retired Chairman, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy;
Chairman,The Galileo Company Limited, Swindon, U.K.
Renato Riverso Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe
Bo Rydin Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Svenska Cellulosa AB, Sundsvall, Sweden
Sir Philip Shelbourne Chairman, Henry Ansbacher Holdings PLC, London, England
Otto Sturzenegger Chairman of the Board, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y.
Nancy H. Teeters Vice President and Chief Economist, IBM
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
IBM World Trade Manuel F Ayau President Emeritus, Universidad Francisco Marroquin, Guatemala City, Guatemala
Latin America Roberto Konder Bornhauser Vice Chairman, Unibanco, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Board: William A. Etherington Vice President and Assistant General Manager, IBM Latin America
James J. Forese Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM World Trade Americas Group
Jaime Garcia Parra President, Acerias Paz del Rio, S.A., Bogota, Colombia
Julio J. Gomez Vice President and General Manager, Banco Shaw, S. A., Buenos Aires, Argentina
Claudio X. Gonzalez Chairman of the Board and Director General, Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico
Rudolf Hohn President and General Manager, IBM Brazil
Robeli J. Libero President and General Manager, IBM Latin America
Eliodoro Matte L Vice Chairman, Compania Manufacturera de Papeles y Cartones S. A., Santiago, Chile
Paulo D. Villares Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. Vollmer Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S. A., Caracas, Venezuela
Richard Webb Chairman, Cuanto, S. A., Lima, Peru

===== PAGE 55 =====
The following information is provided as a convenient reference for IBM stockholders:
The 1989 Annual Meeting IBM Stock is Traded IBM Annual Report Translations
of stockholders will be held on Monday, on the New York Stock Exchange, other and Recordings
April 24, at 10 a.m., at the David L. Lawrence exchanges in the United States, and exchanges are available. The report is translated into
Convention Center, Pittsburgh, Pa. in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, French and Japanese. An audio cassette recording
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and in English is available for the blind.
Notice of Annual Meeting,
the Netherlands.
Proxy Statement and Proxy Voting Card A Service for Deaf Stockholders
are mailed to each stockholder in March. The provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations
The following information may be obtained
Proxy Statement describes the items of business Department enables deaf stockholders who have
without charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations
to be voted on at the Annual Meeting and access to a teletypewriter to communicate
Department, Box J896, Church Street Station,
provides biographies of the Board's nominees with the department's New York City office.
New York, N.Y. 10242.
for director and their principal affiliations Stockholders who wish to use the service
with other companies or organizations, as well The Form 10-K Annual Report should call (212) 735-7120.
as other information about the company. to the Securities and Exchange Commission
provides further details on IBM's business, For Information
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting,
including a list of subsidiaries, summarized in regarding stockholders' accounts, call
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes
the Annual Report. Form lO-K is available (212) 735-7000.
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including
in April. General questions about IBM, call
a report on the company, questions and answers
(800) 426-3333-
of general interest, and the results of voting The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report
Outside the continental U. S., call
on items of business. to the Securities and Exchange Commission is
(617) 895-2874-
available in May, August and November.
IBM Stockholder Records
are maintained by the IBM Stockholder A Transcript of the Annual Meeting international Business Machines
Relations Department, 590 Madison Avenue, is available in June. Corporation
New York, N.Y. 10022.This department distrib- Corporate Headquarters
utes dividends and can answer questions IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet Armonk, N.Y. 10504
explains how stockholders may automatically
regarding stockholder accounts.
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of AIX, Application Systcmy4oo, DB2, Enterprise System/3090,
IBM Stock Transfer additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make ES/4381, Enterprise System/^370, ES/ti370, Enterprise
is handled by Morgan Shareholder Services optional additional investments for that purpose. Systems Architecture/370, ESA/370, Independence Series,
Micro Channel, MVS/ESA, NetView, NetView/PC,
Trust Company, 30 West Broadway, New York,
Operating Systcm/2, OS/2, Operating Systeni/^oo,
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines
N.Y. 10007. Stockholders wishing to transfer OS/4^oo, Presentation Manager, Screen Reader, System/370
stock or to change the name on a stock certifi- is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide and Systems Application Architecture are trademarks of
describing the ethical and business principles that the IBM Corporation.
cate should contact Morgan.
Stock certificates are valuable and should the company sets for the conduct of its business. IBM RT, Personal Systcm/2 and PS/2 are registered
trademarks of the IBM Corporation. UNIX is a registered
be safeguarded since replacement takes time Equal Opportunity, Affirmative trademark of AT&T Company.
and requires payment of a surety bond premium Action and Community Programs
PRODIGY is a service mark and registered trademark of
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost, in IBM are outlined in a document that describes Prodigy Services Company.
stolen or destroyed, Stockholder Relations programs in the United States for women,
should be notified. Registered mail should be minorities and handicapped persons, and reviews
used whenever stock is mailed. IBM's affirmative action efforts in the community.

===== PAGE 56 =====


===== PAGE 57 =====
G505- 988-0 3