

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: IBM's operations:
1 Financial Highlights IBM is in the business of applying advanced
information technology to help solve the
2 Letter to Stockholders
problems of business, government, science,
5 Reshaping IBM for the '90s: space exploration, defense, education,
A Progress Report medicine and other areas of human activity.
IBM olfers customers solutions that
22 IBM and the Community
incorporate information processing systems,
25 Financial Report software, communications systems and
Report of Management
other products and services to address specific
Report of Independent Accountants
needs. These solutions are provided by
Earnings
IBM's worldwide marketing organizations,
Financial Position
as well as through the company's Business
Cash Flows
Partners, including authorized dealers
Stockholders' Equity
and remarketers.
Management Discussion
Notes to Financial Statements
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data
46 Directors and Officers
48 Stockholder Information
Cover and right: Visitors to the historic Louvre
museum in Paris, France, are welcomed by an
eye-catching pyramid that serves as the new public
entrance to the renowned museum. The new
entrance gives visitors better access to the Louvre's
diverse treasures, while improving the museum's
ability to accommodate museum-goers from around
the world. Designed by architect I. M. Pei, the
complex includes the museum bookstore and a
variety of shops supported by an IBM Application
System/400 and 75 IBM468} point-of-sale terminals.
IBM, too, is transforming itself to be more
responsive to customers, building on the company's
enduring values of service and excellence.

===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights
for the year ended December 31,1989
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1989
Highlights of the year:
Revenue 62,710 59,681
Earnings before income taxes 6,645 9,033
Income taxes 2,887 3,542
Net earnings before cumulative elfect of accounting change 3,758 5,491
Per share 6.47 9.27
Cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes. 315
Per share .53
Net earnings 3,758 5,806
Per share 6.47 9.80
Cash dividends paid 2,752 2,609
Per share 4.73 4.40
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 6,410 5,431
Average number of shares outstanding (in millions) . . . . 581 592
Return on stockholders' equity 9.6% 14.9%
At end of year:
Total assets $ 77,734 $ 73,037
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 24,943 $ 23,426
Working capital $ 14,175 $ 17,956
Long-term debt $ 10,825 $ 8,518
Stockholders' equity $ 38,509 $ 39,509
Number of employees 383,220 387,112
Number of stockholders 815,580 833,785
Revenue Dividends/ Net Earnings Earnings Per Share
62,710
59,681 10.67
55,256 9.80
52,160 6,555
50,7
5,806
5,258 781
4,789
6.47
3,758
2,703 12,698 • 2,6<i4l 2-609 2,752
1985 '86 '87 1985 '86 '87 '88 198 1985 '86 '87 '88 1989
Dividends 18 Net Earnings

===== PAGE 4 =====
Letter to Stockholders
billion. Worldwide net earnings for the three These changes confirm our resolve
months were $.6 billion in 1989, compared to continue with the competitive transforma-
with $2.3 billion in 1988, with after-tax tion of IBM — a resolve to strengthen:
margins of 2.9 percent and 11.7 percent, • Our relationships with our customers;
respectively. Earnings per share were $ 1.04 • The competitiveness of our products and
For the fourth quarter and full year, IBM's in 1989, compared with $3.97 in 1988. services;
1989 shipments and revenue exceeded Average shares outstanding for the period • Our efficiency.
those of 1988, while earnings decreased from were 575.9 million in 1989 and 590.8 The pages that follow provide a progress
the prior-year periods. The company took million in 1988. report. A few points bear particular mention.
significant actions to restructure its U.S. In a generally difficult year for the
Focus on Customers
business, resulting in a $2.4 billion charge computer industry, IBM's performance did
against fourth-quarter earnings. Revenue not meet our expectations — or yours. In transforming IBM, we have increased the
and earnings v^ere unfavorably affected by a At the same time, our World Trade busi- number of people working directly with
stronger U.S. dollar and by an increase nesses continued to demonstrate strong sales customers by 23 percent over the past three
in operating lease activity. While the increase and earnings growth. Our United States years. With in-depth education and longer
in IBM operating leases has an unfavorable operations achieved modest revenue growth tenure, they are more knowledgeable and
impact on short-term results, these leases will for the first time in four years, despite gener- better prepared to understand and to help
benefit the company in the long term. ally sluggish demand in the US. market- customers solve their business problems.
Demand for IBM's products and services place. And IBM's 3090 large-scale processor, Our customers also report we are
remains good. Revenue in 1989 continued midrange Application System/4oo and making it easier and simpler to do business
to show strong growth outside the Personal System/2 product lines all enjoyed with IBM — to acquire, finance, support
United States, with modest growth in the better than double-digit revenue growth. and use our offerings. To be certain we are
U.S. With the U.S. restructuring announced These results, and the restructuring developing products and services that meet
in December, we look forward to a more actions we have taken, give us confidence that customers' real needs, we are being as
competitive IBM. IBM will be the stronger, more competi- forthcoming as we can about our plans and
Worldwide revenue for the year ended tive company it must be to prosper in the '90s directions, and we continue to ask customers
December 31,1989, was $62.7 billion, up and to provide enhanced value to the to participate in the work of our develop-
5.1 percent from the prior year's $59.7 billion. company's shareholders. ment laboratories.
Worldwide net earnings for the year were Customers tell us we are on the right
A Changing and
$3.8 billion, compared with $5.8 billion course — that they welcome the changes in
in 1988.The after-tax margin was 6.0 percent Highly Competitive Industry IBM, and would like to see us do more, and
in 1989, compared with 9.7 percent in 1988. For almost a quarter of a century, growth even more quickly. We are following that
Earnings per share were $6.47 in 1989, in the information industry averaged nearly very good advice.
compared with $9.80 per share in 1988.The 15 percent each year, driven largely by While these changes strengthen our
one-time charge against earnings for the advances in technology that dramatically ability to respond to customers' individual
restructuring initiatives, investment revalua- reduced the cost of computing. Over the needs, IBM is also well-positioned for
tions and other actions amounts to $2.58 per past three years, however, industry growth an environment of fast-moving markets and
share. Average shares outstanding were 581.1 has slowed to between 8 and 10 percent diverse opportunities.
million in 1989 and 592.4 million in 1988. worldwide, with the fastest growth coming With customer expectations at the
Revenue from non-US. operations in outside the United States. center of how we manage our business and
1989, included in consolidated results, was At the same time, the industry is under- measure our progress, we have a sharper
$37.0 billion, up 7.6 percent from $34.4 going fundamental change. Opportunities focus on understanding and selecting
billion in 1988. Non-US. net earnings were are shifting in favor of software and services, specific markets where we can achieve clear
$4.1 billion in 1989, compared with and toward small computers, open systems leadership and attractive returns.
$3.6 billion in 1988. and standards. Rapid changes in technology
For the quarter ended December 31, and advances in manufacturing productivity
1989, worldwide revenue was $20.5 billion, have created overcapacity in both physical
up 2.3 percent from the prior year's $20.0 and human resources. Intense competition is
increasing pressure on prices, margins
and profitability. And customers continue to
raise the level of their expectations.

===== PAGE 5 =====
Partners who reach and support the Other announcements reflected our
majority of our Application System/4oo determination to lead in introducing and
and Personal System/2 customers. applying advanced technologies. The 3390
Other relationships take the form of Direct Access Storage Device, introduced
direct equity investments; through 1989, we and shipped in 1989, is the industry's fastest
had established more than 75 equity high-performance storage product —40
alliances worldwide. Our partners range percent faster and capable of storing as much
from large, long-established companies such data as its predecessor in one-third the space.
as Sears and Siemens, to small, entrepre- During the year, IBM was the first in the
neurial software ventures; we are investing in industry to use Intel's powerful new i486
promising opportunities from supercom- microprocessor in a product — an upgrade to
puters to interactive information services the IBM Personal System/2 Model 70-A21.
for the home. And we delivered the first product in the
These relationships are important to IBM industry to incorporate a 4-million-bit
today, and a key element of our plans for memory chip, as we did with the earlier
growth in the future. one-million-bit chip.
To maintain our position in the forefront
More Competitive Product Line
of semiconductor technology, and there-
In our drive for more competitive products fore in our systems business, we dedicated
and services, delivered on ever-shorter a new Advanced Semiconductor Technology
cycles, we are making essential investments in Center at our site in East Fishkill, New York,
research, development and engineering. in October. This research and development
We have not compromised in this area and in facility —the first of its kind in the United
1989, as in prior years, these investments States — will be home to a new manufactur-
outpaced revenue growth. ing technology called X-ray lithography,
IBM Chairman of the Board John F.Akers and We continue to shift the balance of essential to producing future generations of
IBM President Jack D. Kuehler (seated). our investments to software —up 41 percent semiconductor chips.
in 1989. We have offered to share our technolo-
Today, more than ever, that requires During the year, the results were evident gies and to make the facility available for use
leadership in quahty —world-class quality in in a series of significant new products: by other companies because we believe it is
our products, in our services, in the way • OfficeVision, a family of easy-to-use appli- vital to IBM's long-term interests for the U.S.
we make a proposal or render a bill.Through- cations for document preparation, filing, to be part of a semiconductor industry that
out our operations, we are putting specific electronic mail and calendars. Our first major is competitive worldwide. We are delighted
initiatives and measurements in place to Systems Application Architecture offering, that Motorola is the first company to join us.
be certain we are meeting customers' expecta- OfficeVision provides consistent, integrated
Greater Efficiency
tions—so that, in their eyes, the quality of office functions across IBM's product line.
every aspect of their relationship with IBM is • AD/Cycle, a series of products, tools Over the past four years, we have taken a
as nearly perfect as we can make it. and services and programming languages series of actions to reduce our costs, expenses
developed by IBM and our Business Partners. and structure, and to sharpen IBM's com-
Expanding Alliances AD/Cycle uses computer automation to petitiveness worldwide. We have consolidated
In developing specific solutions for cus- improve the productivity and quality of cus- manufacturing capacity; we are operating
tomers or pursuing longer-range opportuni- tomers' application development efforts. with fewer layers of management; and we
ties, we often come to a choice: whether to • CIM Advantage, a package of hardware have reduced overhead and indirect positions
rely entirely on IBM resources, or to join and software products that provides a com- by some 50,000, while maintaining our tra-
with other companies whose strengths com- prehensive approach to computer-integrated dition of full employment. We believe that the
plement and extend our own. The result manufacturing. CIM Advantage includes returns —in the loyalty, flexibility and pro-
can be access to technology, to software, or to several solutions we developed for use in our ductivity of IBM employees — continue to be
specific markets and distribution channels. own manufacturing plants. a competitive advantage for the company.
Around the world, for example, IBM has While our business in the United States
relationships with more than 10,000 joint is improving, that improvement is not as
marketers, systems integrators and Business rapid as we expected. As a result, in 1989 we

===== PAGE 6 =====
announced further actions to restructure per year, faster than overall economic
our operations and improve our efficiency. growth worldwide.
These initiatives include plans for additional Given a reasonable economic environ-
consolidations of capacity and reductions ment, IBM is planning for growth in all
in selected skills. Through a combination major geographies in 1990, led by the Asia
of attrition and incentive payments, Pacific area, followed by Europe and the
we expect our U.S. population to decline by United States. With these plans, we expect
at least 10,000 during 1990.The year-end significant improvement in our financial
figure of 206,000 will represent a reduction results beginning in 1990, with additional
of 37,000 from the 1985 peak, and a return progress in 1991.
to the level of 1981. Our confidence is based on two
The costs of this restructuring, in- fundamentals. The first is the opportunity
cluding investment revaluations announced we see in the potential for new customers
at the same time, are included in the and new applications. For example, as
provision against fourth-quarter earnings. the 1980s began, personal systems in use
As a result of these actions, we will on desktops around the world numbered in
reduce IBM's ongoing cost and expense rate the tens of thousands. Today, the figure is
by approximately $ i billion per year. We in the tens of millions.
expect to see the return in our 1990 results, Even with that remarkable growth, the
and to achieve the full earnings benefit great majority of companies worldwide
of about $1.00 per share in 1991. do not use modern information products.
An even larger majority of employees
Enhancing Shareholder Value who could use some type of workstation do
We believe these actions will substan- not have them. In fact, only about two
tially improve IBM's operating returns and percent of the world's business information
reward the company's shareholders for has been digitized — that is, put on a
their support. computer system. So the opportunity is
To further enhance shareholder clearly there — for IBM and for others.
value, IBM has, since 1986, repurchased The second fundamental is our con-
shares of its common stock — a total of fidence that IBM is well-positioned to par-
47 million shares through the end of 1989. ticipate fully in the opportunity we see
Repurchase reduces shareholders' equity, ahead — in our worldwide presence, our
distributing earnings over a smaller base financial resources, our investments in
and increasing returns.The benefit to technology and software.
IBM shareholders has been to increase return Above all, our faith and confidence rests
on equity by approximately 6 percent in in the people of IBM. We are grateful for
1988 and 1989. their unflagging energy and loyalty and
In December, the IBM Board of Directors their readiness to do whatever is required to
authorized the repurchase of as much as assure that IBM continues to prosper.
$4 billion in additional shares.This additional
laniiary 30, 1990, by order of the
repurchase would bring the total investment
Board of Directors
since 1986 to $10.5 billion —a continuing
reflection of the company's confidence in its Singapore Airlines operates over 500 flights a week
prospects, and an indication that we regard and its routes span five continents — linking
lohn F. Akers
IBM stock as an attractive investment. 57 cities in 37 countries. This international airline
Chairman of the Board
utilizes IBM systems to schedule cabin and flight
Prospects for the Future crews, manage the maintenance of its aircraft, and
These investments also reflect our control ground services, including passenger
confidence in the information industry and and cargo handling.
its prospects for growth. Long term, we
expect industry growth of 7 to 10 percent

===== PAGE 7 =====
The incredible pace of new
W XM W Msav*
shifting market trends.
aiiu i i c i ce Cuiiip<=t,ii.ion GH
every front have chanaed
t he f a ce of m ts i i i i u r n i d n on
jprliicfrry forck«fQ|>, | pM is
changing, as well, to become
• w i • • ^ * WW • • • w * • » ^
information processing
COiiipaii/ in t,iid Wvri lU...

===== PAGE 8 =====
....,
The last four years have been a period of dramatic
o change for IBM and for the information industry as a
e.
whole. Rapid strides in technology and product
a Q :: ) innovations have brought about millions of new com
puter users, including consumers and small busi
.U.) nesses, and a tremendous demand for new applications,
U)
open systems and standardized products.
Q)
Manufacturing efficiencies have resulted in
..
m
excess capacity throughout the industry, and there are
o
pressures on prices, margins and profitability.
a.. Moreover, competition, ranging from one-person
software consulting firms to major global companies,
<.C.
is intense and unrelenting .
U) Recognizing the scope of these challenges, IBM
o
developed a strategy in 1985 to become leaner, more
~ efficient and, most important, market driven.
Q) IBM's goal is to be the world's champion in meeting
...c..,
customers' wants and needs .
In a sense, this strategy means getting back
2 to basics: selecting markets that offer the best returns
and pursuing leadership in them by making
:E customer satisfaction the number-one priority.
m- To this end, IBM has been taking decisive and far
reaching steps to refocus its business on the customer.
m Headquarters operations around the world have been
c
streamlined. To move more resources and authority
I e - . closer to customers, seven lines of business have
ca been established. These largely independent organi
.c
zations are responsible for developing and manu
U) facturing product and service solutions for customers
Q)
a:: ranging from individuals using personal systems Available in a variety of colors and textures,
to large enterprises with worldwide networks. Robinson Brick's products are viewed among the best
To extend direct customer support, IBM launched in the industry. Five years ago, when construction
the largest retraining and redeployment program in the Denver, Colo., area slowed, this fourth
in its history. The company also consolidated manufac generation brick company began marketing on a
turing plants and redirected the missions of some national basis. Today, the company counts on
of its development laboratories to respond to increased an IBM AS,4oo to help manage a distribution net
demand for software and services. Further, some work that includes 135 distributors in 44 states.
Mazda Motor Corporation operations that were not part ofIBM's core business
is using a computer of computing and communications have been sold.
integrated manufacturing Product lines have been refreshed from top to
network to tailor cars like bottom,and production cycles have been shortened
the Miata to the driving to enable the company to deliver solutions faster.
needs and style preferences Along with these changes, the company has inten
ofi ts customers. IBM sified its focus on quality and on delivering superior
systems link Mazda develop customer service. At the same time, it is exploring
ment laboratories and innovative new ways of doing business.
manufacturingfacilities While the transformation continues, IBM
around the world. is better-positioned-in organization and outlook
for success in the years ahead. The following
pages review the company's progress in becoming
more market driven.
6 IBM 1989 Annual Report IBM 1989 Annual Report 7

===== PAGE 9 =====
Doing business
Credit Corporation financed one-third of
in new ways all customer purchases of IBM products and
nine out of ten Personal System/2 (PS/2)*
computer shipments to authorized dealers.
The company is seeing a growing trend
The cornerstone of IBM's business has been, toward leasing equipment, particularly
and remains, the strength of its relationship in the U.S., where IBM Credit Corporation
with customers. As the company reshapes its has become the preferred source of IBM
business for the challenges of the 1990s, customer financing.
IBM is reaffirming its commitment to provide Business alliances have grown in impor-
customers with the most competitive solu- tance in recent years as IBM turns to them
tions available. Often this means doing busi- to complement marketing and development
ness in new ways. efforts, to gain access to specialized skills
The growing trend toward global busi- and new technologies, and to deliver inter-
ness has led to significant changes in the national solutions to customers faster.
support that international customers require. The most visible of these alliances are
To expand its international business, IBM IBM Business Partners —remarketers, agents,
has given its country general managers world- application specialists, and dealers who
wide responsibility for key international sell selected IBM products or complement
customers headquartered in their countries. them with their own products and
Moreover, to ensure consistent, coordinated services. Today they account for about 80
solutions and support, regions and branch percent of Application System/^oo
offices have been created specifically to sup- (AS/i-oo)* and Personal System/2 computer
port each of these customers' operations sales in the U.S.
worldwide. In the U.S., for example, a branch
office in New York coordinates all market- Service representatives at USAA (United Services
ing and support activities for Citicorp in Automobile Association), an insurance and finan-
44 countries. cial services company based in San Antonio, Texas,
Japanese customers expanding their are using an advanced IBM image processing
operations into global markets are now system to improve customer service, while reducing
Communication among Mobil Corporations receiving marketing, language and cultural costs and paper clutter. The system, which com-
worldwide offices is becoming easier with IBM'ss upport from IBM Japan at their new presses mountains of insurance data into compact
OfficeVision. The OfficeVision system will links ites. Currently, more than 30 employees computerized files, can retrieve and display
Mobil's office workers engaged in activities rangofi nIgB M Japan are on international assign- images of correspondence and policies in seconds.
from management of oil supplies through ments in the U.S., Europe and parts of Asia
delivery of finished products. It will help Mobil to assist Japanese customers.
improve its efficiency and productivity, while IBM is also offering customers a wide
enhancing customer service. range of financing options through its U.S.
subsidiary, IBM Credit Corporation, and
other credit operations around the world. In
1989, customer financing volumes grew
by 45 percent worldwide. In the U.S., IBM

===== PAGE 10 =====
St. Francis Hospital, The Heart Center, in Long
Island, N. Y., is staying in the forefront of cardiac
care with the help of IBM systems. In the radiology
department, a radiology management system
developed by an IBM Business Partner tracks and
reports on patient information and on staff and
equipment scheduling.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Nawarat Marine Farm knows all too well that the
slightest drop in the temperature of a shrimp
pond or change in feeding patterns can result in a
costly business loss. That's why Nawarat, one
of Thailand's largest shrimp producers, relies on
IBM computers to control its ponds and monitor
the growth and feeding rates of its shrimp.

===== PAGE 12 =====
IBM has made equity investments in tunity Council formed in 1988.The council,
many of the companies with which it has composed of marketing and development
alHances. Examples include PCO Inc., an executives from IBM U.S. and World Trade
optoelectronics company, and Policy Man- organizations, directs resources and invest-
agement Systems Corporation, a provider of ments toward developing new industry solu-
insurance applications. The benefits of such tions in promising international markets.
equity investments are twofold: First, More than 30 industry opportunities
they help accelerate the development of solu- have been identified to date. In one instance,
tions for customers; second, they offer the the council provided $ 15 million in funding
opportunity for financial returns to IBM as and 130 personnel to develop opportunities
these companies grow and prosper. in wholesale distribution. Within this indus-
During 1989, the company completed try, specialists were responsible for develop-
the sale of ROLM manufacturing and develop- ing solutions in 27 segments, including food
ment activities to Siemens AG. However, and drug wholesalers, automotive parts,
telecommunications will continue to be an and hotels. In the year since the council's
important part of IBM's business. A newly initial funding, IBM's revenues in wholesale
formed company jointly owned by IBM and distribution have increased by nearly
Siemens will market and service Siemens $300 million.
telephones, telephone switching systems In October, IBM reaffirmed its intent
and other telecommunications products in to remain in the forefront of global semicon-
the U.S. IBM will also remarket Siemens ductor technology with the opening of the
telephone products to businesses in Europe Advanced Semiconductor Technology Center
and Australia. (ASTC) in East Fishkill, N.Y. The center
On a broader level, IBM is facilitating the will develop advanced chip technology for
development of customer solutions through future IBM products and house the first
a Worldwide Customer Solutions Oppor- commercial X-ray lithography facility in the
U.S. Motorola is participating in IBM's
A shopper completes a purchase in the glass shroepse arch on the use of X-ray lithography tech-
of an NK department store in Stockholm. nology and some of this research will
With assistance from Skandinaviska Banken anbde conducted at the new ASTC as the facility
IBM Sweden, the prestigious Swedish retail becomes operational. Snow doesn't slow mail deliveries at Canada Post
company has automated point-of-sale and credit In addition, IBM is licensing process Corporation. A network of IBM systems allows
card operations at its department and fashion technology and its 4-million-bit chip to Canada Post to track Priority Courier deliveries
stores located throughout Sweden. Micron Technology, Inc., to help broaden across the country; mail delivery performance
U.S. sources of supply for this key semi- is at record levels.
conductor component.
IBM continues to explore new ways of
applying advanced technologies such as
artificial intelligence, image-based systems
and computer-integrated manufacturing
(CIM) to solving customer problems. Many
banking, insurance, manufacturing and
retailing customers are helping IBM to pio-
neer these technologies.

===== PAGE 13 =====
A strengthened to customer needs. One of the most impor-
product line tant was OfficeVision, a family of applications
that allows IBM customers to boost their
office productivity and efficiency across their
information networks.
The basic building blocks for addressing OfficeVision applications are easy
unique customer requirements are IBM's to use and provide a range of office func-
products — hardware, software and sup- tions, including document preparation,
port services. In recent years, customers filing, electronic mail and calendar schedul-
have worked closely with IBM during prod- ing. They also allow all office personnel,
uct development cycles to ensure that from secretaries to executives, to use
new products accurately respond to their the power and resources of large IBM systems
specific needs. at their desktop workstations.
For example, customers with System/36 OfficeVision is the first major product
and System/38 computers indicated they developed using SAA architecture.
needed to expand their computing capabili- Another SAA-based solution announced
ties with a new system that would also in 1989 was CIM Advantage.* A comprehen-
be compatible with large processors and sive approach to computer-integrated manu-
Personal System/2 computers. IBM responded facturing, CIM Advantage features more
with the Application System/^oo, a power- than 50 hardware and software products,
ful midrange system that was supported by developed by IBM and its Business Partners,
more than i ,000 application programs
on the day it was announced. Early and exten- When "TCBY" The Country's Best Yogurt opened
sive customer involvement in the planning, its first franchise store seven years ago, a personal
development and testing made the AS/^oo computer handled the company's information
product introduction the most successful in processing needs. Today, 1,600 stores later, "TCBY"
IBM history uses three distributed Application System/400
Customers wanted a framework for build- computers to help manage its operations, and its
ing applications that are consistent in appear- frozen yogurt has never tasted better.
ance and function when running on any
Members of the North Dakota State LegislatureI BM system; IBM responded with the Systems
discuss a bill under review. Legislators' tradi- Application Architecture (SAA)* platform.
tional "bill books" are being replaced by IBM PeArp-plications developed using this unifying
sonal System/2 workstations. The PS/2s are paratr chitecture look the same and have the
of a new legislative network that will enable repcraep-ability to run on a Personal System/2,
sentatives to more efficiently track bills, revisioAnpsp lication System/^oo or high-end proces-
and amendments that are before their chambers.o r like the Enterprise System/3090.*
In response to customers' requirement
for an operating system that would run on
both IBM and non-IBM processors, the
company introduced Advanced Interactive
Executive (AIX*), a UNIX**-based operating
system. By the end of 1990, AIX support will
extend across IBM's Personal System/2,
high-function workstations and System/370*
product lines.
During the year, IBM continued to deliver
innovative products that effectively respond

===== PAGE 14 =====
1
•
I
ssi
SE(X)M security service at the Ueno Zoo in Tokyo
is getting help from IBM computers which monitor
animal cages. SECX)M Co., Ltd., uses IBM
System/88s to provide residential and commercial
security services to customers throughout Japan,
and in some parts of the U.S.

===== PAGE 15 =====
t
. • i \
. 'J
"J*'
-s, . t. ff'i '-J
V-. .
im
Australia's largest retail chain, Coles Myer, has
1,600 supermarkets, and discount and department
stores. From hats to pastries, the company aims
to provide for all of its customers' retailing needs.
IBM information systems play an important
part in Coles Myer's superior customer service
and business success.

===== PAGE 16 =====
that integrate design, engineering, produc- IBM also enhanced the power, perform-
tion planning and plant operations ance and function of its Personal System/2
with marketing, business planning and dis- family of desktop systems. Moreover, IBM
tribution. CIM Advantage also incorporates Japan introduced the Personal System/55
some of the solutions that IBM uses in family to address special needs of the mar-
its manufacturing operations to help reduce ketplaces of Japan, Korea and Taiwan.
costs, improve productivity and shorten The company continued to shorten
production cycles. the time it takes to get new technologies into
To help customers improve the quality products. IBM was the first company in the
and management of their application develop- world to ship products that use 4-million-bit
ment efforts, IBM introduced AD/Cycle, a memory chips. These chips, capable of
series of IBM and Business Partner products, storing about 400 pages of double-spaced
tools, services and improved program- typewritten text, almost double the
ming languages that will enhance produc- maximum processor storage of IBM's new
tivity. AD/Cycle addresses each phase of 3090 models. The chips also are used in
the development process, including modeling, an optional memory upgrade for high-end
analysis/design, producing the application, Personal System/2 models.
testing and maintenance. Recognizing customers' increasing need
In response to customer requirements for for more storage capacity, IBM introduced
more function and power at the high end, the industry's most advanced disk storage
IBM dramatically reduced batch processing product, the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage
time, enhanced system security and intro- Device.The 3390 can store as much data
duced new models of the 3090. In addition, as its predecessor, the IBM 3380K disk
the Application System/4oo was enhanced storage system, in one-third the space. It
with new top-of-the-line, intermediate and offers significant reductions in maintenance
entry models. costs, power and cooling requirements.
The company also demonstrated an advanced
A chef in one of Varig Airlines' renowned catering 3y2-inch disk file for IBM personal and
kitchens prepares salads for an upcoming flight. midrange systems and workstations, as well
Varig, a major international airline headquar- as other manufacturers' systems.
tered in Brazil, manages its reservations netivork, In a laboratory demonstration, the Newly manufactured cutting tools rest on a special
maintenance and ejigineering activities, and company set a world record in the amount rack, awaitingfinal inspection. Montanwerke
catering operations through an information net- of information that could be stored on a Walter, a German manufacturer of quality machin-
work featuring IBM products that spans the globe. magnetic hard disk. A billion bits of ing tools and systems, has installed a sophisticated
information —the equivalent of 100,000 IBM computer-integrated manufacturing
double-spaced typed pages —were stored on application to ensure the quality and efficiency
a square inch of magnetic hard ciisk.This of its manufacturing operations.
advance could yielci i5-t0-30 times more stor-
age density in future disk storage prociucts.
IBM took the technology lead in the
personal computer market when it shipped
the industry's first system using Intel's
new i486** microprocessor, an upgrade to
the Personal System/2 Model 70-A21. A new
Model 70 486, which also uses the i486
microprocessor, can process numerically
intensive applications up to three times faster
than systems based on the earlier 386**
microprocessor. There is up to an 80 percent
performance improvement in processing
business applications.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Innovative new services quakes or other disasters can seriously affect
a customer's competitiveness. In April,
IBM introduced Business Recovery Services,
an offering that enables a business to con-
Increasingly, service is being defined by tinue operations in the event of an unplanned
the customer. Whether it involves repairing outage or disaster. The new service gives
another manufacturer's products, con- customers with midrange and large systems
figuring software or training a customer's assurance that information processing
employees on a new system, IBM is systems that are critical to their operations —
responding with innovative service solu- including some non-IBM products —will
tions that are helping customers solve busi- be operational within 24 hours of the time
ness problems, increase their competitiveness, IBM learns of the disaster.
and improve the returns on their informa- IBM Germany has added another
tion processing investments. innovative ofi^ering in this area. IBM mobile
The word "service" took on a broader service vehicles are "on the road" and
meaning in 1989 when IBM signed unique can be dispatched to anywhere in the country
service contracts with firms including East- within 24 hours to respond to customer
man Kodak and Hibernia National Bank. emergencies.
These agreements call for IBM to assume With the introduction of ServicePlan
responsibility for operating and maintaining in the U.S. in January, IBM simplified service
the customers' computer systems and for contracts for customers. ServicePlan
providing information processing support consolidates IBM services into a simple, one-
throughout their organizations. IBM also page contract and allows customers to
assumed responsibility for building Kodak a select the services they need and determine
new data center in Rochester, N.Y. when and how often IBM should bill them.
The new service allows customers to With fewer invoices, customers can reduce
focus their time, resources and attention on their administrative costs, as well.
running their businesses. At the same IBM is also tailoring service solutions
time, it can help them reduce their operating for specific market needs. In Brazil, IBM
costs, while expanding the range of informa- customers can order applications, or report
Cannondale Corporation, an American tion processing services to their end-users. software problems and get help in resolving
manufacturer of high-performance bicycles and Sometimes the solution to a complex them via terminals and a countrywide
bicycle clothing and gear, uses three IBM business problem calls for integrating IBM toll-free telephone number. In the U.S., per-
Application System/400 computersfor administra- products and services with those of other sonal computer specialists are on call
tive and manufacturing applications, and companies. IBM has extensive experience in around the clock to assist subscribing cus-
to stay on top of cycling trends. this area and is uniquely qualified to pro- tomers with hardware and software
vide the required support. For example, when problems, whether they involve IBM systems
Burger King Corporation, the fast-food or some products of competitors. IBM
chain, wanted to automate its customer serv- Canada Ltd. has shortened distribution
ice operations, IBM had no fast-food cycles for high-volume products to within a
order-entry products or services. Working week to enhance customer service.
with Burger King, the company developed One of the fastest-growing areas is
a customized order-entry station and operational services that are tailored to a
contracted for specialized displays, cash draw- customer's individual needs. IBM Japan, for
ers and tills, and enclosures that protect example, developed a unique network serv-
the equipment from heat, grease and spills. In ice for Nomura Securities, one of the world's
addition, IBM tailored service olferings, largest financial institutions. This service
including a management training program, enables Nomura to monitor its worldwide
to address Burger King's needs. net work from its Tokyo headquarters,
Interruption of information processing quickly determine the status of each branch,
operations caused by fires, floods, earth- and address problems.

===== PAGE 18 =====
J:
iiii ii
I'll i»i
• • ,'ica
A unique service agreement
is enabling Louisiana's
I Hibernia National Bank
to concentrate its time,
attention and resources on
% the business of banking,
while IBM takes care of its
information processing
needs. An IBM facility in
Boulder, Colo., provides
support to the bank's more
than i^o branches.

===== PAGE 19 =====
V'i-'-',
ji| I
i l ^ i i l t-
Wafers processed at IBM's Sindelfingen, Germany,
plant await a cutting operation which will slice them into
4-million-bit memory chips — the densest memory chips
currently available in the industry. The advanced
memory chips are now in production in IBM plants in
Sindelfingen and Essex Junction, Vt.

===== PAGE 20 =====
An organization focused
50,000 positions — has been eliminated.
on the customer Today, over half of all IBM employees world-
wide are doing work directly involved
with developing, making, marketing or serv-
icing customer solutions. In addition,
In positioning itself to be more com- headquarters staffs worldwide have been
petitive, IBM is building on its most valuable reduced by more than 11,000.
asset— the quality of its people. From To drive decision-making and account-
Hannover, Germany, to Tampa, Florida... ability closer to customers, IBM restructured
from Bangkok, Thailand, to Sumar^ Brazil its U.S. development and manufacturing
... IBMers around the world have been asked operations into seven lines of business dur-
to change jobs, careers and work habits to ing 1988.These organizations have world-
become more responsive to customer needs. wide responsibility for solutions in areas
During the past three years, over 60,000 ranging from application and programming
IBMers have been retrained and reassigned to development and network management sup-
new jobs. Of these, more than 30,000 port to semiconductor products and large
switched from overhead positions — head- and small systems.
quarters staffs, administration and distri- IBM also has taken significant actions ipact.^^
bution, for example — into sales, systems to expand its marketing force. Today, there
p2.:3 VV KA;^JiiitE&colo 2.
engineering, programming and other jobs are over 70,000 marketing people work-
that help produce revenue and directly ing with customers around the globe, 23
contribute to IBM's growth. percent more than three years ago.
Between 1986 and the end of 1989, one The company continues to invest heavily
out of every five overhead jobs — roughly in software development and has steadily
increased resources in this high-growth area.
Employees at IBM's Business Recovery Services By 1990, IBM's software development pop-
Center in Tampa, Florida, support a growing ulation will grow to about 35,000 employees
number of customers who are using a new service worldwide, an approximate 59 percent
to safeguard against disasters or unplanned increase since 1986. Much of this growth will
outages. These specialists provide technical assis- have come from the ranks of redeployed or
tance in testing and executing business recovery retrained employees. International Translation and Services
plans. They are among the thousands of On the manufacturing side, improved Company, Ltd., was formed through a joint ven-
IBMers who have retrained for new jobs and production techniques and productivity ture between IBM Japan and two of its retirees.
careers that directly support customers. gains enabled IBM to reduce its number of The company provides translation services, from
manufacturing plants worldwide from 42 English to Japanese, utilizing IBM computers.
to 33 between 1986 and 1989.
IBM's customers operate in many
different industries — banking, government,
education, manufacturing, airlines and
insurance, to name a few. Because their needs
are so varied, developing customized solu-
tions requires in-depth industry knowledge
and expertise. In addition, more and
more customers are looking to IBM not just

===== PAGE 21 =====
for hardware and software products, but for The decline in IBM's population since
insight into their particular industries and the transformation began has been as signifi-
guidance on information strategies that will cant as the organizational and skill changes.
help them gain a competitive advantage. Through normal attrition, limited hiring,
To ensure that IBM marketing repre- and special incentives, the company has
sentatives and systems engineers are equipped reduced its employee population worldwide
to address these needs, IBM restructured its by 24,000 since early 1986, to approximately
marketing education program last year. New 383,000 employees.The largest reduction
curricula, training techniques and tools occurred in the U.S., where more than
have been incorporated to sharpen the focus 13,000 IBMers took advantage of a voluntary
on industry specialization and address retirement incentive announced in 1986, and
customers' special needs. Advanced educa- another 7,500 voluntarily retired or resigned
tion for marketing representatives and as a result of U.S. manufacturing and head-
systems engineers has increased by 50 per- quarters consolidations begun in 1988.
cent worldwide. Voluntary retirement incentives were
An example of a new training tool also offered in Canada and selected
is the use of artificial intelligence in comput- European locations during 1986 and 1987.
erized instruction. One such application About 2,000 employees retired under these
is helping account teams better understand programs.
their financial customers' businesses. In In December 1989, IBM announceci
effect, this new financial training system additional restructuring initiatives at
brings the wisdom of financial experts most U.S. locations. These actions, coupled
to marketing plans and proposals. It gives with attrition and reduced hiring, are
marketing representatives and systems engi- expected to lower IBM's U.S. population by
neers access from their workstations to another 10,000 people, to 206,000 by
knowledge about financial strategies, current the end of 1990 —a reduction of 37,000
business news, Business Partners and from the 1985 peak.
industry support.
The company also has enhanced the level Operating in a state where severe storms
of technical support available to customers and lightning often cause power outages, Florida
Using the brightest colors in the rainbow, The by redeploying engineers and product devel- Power & Light Company uses IBM systems to
Benetton Group has established itself as a premier opers from IBM laboratories to branch help identify where power linefailures have occurred
firm in the clothing industry with more than offices to assist account teams in analyzing so that repair crews can be quickly dispatched to
5,000 shops in 80 countries. To help the Italian customer problems and developing restore service.
clothing designer manage its operations, solutions.
IBM Italy developed a special application to link Another important element of high-
Benetton's 3090 processor with PS/2 work- level customer support is continuity in the
stations installed throughout the company. relationship between customers and the
marketing teams supporting them. IBM has
extended marketing assignments to enable
marketing representatives and systems
engineers to build long-term relationships
with their customers and more effectively
plan solutions for their information needs.

===== PAGE 22 =====
To better prepare its young people for the challenges of the
2ist century, the Omar Dengo Foundation and the
government of Costa Rica are underwriting a nationwide
program to put computers in the hands of nearly
210,000 students, about 45 percent of the country's primary
school population. Working with educational experts,
IBM developed a comprehensive solution which includes
sophisticated PS/2 networks in each school.

===== PAGE 23 =====
sons with disabilities, and Vietnam-era and contained in seven university libraries.
disabled veterans to ensure that they have The network will permit students and other
equal opportunity to participate in the eco- users to retrieve academic and scientific
nomic mainstream of American society. information from libraries throughout
Of the 11,200 new employees hired in the Venezuela and in the U.S. and Europe.
The countries and communities in which U.S. during 1989, approximately 24 percent IBM continued its support of university
IBM carries out its daily business face many were minorities and 38 percent were research in 1989. In one such effort, the
complex economic and social issues — women. Minorities and women currently company initiated a joint study with the
employment, education and environmental make up 17.3 percent and 29.2 percent, University of Missouri School of Journalism
concerns, to name just a few. As a responsible respectively, of the company's U.S. popula- to define new uses for microcomputer tech-
corporate citizen, IBM is committed to help- tion. In addition, IBM employs about nology in the field of journalism.
ing address these issues, particularly where 26,000 Vietnam-era and disabled veterans. Changing job markets continue to put
technology and the special skills of IBM's Minorities held 12.9 percent of U.S. pressure on the economically disadvantaged.
people can add significant value. In 1989, management positions at year end, while Job training programs, on the other hand,
IBM contributed $135 million in support of women held 20.7 percent. Minorities held offer unemployed and underemployed work-
social, cultural and educational programs 9.8 percent of senior management positions, ers new avenues of opportunity.
worldwide. while women held 12.6 percent. IBM has actively supported job training
IBM's affirmative action program pro- During the past decade, IBM has efforts for disadvantaged and handicapped
vides assistance to minorities, women, per- purchased in excess of $ i billion in goods persons for more than 20 years. In the U.S.,
and services from minority-owned busi- 128 community-based centers are preparing
nesses. IBM is also actively involved in students for careers in areas such as word
business relationships with companies owned processing, data entry, computer program-
primarily by women and organizations ming and operations, using IBM-loaned
with workforces composed predominantly equipment.
of handicapped workers. In 1989, IBM To counter adult illiteracy in the U.S.,
purchased goods and services from approxi- IBM announced a plan to help job training
mately 1,800 such businesses.
Support of educational initiatives In line with its efforts to assist disabled persons,
continues to be an area of emphasis for IBM. IBM France provided the Lycee Toulouse-Lautrec
In the U.S., for example, IBM committed in Vaucresson, France, an employee to teach the
more than $46 million targeted at improv- institutions first course in information technology.
ing elementary and secondary education. The Lycee Toulouse-Lautrec has one of the
A five-year, $25 million grant program is sup- largest handicapped enrollments within France's
porting two types of projects — those that Public University system.
prepare teachers to use existing technology
nor more than a year, Dave Johnson, an IBM and those that stimulate new, innovative
branch manager in Baltimore, Md., has been au ses of technology in the classroom.
role model and friend to 18-year-old Shawn IBM Korea has entered a joint agree-
Satterfield. Johnson heads up Project Roadmapm, ae nt with the Korea Advanced Institute of
program supported by IBM and the Baltimore Science and Technology to create a Systems
Urban League. This program aims to raise the Esenlgf-ineering Center. The center will pro-
esteem of young men and women who typicallyv ide a computer education curriculum for
have dropped out of school and are finding it diffais-piring data processing professionals at
cult to participate in today's society. Shawn is universities in Korea.
preparing for a high-school-equivalency diploma,
The Instituto Autonomo Biblioteca
and the effort has been made easier by the
Nacional, Venezuela's National Library,
support that Johnson provides.
recently initiated a joint project with IBM
Venezuela to enhance the previous national
library system by combining the library's
bibliographic database with information

===== PAGE 24 =====
ccntcrs establish adult literacy and basic and accessories that make it easier for dis- A ijth-century Royal Swedish man-of-war which
skills programs for students who need reme- abled persons to perform productively. was sunk in 1628 is the featured attraction at the
dial training before beginning their job In the U.S., the company continued to new Vasa Museum, scheduled to open this summer
training curricula. provide equipment and consultation to in Stockholm. The vessel was discovered and
IBM Canada Ltd., and the government centers that train persons with severe disa- raised from the seabed during the ip6os. IBM
of Saskatchewan also initiated a cooperative bilities in skills ranging from computer Sweden, the museum and the Swedish National
project to address adult illiteracy in that programming to data entry. Board of Education are jointly developing
province. Under the program, IBM Canada Environmental concerns have long an information system that uses IBM PS/2 work-
provided the Saskatchewan Department been a point of focus in IBM. Over the years, stations to relate information about lyth-century
of Education with IBM PS/2 workstations, the company has worked to maintain a Sweden and life onboard the vessel.
InfoWindow* displays and Principles of responsible environmental approach in its
Alphabet Literacy Software for use in liter- operations. These efforts earned the company
acy laboratories across the province. international recognition when it was named
IBM continued to extend its assistance to the recipient of the World Environment
disabled persons in 1989. For instance, IBM Center's 1990 Gold Medal for International
United Kingdom and IBM France both Corporate Environmental Achievement.
established Support Centers for People with To stimulate employee participation in
Disabilities. These centers provide interested their communities on a worldwide basis,
individuals, professionals and community IBM announced in 1989 a one-time program
agencies with advice on information products to provide seed monies to support volun-
teer initiatives. Under the plan, the company
will provide grants for new programs
and projects in nine countries where IBM
volunteers are involved.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Using satellite data and
sophisticated IBM image
processing techniques,
researchers from IBM
Denmark, the Danish
Hydraulic Institute and the
Electromagnetics Institute
at theTechnical University of
Denmark are tracking
and measuring ice move-
ments along the east
coast of Greenland. These
data will give scientists
insights into the relationship
between the ice packs and
the weather and climate
in the Atlantic Ocean and
in Western Europe, and
could prove valuable
to industries ranging from
shipping to agriculture
and fishing

===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Management
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the numerous languages, are distributed to employees
financial information presented in this Annual Report throughout the world, and reemphasized through inter-
rests with IBM management. The accompanying financial nal programs to assure that they are understood
statements have been prepared in conformity with and followed.
generally accepted accounting principles, applying certain Price Waterhouse, independent accountants, are re-
estimates and judgments as required. tained to examine IBM's financial statements. Their accom-
IBM maintains an effective system of internal panying report is based on an examination conducted
accounting control. It consists, in part, of organizational in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards,
arrangements with clearly defined lines of responsibility including a review of the internal control structure and
and delegation of authority. We believe this system tests of accounting procedures and records.
provides reasonable assurance that transactions are exe- The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is
cuted in accordance with management authorization, composed solely of outside directors, and is responsible
and that they are appropriately recorded, in order to per- for recommending to the Board the independent
mit preparation of financial statements in conformity accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, sub-
with generally accepted accounting principles and to ject to stockholder approval. The Audit Committee meets
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain accountability periodically and privately with the independent accoun-
of assets. An important element of the system is an tants, with our internal auditors, as well as with IBM
ongoing internal audit program. management, to review accounting, auditing, internal
To assure the effective administration of internal accounting controls and financial reporting matters.
control, we carefully select and train our employees,
develop and disseminate written policies and procedures,
provide appropriate communication channels, and foster
John F. Akers Chairman of the Board
an environment conducive to the effective functioning
of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Frank A. Metz, Jr Senior Vice President,
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into Finance & Planning
Report of Independent Accountants
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of January 30,1990
International Business Machines Corporation
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures
statements, appearing on pages 26, 27, 28, 30 and in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
34 through 44, present fairly in all material respects the principles used and significant estimates made by manage-
financial position of International Business Machines ment, and evaluating the overall financial statement
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31,1989 presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reason-
and 1988, and the results of their operations and their cash able basis for the opinion expressed above.
flows for each of the three years in the period ended As discussed in the note regarding Taxes on
December 31,1989, in conformity with generally accepted page 39, the company changed its method of accounting
accounting principles. These financial statements are the for income taxes in 1988. We concur with this change.
responsibility of the company's management; our respon-
sibility is to express an opinion thereon based on our
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with gen-
U-OSI,
erally accepted auditing standards which require that
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assur- Price Waterhouse
ance about whether such statements are free of material 153 East 53rd Street
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test New York, N.Y. 10022

===== PAGE 27 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 1988
Revenue:
Sales $41,586 39,959 36,424
Support services 9,858 9,285 9,297
Software 8,424 7,927 6,836
Rentals and financing 2,842 2,510 2,699
$ 62,710 $ 59,681 $ 55,256
Cost:
Sales 18,001 17,499 17,368
Support services 5,701 4,971 4,686
Software 2,694 2,110 1,957
Rentals and financing 1,305 1,068 1,111
27,701 25,648 25,122
Gross Profit 35,009 34,033 30,134
Operating Expenses:
Selling, general and administrative 21,289 19,362 16,540
Research, development and engineering 6,827 5,925 5,434
28,116 25,287 21,974
8,160
Operating Income 6,893 8,746
Other Income, principally interest 728 996 955
Interest Expense 976 709 485
Earnings before Income Taxes 6,645 9,033 8,630
Provision for Income Taxes 2,887 3,542 3,372
Net Earnings before Cumulative Effect of Accounting Change 3,758 5,491 5,258
Cumulative Effect of Change in Accounting for Income Taxes 315
Net Earnings $ 3,758 $ 5,806 $ 5,258
Per share amounts:
Before cumulative effect of
accounting change $ 6.47 $ 9.27 $ 8.72
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting for income taxes ^
Net earnings $ 6.47 $ 9.80 $ 8.72
Average number of shares outstanding:
1989—581,102,404
1988-592,444,409
1987—602,961,631

===== PAGE 28 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31:
(Dollars in millions) 1989
Assets
Current Assets:
Cash » 741 1,072
Cash equivalents 2,959 3,103
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 1,261 1,948
Notes and accounts receivable — trade, net of allowances 18,866 17,086
Other accounts receivable 1,298 1,014
Inventories 9,463 9,565
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 1,287 1,555
$ 35,875 $ 35,343
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property 48,410 44,882
Less: Accumulated depreciation 23,467 21,456
24,943 23,426
Investments and Other Assets:
Software, less accumulated amortization (1989, $4,824; 1988, $3,783) 3,293 2,809
Investments and sundry assets 13,623 11,459
16,916 14,268
$ 77,734 $ 73,037
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity
Current Liabilities:
Taxes $ 2,699 2,225
Loans payable 5,892 4,862
Accounts payable 3,167 2,702
Compensation and benefits 2,797 2,624
Deferred income 1,365 844
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 5,780 4,130
21,700 17,387
Long-Term Debt 10,825 8,518
Other Liabilities 3,420 3,000
Deferred Income Taxes 3,280 4,623
Stockholders' Equity:
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 6,341 6,442
Shares authorized: 750,000,000
Issued: 1989—574,775,560; 1988 — 590,037,328
Retained earnings 30,477 31,186
Translation adjustments 1,698 1,917
38,516 39,545
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 7 36
Shares: 1989—75,723; 1988 — 296,820
38,509 39,509
77,734 $ 73,037

===== PAGE 29 =====
(Dollars in millions) 1988
Cash Flow from Operating Activities:
Net earnings $ 3,758 $ 5,806 $ 5,258
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to cash
provided from operating activities:
Depreciation 4,240 3,871 3,534
Amortization of software 1,185 893 863
(Gain) on disposition of investment assets (74) (133) (128)
(Increase) in accounts receivable (2,647) (2,322) (2,542)
(Increase) decrease in inventory (29) (1,232) 129
(Increase) in other assets (1,674) (1,587) (808)
Increase in accounts payable 870 265 300
Increase in other liabilities 1,743 519 134
Net cash provided from operating activities $7,372 $6,080 $ 6,740
Cash Flow from Investing Activities:
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property . . (6,414) (5,390) (4,195)
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines
and other property 544 409 353
Investment in software (1,679) (1,318) (1,048)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (1,391) (2,555) (4,815)
Proceeds from marketable securities and other investments. 1,860 4,734 5,900
Net cash used in investing activities (7,080) (4,120) (3,805)
Cash Flow from Financing Activities:
Proceeds from new debt 6,471 4,540 2,963
Payments to settle debt (2,768) (3,007) (1,980)
Short-term borrowings less than 90 days —net 228 1,028 (399)
Proceeds from (payments to) employee stock plans — net. . (29) (11) 105
Payments to purchase and retire capital stock (1,759) (992) (1,425)
Cash dividends paid (2,752) (2,609) (2,654)
Net cash used in financing activities (609) (1,051) (3,390)
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
(158) (201) 330
on Cash and Cash Equivalents
(475) 708 (125)
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents
4,175 3,467 3,592
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January 1
$ 3,700 $4,175 $ 3,467
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31
Supplemental Data:
Cash paid during the year for: 3,071 $ 3,405 $2,186
Income taxes 1,605 $ 1,440 $ 1,048
Interest

===== PAGE 30 =====
Summary of Cash Inflows Summary of Cash Outflows
(Dollars in billions) (Dollars in billions)
Collections from Payments to Suppliers and
Customers and Employees $46.81
Others $58.8
Interest Paid $1.6
Income Taxes Paid $3.1
Payments for Plant,
Rental Machines and
Other Property $ 6.4
Proceeds from Investments in Software $ i .7
Disposition of Investment Purchase of
Assets $2.4 Marketable Securities and
' Pinanciuji 11"'
Other Investments $1.4
Proceeds from
Payments to Settle Debt $2.8
Debt $6.7
Capital Stock Purchased
and Retired $1.8
Cash Dividends $2.8
tincludes Effect of Exchange Rate Changes
on Cash and Cash Equivalents
Investment in Plant and Other Property
$ 28,000 (In millions)
Although improved production techniques and
productivity gains have resulted in reduced manu-
facturing sites, continuous upgrading of facilities 24,500
is essential to achieve objectives to maintain techno-
logical leadership, improve productivity and meet
21,000
customer demand. Over the past five years, the
company has invested approximately $24 billion
17,500
in land, buildings, machinery and equipment,
and internally installed IBM manufactured equip-
ment. These recent additions represent 54 percent 14,000
of the gross asset value of plant and other
property as of December 31,1989. 10,500
7,000
3,500
o 1985 '86 '87 '88 1989
Annual IS Cumulative for five-year period

===== PAGE 31 =====
Retained Translation
(Dollars in millions) Capital Stock Earnings Adjustments Treasury Stock Total
1987 Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1987 $ 6,321 27,834 $ 307 $(88) $ 34,374
Net earnings 5,258 5,258
Cash dividends declared (2,654) (2,654)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(1,766,488 shares) 139 139
Purchases (6,275,092 shares) and
sales (6,692,196 shares) of treasury stock
under employee and stockholder plans — net (117) 53 (64)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(11,252,000 shares) (120) (1,305) (1,425)
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . 17 17
Conversion of debentures (197,203 shares). . . . 30 30
Tax reductions — employee plans 30 30
Translation adjustments 2,558 2,558
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1987 6,417 29,016 2,865 (35) 38,263
1988 Net earnings 5,806 5,806
Cash dividends declared (2,609) (2,609)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(1,321,697 shares) 92 92
Purchases (8,140,101 shares) and
sales (8,117,596 shares) of treasury stock
under employee and stockholder plans — net (128) (1) (129)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(8,611,396 shares) (93) (899) (992)
Tax reductions — employee plans 26 26
Translation adjustments (948) (948)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1988 6,442 31,186 1,917 (36) 39,509
1989 Net earnings 3,758 3,758
Cash dividends declared (2,752) (2,752)
Capital stock issued under employee plans
(824,026 shares) 60 60
Purchases (8,202,058 shares) and
sales (8,423,155 shares) of treasury stock
under employee and stockholder plans — net (133) 29 (104)
Capital stock purchased and retired
(16,085,900 shares) (177) (1,582) (1,759)
Tax reductions — employee plans 16 16
Translation adjustments (219) (219)
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1989 $ 6,341 $ 30,477 $ 1,698 $ (7) 38,509

===== PAGE 32 =====
Results of Operations leases has an unfavorable impact on short-term Revenue
In 1989, demand for IBM's products and results, it will benefit IBM in the longer term
services continued to be good and the company as the company realizes increased revenue and $70,000 (In millions)
made steady progress on its strategy of trans- profit from future rental receipts.
5%
forming itself into a more market-driven and Revenue from sales was $41.6 billion, an 60,000 4%
efficient company. increase of 4.1 percent compared to a 9.7 percent 13%
5%
13%
Worldwide revenue increased 5.1 percent in increase in 1988. Sales revenue in the United
1989 to $ 62.7 billion. While there was growth in States declined 2.3 percent reflecting the higher 50,000 11 9% 7% 12% 16%
10%
all major geographic areas, the rate of growth levels of operating lease activity in 1989. World- 8% 16%
17%
continued to be stronger outside the United States. wide revenue from support services increased 6.2
40,000
15% 17%
Revenue from non-U.S. operations was $37.0 percent in 1989 after an essentially flat year
billion, an increase of 7.6 percent over 1988. Non- in 1988. Growth in the other services category
U.S. revenue, as a percent of total revenue, has was 43.8 percent in 1989 and 20.6 percent in 30,000 67%
66% 66% 66%
grown from 42.9 percent in 1985 to 58.9 percent 1988. Maintenance services, which is the largest 6 8%
in the current year. Revenue from U.S. operations component of support services, had declines
20,000
grew for the first time in four years, increasing of 3.8 percent in 1989 and 4.5 percent in 1988.
1.7 percent over the previous year. Additional infor- Software revenue was up 6.3 percent in
mation on revenues and other financial data 1989 following increases of 16.0 percent and 24.0 10,000
by geographical area can be found in the note percent in 1988 and 1987, respectively. The
on page 44. 1988 software revenue included payments made
1985 '86 '87
Net earnings for the year were $ 3.8 billion by Fujitsu to IBM as a result of arbitration
Rentals and Financing
compared with $5.8 billion in 1988. Both 1989 between the two companies. The rate of growth
Software
and 1988 contained the effects of unusual actions. in the United States was greater in 1989 than that
Support Services
In December 1989, the company announced a of 1988. Rentals and financing revenue in-
series of restructuring initiatives, investment creased 13.2 percent in 1989 reflecting the success Sales
revaluations and other actions which resulted in a of our leasing operations around the world.
pre-tax charge of $2.4 billion against 1989 Revenue from rentals, which includes amounts
earnings. Earnings before tax in 1988 include an from operating leases, increased from the
$870 million charge related to the costs of prior year for the first time since 1982.
manufacturing and headquarters consolidations Information on industry segments and
announced in June 1988. The company imple- classes of similar products or services is presented
mented the Statement of Financial Accounting on page 43-
Standards (SFAS) 96, "Accounting for Income Revenue from processors increased 6.7 per-
Taxes," in 1988.This change in accounting cent in 1989. The increase is attributable to strong
principle resulted in additional net earnings in sales of IBM's largest computers, the ES/3090
1988 of $315 million. family, and the Application System/4oo. New
Revenue and earnings in 1989 were unfavor- models of the ES/3090, introduced in 1989, con-
ably impacted by a stronger U.S. dollar and tain IBM's new 4-million-bit memory chip.
by an increase in operating lease activity primarily Revenue increases for both the ES/3090 and the
in the U.S. While the increase in operating AS/4-00 were strong in the U.S. and overseas.
In workstations, revenue from personal
systems increased 18.9 percent worldwide and 23.1
percent in the US. The decline in other
workstations is primarily attributable to display
terminals. During 1989, IBM was the first
in the industry to use Intel's powerful new i486
microprocessor in a product when an upgrade
to the PS/2 Model 70-A21 was announced.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Revenue from peripherals declined 17.5 per- general and administrative expense would have $2.4 billion in 1989 and $.3 billion in 1988 for
cent in the U.S. and increased 8.8 percent in increased 5.2 percent. These actions are a con- charges stemming from the previously mentioned
the non-U.S. operations. The decline in the U.S. tinuation of the strategy designed to transform efforts to improve competitiveness.
revenue is primarily attributable to a substantial the IBM company to be the best in providing During 1989, IBM continued its efforts to
increase in operating leases of storage products offerings that meet the needs of customers become a more market-driven company, one that
in 1989 over 1988 and a transfer of telecommuni- and to do so more quickly, efficiently, and cost makes customer satisfaction the number-one
cations revenue as a result of the completion effectively. priority. As customers pursue their own competi-
of the agreement with Siemens AG to establish Today's competitive environment and the tive requirements, the need for solutions rather
joint activities in the field of telecommunications. ever quickening pace of technology require a than individual products becomes increasingly
In the fourth quarter of 1989, IBM began ship- continued investment in research, development important. This growing focus is evident by
ments of the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage and engineering. To this end, IBM invested $6.5 the growth in systems integration activities and
Device, the industry's most advanced disk storage billion in 1989 after adjusting for the one-time other professional service offerings. Manage-
product. charge included in the restructuring actions ment expects continued growth in this activity.
Gross profit margins in 1989 declined 1.2 announced in December 1989. This represents an The company has reduced its employee
percentage points to 55.8 percent. Continued 8.9 percent increase over 1988. Management population every year since 1985. Worldwide, this
efficiencies in manufacturing activities were offset expects to continue to make those investments reduction exceeded twenty-two thousand
by declines in gross profit margins in support essential to assure the company's ability to people including more than twenty-six thousand
services and software. The decline in the gross participate in the future growth of the industry. in the United States. The restructuring initia-
profit margin of support services is primarily the Other income declined 26.9 percent. tives announced in December are expected to
result of a proportionately greater amount The decrease is primarily the result of gains in further reduce IBM's U.S. population by ten
of other services whose lower margins are exacer- 1988 on the sale of MCI stock and the sale of thousand people in 1990.
bated by start-up activities and, to a lesser the Science Research Associates subsidiary, which Management believes that the initiatives it
degree, continued declines in gross profit margins were only partially offset by a gain in 1989 on has taken, coupled with the continuing drive
of maintenance service. The gross profit the sale of IBM's interest in Discovision Associates. to reduce the company's cost and expense struc-
margin comparison of software was adversely Interest expense increased 37.6 percent ture, will enable it to take advantage of the
impacted by the inclusion of costs associated in 1989 following a 46.3 percent increase in 1988. growth opportunities seen for its business while
with the actions taken in December 1989 to im- The increases in both years are primarily the enhancing shareholders' value.
prove the company's competitiveness and result of high interest rates on short-term borrow-
the revenue benefit from the Fujitsu settlement ings in subsidiaries whose economic environ-
in 1988. ment is hyperinflationary.The high interest rates
Selling, general and administrative expenses in those operations are mitigated by the effects
for 1989, as reported, showed an increase of of inflation on the funds borrowed.
lo.o percent over 1988. Both years were marked by The effective tax rate for 1989 of 43.4
unusual charges. If adjusted for the restructur- percent was higher than the 39.2 percent in 1988
ing expenses in 1989 and the manufacturing and primarily due to the impact of the restructur-
headquarters consolidations in 1988, selling. ing charge taken in the fourth quarter of 1989 and,
as anticipated, lower tax credits this year com-
pared to 1988.
For the quarter ended December 31,1989,
worldwide net earnings were $.6 billion,
compared with $2.3 billion for the same period
in 1988. Fourth-quarter revenue was $20.5
billion, compared with $20.0 billion for the 1988
period. IBM's fourth-quarter results include

===== PAGE 34 =====
Financial Condition Working capital decreased 21. i percent Research, Development and
During 1989, IBM continued to make in 1989 to $14.2 billion. Increases in accounts Engineering Expenses
essential investments in its drive for more com- receivable reflected higher levels of shipments
petitive products and services, delivered on in December 1989 compared to the same period
ever shorter cycles. As a result, the company was in 1988 and increased amounts due on current 6,000
able to announce a series of significant new sales-type lease investments. These amounts were
products in 1989. Among these were OfficeVision, offset by declines in cash and marketable securi-
a family of applications that allows customers to ties. Current liabilities increased $4.3 billion due 5,000
boost their office productivity and efficiency, primarily to increased accruals resulting from
AiyCycle, a series of IBM and Business Partner the restructuring and other actions taken in the 4,000
products, tools and services that will enhance fourth quarter. Current liabilities also increased
productivity, the IBM Personal Systern/2 Model as a result of the maturing in 1990 of previ-
70 486 which gives advanced processor perform- ously issued long-term debt used to finance cus- 3,000
ance to users of numerically intensive applications, tomers' leases of IBM equipment.
and the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage Device, The increase in long-term debt is also
2,000
the industry's most advanced disk storage product. primarily attributable to financing of customers'
Over the past five years, IBM invested long-term leasing of IBM equipment.
approximately $24 billion in plant and other In September and November 1989, the Board 1,000
property, including $5.1 billion in 1989.These of Directors authorized the company to purchase
investments contributed significantly to improved shares of its capital stock in amounts not to exceed
0 1985 '86 '87 '88 1989
production techniques and productivity gains, $1,000 million and $4,000 million, respectively.
which enabled the company to add to its compet- There is no specific date to complete these pur-
itiveness. Much of this investment was directed chases. At December 31,1989, $4,887 million of
to maintaining the company's position in the these authorizations remained. Shares purchased
forefront of semiconductor technology. Man- under these programs have been and will con-
agement intends to continue to make substantial tinue to be retired and restored to the status of
investments in plant and other property in authorized but unissued shares. Also during
order to assure the company's technological 1989, the company continued open-market acquisi-
competitiveness. tion of shares to meet most requirements of
In addition to software development costs IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans.
included in research, development and engineer- Management expects that the funds required
ing expense, IBM invested $1.7 billion in capital- to continue the level of investments necessary
ized production costs of software products in to ensure the company's competitiveness, as well
1989. Amortization of capitalized software costs as funds used to purchase IBM capital stock
amounted to $ 1.2 billion in the year. from time to time, will be largely generated from
Investments and sundry assets increased 18.9 normal operations. To the extent that amounts
percent in 1989 to $13.6 billion.The increase generated from operations need to be supple-
is primarily due to IBM's growing participation mented by borrowings, it will be done consistent
in the financing of products purchased by its with management's intent to continue
customers. IBM's long-term net investment in sales- to maintain the highest quality rating of the
type leases increased 29.5 percent to $8.4 billion company's indebtedness.
at year-end 1989. The increase in investments and Management continues to have confidence
sundry assets also reflects increased investments in the information industry and its prospects
in business alliances, as IBM joins with other com- for growth as well as the ability of IBM to partici-
panies whose strengths complement and extend pate fully in that growth.
its own. These increases were partially offset
by the valuation of special investments and the
change in the amortization periods for goodwill
from twenty years to five years.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Significant Accounting Policies
Principles The consohdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and its U.S.
of Consolidation: and non-U.S. subsidiary companies. Investments in joint ventures and other companies in which IBM does not have
control, but has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and financial policies (generally greater than
20% ownership) are accounted for by the equity method. Other investments are accounted for by the cost method.
Translation of For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S.
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S.
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, invento-
ries and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. All
other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and depreciation
are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange
prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are included in earnings.
Revenue: Revenue is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, from software when the program
is shipped or as monthly license fees accrue, from support services (primarily maintenance services) over the contractual
period or as the services are performed, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and
from financing at level rates of return over the term of the lease or receivable.
Software: Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development.
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally
capitalized. The annual amortization of the capitalized amounts is the greater of the amount computed based on the
estimated revenue distribution over the products' revenue-producing lives or the straight-line method, but not
in excess of six years. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged against income as incurred or when
related revenue is recognized, whichever occurs first.
Depreciation: Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using
the straight-line method.
Goodwill: Goodwill is amortized on a straight-line basis over the periods estimated to be benefited, currently not exceeding
five years.
Retirement Plans and Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements in
Other Postretirement Benefits: the plans are amortized over the average remaining service period of employees expected to receive benefits.
Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued, principally at retirement.
Selling Expenses: Selling expenses are charged against income as incurred.
Income Taxes: Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of
temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and such
amounts recognized for tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws.
In years prior to 1988, deferred taxes were accounted for at the tax rates in eflfect when the asset or liability was recorded,
with no adjustment for subsequent rate changes. Deferred investment tax credits are being amortized as a reduction
of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property.
Inventories: Raw materials, finished goods and work in process are stated at the lower of average cost or market.
Cash Equivalents: All highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at date of purchase are considered to be
cash equivalents.

===== PAGE 36 =====
IMon-U.S. Operations (Dollars in millions) 1989 1987
At end of year:
Net assets employed
Current assets $ 20,361 $ 20,005 $ 20,777
Current liabilities 12,124 11,481 9,818
Working capital 8,237 8,524 10,959
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 9,879 9,354 9,411
Investments and other assets 6,822 5,251 4,626
24,938 23,129 24,996
Long-term debt 3,358 2,340 1,575
Other liabilities 2,607 2,505 2,668
Deferred income taxes 1,814 1,580 1,540
7,779 6,425 5,783
Net assets employed $ 17,159 $ 16,704 $ 19,213
Number of employees 167,291 163,904 161,399
For the year:
Revenue $ 36,965 $ 34,361 $ 29,752
Earnings before income taxes $ 7,496 $ 7,088 $ 5,680
Provision for income taxes 3,388 3,009 2,371
Net earnings $ 4,108 $ 4,079t $ 3,309
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property $ 2,514 $ 2,389 $ 1,847
11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes.
Non-U.S. subsidiaries which operate in a adjustments, resulting from the translation of net non-US. operations or will be remitted sub-
local currency environment account for approxi- assets, amounted to $1,698 million at December stantially free of additional tax. Accordingly, no
mately 90% of the company's non-U. S. revenue. 31,1989, $ 1,917 million at December 31,1988, material provision has been made for taxes
The remaining 10% of the company's non-US. and $2,865 million at December 31,1987.The that might be payable upon remittance of such
revenue is from subsidiaries and branches which changes in translation adjustments since the end earnings. It is extremely improbable that all
operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic of 1987 are a reflection of the strengthening of these earnings would be remitted to the U.S.
environment is highly inflationary. the dollar in 1988 and in 1989. Nevertheless, SFAS 96, 'Accounting for Income
As the value of the dollar weakens, net assets Undistributed earnings of non-US. subsid- Taxes," requires disclosure of the amount of
recorded in local currencies translate into more iaries included in consolidated retained earnings withholding taxes that would be payable were
U.S. dollars than they would have at the previous amounted to $13,207 million at December 31, this unlikely event to occur. Therefore in
year's rates. Conversely, as the dollar becomes 1989, $12,374 million at December 31,1988, and response to that requirement, it is estimated that
stronger, net assets recorded in local currencies $13,076 million at December 31,1987.These such withholding taxes would be as much as
translate into fewer U.S. dollars than they would earnings, which reflect full provision for non- $1,100 million.
have at the previous year's rates. The translation US. income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in

===== PAGE 37 =====
Restructuring and Other Actions
In December 1989, the company announced investments. This amount is included in pace of technological change and the company's
a series of actions to reduce costs, expenses, and selling, general and administrative expense. Costs success in shortening its product cycles.
structure. of $500 million associated with employee These charges are included in research, develop-
As a result, a charge of $2,420 million separations and relocations are also included in ment and engineering expenses and in cost
($1,500 million after tax or $2.58 per share) was selling, general and administrative expense. of software.
recorded in the fourth quarter. $ 1,335 million Costs of $585 million represent a charge In 1988, $870 million was included in
of this relates to the costs of facility consolida- related to the adoption of new guidelines selling, general and administrative expense for
tions and capacity reductions and changes to provide for the earlier recognition of costs manufacturing and headquarters consolidations.
in the valuation and recovery periods of special in both hardware and software due to the
Marketable Securities (Dollars in millions) December 31,1989 December 31, ic
U.S. Government securities 201 642
Time deposits and other bank obligations 419 504
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 641 802
Total $ 1,261 $ 1,948
Market value $ 1,263 $ 1,944
Inventories (Dollars in millions) December 31,1989 December 31,1988
Current inventories:
Finished goods $ 2,915 $ 2,972
Work in process 6,394 6,444
Raw materials 154 149
Total current inventories 9,463 9,565
Work in process and field service parts included in
plant, rental machines and other property . 1,364 1,108
Total inventories $10,827 $ 10,673

===== PAGE 38 =====
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property (Dollars in millions) December 31,1989 December 31,1988
Land and land improvements $ 1,507 $ 1,493
Buildings 12,333 11,590
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 31,064 28,678
44,904 41,761
Less: Accumulated depreciation 22,017 19,711
22,887 22,050
Rental machines and parts 3,506 3,121
Less: Accumulated depreciation 1,450 1,745
2,056 1,376
Total $ 24,943 $ 23,426
Investments and Sundry Assets (Dollars in millions) December 31,1989 December 31, ic
Net investment in sales-type leasest $ 12,728 $ 10,121
Less: Current portion classified as notes and accounts receivable—trade. 4,332 3,640
8,396 6,481
Installment payment receivables 912 1,036
Investments in business alliances 660 396
Prepaid pension cost 655 551
Mortgage investments . .. 509 460
Goodwill, less accumulated amortization (1989, $283; 1988, $184)" 392 717
Other investments and sundry assets** 2,099 1,818
Total $ 13,623 $ 11,459
tThese leases relate to IBM equipment and *In 1989, amortization of goodwill was "Includes, at cost, the investment in 1988 of $400
are for terms generally ranging from three to changed from a 20-year period to periods not million in 7.35% preferred stock of MCI Communica-
five years. exceeding five years. tions Corporation, which is not convertible, nor is
it planned to be publicly traded. MCI has the option
to redeem all or part of the new issue at any time.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Long-Term Debt (Dollars in millions) December 31,1989 December 31,1988
U.S. dollars:
7%% convertible subordinated debentures due 2oo4t $ 1,254 $ 1,254
8%% debentures due 2019 750
6%% notes due 1990 500 500
ioV4% notes due 1995 500 500
9% notes due 1998 500 500
8%% notes due 1992 450 450
7%% notes due 1992 400
8%% notes due 1992 400
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 300 363
71/8% notes due 1989 300
8%% notes due 1990 300 300
7^4% notes due 1991 250 250
91/2% notes due 1992 250
9%% notes due 1992 250
8%% notes due 1991 250 250
878% notes due 1991 250 250
9% notes due 1992 250
9.32% notes due 2000 203 205
6%% notes due 1989 200
10% notes due 1992 200
8% notes due 1990 200 200
12^4% notes due 1992 200
Medium-term note program, payable 1990-2008 (7.5%-i5.o%) 1,057 667
Other U.S. dollars, due 1990-2012 (7.3%) 948 954
9,462 7,343
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1989, in parentheses), payable in:
European currency units, due 1990-1994 (8.6%) 599 176
Australian dollars, due 1990-1993 (14.4%) 539 509
Japanese yen, due 1990-2019 (5.3%) 489 355
French francs, due 1990-2002 (10.2%) 486 513
Canadian dollars, due 1991-1994 (10.1%) 443 261
Swiss francs, due 1992-1996 (5.0%) 317 232
Other currencies, due 1990-2010 (9.8%) 379 261
12,714 9,650
Less: Net unamortized discount 6 U
12,708 9,637
Less: Current maturities 1,883 1,119
Total $ 10,825 $8,518
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1989, are as follows:
1990, $1,883; 1991,$ 1,598; 1992, $3,261; 1993, $1,203; 1994, $578; 1995 and beyond, $4,191-
tThe 7^8% convertible subordinated debentures They are redeemable, at the option of the ments starting in 1994 are intended to retire
are unsecured subordinated obligations of company, as of November 1989 at a price of 75% of the debentures prior to maturity. During
IBM, which are convertible into IBM capital stock 103.938% of the principal amount, and at 1989, conversions of debentures resulted in
at a conversion price of $153.6563 per share. decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund pay- the issuance of 106 shares of IBM capital stock.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Taxes (Dollars in millions) 1989 1988 1987
Earnings before income taxes:
U. S. operations $ (851) $ 1,945 $ 2,950
Non-U. S. operations 7,496 7,088 5,680
$ 6,645 $ 9,033 $ 8,630
Provision for income taxes:
U. S. operations $ (501) $ 533 $ 1,001
Non-U.S. operations 3,388 3,009 2,371
2,887 3,542 3,372
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 2,562 2,528 2,370
Total $ 5,449 $ 6,070 $ 5,742
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows:
U.S. Federal:
Current $ 476 $ 79 $ (123)
Deferred (1,247) (86) 177
Net deferred investment tax credits (101) (125) (150)
(872) (132) (96)
Non-U.S.:
Current 3,025 3,562 3,013
Deferred 824 87 320
33,,884499 33,,664499 33,,333333
U. S. State and local:
Current 107 12 23
Deferred (197) 13 112
(90) 25 135
Total provision $ 2,887 $ 3,542 $ 3,372
In 1988, the company implemented Statement for tax purposes. The principal items making up unrecognized deferred tax assets of approxi-
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96. the deferred tax provision in 1989 included mately $ 100 million, most of which have
This standard calls for adjustment of deferred tax $904 million related to the restructuring charge carryforwards for substantial periods. In addition,
assets and liabilities whenever there is a change taken in the U.S. and $ 159 million for deferred the company has $287 million of deferred
in enactcd tax rates, with a corresponding inventory overhead, offset by $339 million investment tax credits for financial reporting
adjustment being reflected in income tax expense for sales-type leases and installment sales and purposes, which will reduce tax expense in
for that period. Previous rules called for $230 million for deferred software costs. future years. For tax purposes, the company has
recording these assets and liabilities at the current In 1988, these principal items included $283 mil- available tax credit carryforwards of approxi-
rate, with no subsequent adjustment for tax lion for sales-type leases and installment sales mately $400 million, the majority of which are
rate changes. and $ 175 million for deferred software costs, par- available indefinitely and may be used to offset
The cumulative effect of adopting SFAS 96 tially offset by $ 182 million of deferred tax future taxes.
for periods ending prior to January i, 1988, credits associated with the alternative minimum The consolidated effective income tax rate
which amounted to a benefit of $315 million, has ta)^. In 1987, the principal item was $535 million was 43.4% in 1989, 39.2% in 1988, and 39.1%
been included in 1988 net earnings. The effect for depreciation. No other individual item in 1987. In 1989 and 1988, the higher effective tax
on the 1988 provision for income taxes was not was material. rate on earnings of non-U.S. operations
material. Income taxes for 1987 have not been Under the rules of SFAS 96, no financial accounted for 12.6 and 6.6 percentage points,
restated for this change. recognition is allowed for net deferred tax assets respectively, of the difference between the
Deferred income taxes reflect the impact in excess of the amount that could be recovered effective rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate
of temporary differences between the amount of as income tax refunds through existing loss of 34.0%. In 1987, there were no individually
assets and liabilities recognized for financial carryback or carryforward provisions. Conse- significant items which caused the effective rate
reporting purposes and such amounts recognized quently, at December 31,1989, the company had to differ from the US. federal statutory rate.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Research, Development and Engineering Interest Cost Rental Expense and Lease Commitments
Research, development and engineering expenses Interest on borrowings of the company and Rental expense, including amounts charged to
amounted to $6,827 million in 1989, $5,925 its subsidiaries amounted to $ 1,853 million in inventories and fixed assets, amounted to $ i ,765
million in 1988 and $5,434 million in 1987. 1989, $1,321 million in 1988 and $1,084 million in 1989, $1,566 million in 1988 and
Included in these amounts were expendi- million in 1987. Of these amounts, $ 142 million $1,515 million in 1987 Minimum rental commit-
tures of $5,201 million in 1989, $4,419 million in 1989, $93 million in 1988 and $134 million ments, in millions of dollars, under noncancelable
in 1988 and $3,998 million in 1987 for a broad in 1987 were capitalized. The remainder was leases for 1990 and thereafter are as follows:
program of research and development covering charged to cost of rentals and financing and 1990, $1,536; 1991, $1,327; 1992, $1,119; 1993,
basic scientific research in a variety of fields interest expense. $962; 1994, $812; and after 1994, $3,803.
and the application of scientific advances to the These leases are principally for the rental of
development of new and improved products Lines of Credit office premises.
and their uses. The 1989 amount includes $375 At December 31,1989, the company and its
million associated with the U.S. restructuring. subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit Other Liabilities
In addition, expenditures for product-related with a number of U.S. and non-US. banks per- Other liabilities consist principally of indemnity
engineering amounted to $ 1,626 million, mitting borrowings, primarily short-term, up and retirement plan reserves for non-U. S.
$1,506 million and $1,436 million for the same to an aggregate of $ 6,200 million. Interest rates employees.
three years. on borrowings would vary from country to
country depending on local market conditions.
Finance Subsidiaries
The company's wholly owned finance sub- Financial position at December 31:
sidiaries consist of IBM Credit Corporation and
(Dollars in millions) 1989 1988 (Dollars in millions) 1989 1988
several non-U. S. finance subsidiaries. IBM Credit
Assets: Liabilities and
Corporation offers lease financing of selected
Cash and cash Stockholder's Equity:
IBM products, finances receivables resulting from equivalents $ 315 $ 536 Short-term debt $ 3,482 $ 3,007
installment sales by IBM of its products, and Receivables —net 2,796 2,281 Deferred taxes
finances selected non-IBM equipment in the and accruals 1,214 1,092
Net investment in
U S. The non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer lease Due to IBM and
capital leases 7,350 6,351
affiliates 2,210 1,714
financing of selected IBM products and in some
Equipment under Long-term debt 4,729 3,300
cases finance installment receivables. operating leases — net 2,030 758
Stockholder's equity . . . 1,102 997
The accompanying schedule depicts the Other 246 184
Total Liabilities and
combined financial information for these Total Assets $ 12,737 $ 10,110 Stockholder's Equity . $ 12,737 $ 10,110
finance subsidiaries, of which IBM Credit Cor-
poration accounts for more than 80% of
the net earnings. These wholly owned subsid-
Earnings for the years ended December 31:
iaries are consolidated in the accompanying
(Dollars in millions) 1989 1988 1987
financial statements. Financing activity in coun-
tries in which the company does not have a Financing and other income $ 1,332 $ 914 $ 876
Interest and other expenses 1,098 791 744
finance subsidiary is not included.
Provision for income taxes 75 26 27
Additional information is available in the 1989
Net earnings $ 159 $ 97t $ 105
Annual Report of the IBM Credit Corporation.
Copies may be obtained by writing to: 11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes.
First Chicago Trust Company of New York
P.O. Box 7896, Church Street Station,
New York, N.Y. 10242-7896.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Retirement Plans The funded status at December 31 was as follows:
The company and its subsidiaries have retire- U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
ment plans covering substantially all employees. (Dollars in millions) 1989 1988 1989 1988
The total cost of all plans for 1989,1988 and
Actuarial present value of benefit obligations:
1987 was $328 million, $460 million and $289 Vested benefit obligation $ (11,642) $ (10,135) $ (6,892) $ (6,017)
million, respectively.
Accumulated benefit obligation $ (11,708) $ (10,473) $ (8,056) $ (6,898)
Pension cost in 1989 was lower than in 1988
principally due to changes in actuarial assump- Projected benefit obligation $ (15,451) $ (15,466) $ (11,582) $ (10,676)
Plan assets at fair value 22,867 19,598 11,231 9,835
tions in the U.S. and several non-U.S. plans,
Projected benefit obligation (in excess of)
partially offset by amendments to the U.S. plan.
less than plan assets 7,416 4,132 (351) (841)
Pension cost in 1988 was higher than in 1987
Unrecognized net (gain) loss (4,902) (1,272) (1,108) (531)
principally due to the growth in service and Unrecognized prior service cost 1,092 846 241 239
interest cost exceeding the growth in the expected Unrecognized net asset established at January 1,1986 . . (2,951) (3,155) (163) (176)
return on plan assets, and the refinement of (Accrued) prepaid pension cost recognized
translation techniques for non-US. plans in highly in the statement of financial position $ 655 $ 551 $ (1,381) $ (1,309)
inflationary economic environments. These
increases in cost were partially offset by actuarial
assumption changes in several non-U.S. plans. Net periodic pension cost for the years ended December 31 included the following components:
Annual cost is determined using the Pro- US. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
jected Unit Credit actuarial method. Prior (Dollars in millions) 1989 1988 1987 1989 1988 1987
service cost is amortized on a straight-line basis
Service cost-
over the average remaining service period of
benefits earned during
employees expected to receive benefits. An the period 562 579 545 501 482 445
assumption is made for modified career average Interest cost on the
plans that the average earnings base period projected benefit
obligation 1,194 1,120 1,015 679 648 639
will be updated to the years prior to retirement.
Return on plan assets-
It is the company's practice to fund
Actual (3,950) (2,058) (846) ;i,315) (1,003) (135)
amounts for pensions sufficient to meet the Deferred 2,214 456 (697) 564 340 (572)
minimum requirements set forth in applicable Net amortizations (174) (152) (159) 2 5 (8)
employee benefit and tax laws, and such addi- Net periodic pension cost $ (154) (55) $ (142) 431 472 369
tional amounts the company may determine to
Total net periodic pension
be appropriate from time to time. The assets cost for all non-U.S. plans 482 515 431
of the various plans include corporate equities,
government securities, corporate debt securities
and income-producing real estate. career compensation. For plan purposes, annual and 1987. Measurement of the projected benefit
The tables provide information on the compensation before January i, 1991 is defined obligation was based on a discount rate of
status of the U.S. retirement plan, and selected as the average annual compensation paid for the 8^2% in 1989 and 8% in 1988 and a 5% long-
non-U.S. plans which represent approximately years 1981 through 1990. Effective January i, 1989, term rate of compensation increase for both
98% of the total non-US. accumulated benefit benefits become vested upon the completion 1989 and 1988.
obligations. of five years of service. Prior to January i, 1989, Non-U.S. Plans: Most subsidiaries and
U.S. Plan: U.S. regular and part-time benefits became vested upon completion of branches outside the U.S. have retirement plans
employees are covered by a noncontributory plan 10 years of service. The number of individuals covering substantially all employees, under
which is funded by company contributions receiving benefits at December 31,1989 which funds are deposited under various fiduciary-
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the and December 31,1988 was 44,701 and 40,567, type arrangements, annuities are purchased
sole benefit of employees. Monthly retirement respectively. under group contracts, or reserves are provided.
benefits generally represent the greater of a fixed The expected long-term rate of return on Retirement benefits are based on years of service
amount per year of service, or a percent of plan assets used in the calculation of net
periodic pension cost was 9% for 1989,1988

===== PAGE 43 =====
and the employee's compensation, generally Stock Purchase Plan The following table summarizes stock option
during a fixed number of years immediately prior The employees stock purchase plan enables and long-term performance plan transactions
to retirement. employees who are not participants in a stock during 1989:
The ranges of assumptions used for the option plan to purchase IBM's capital stock Number of Shares
non-U.S. plans reflect the different economic through payroll deductions of up to 10% of eli- Under Available
environments within the various countries. The gible compensation. The price an employee Option for Option
expected long-term rates of return on plan assets pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average
Balance at
used in the calculation of net periodic pension market price on the date the employee has accu- January 1,1989 . . . . 17,674,645 2,281,388
cost ranged from 5% to 12% in 1989, from 5% to mulated enough money to buy a share. Options granted 4,629,537 (4,629,537)
11% in 1988, and from 6% to 11% in 1987. Measure- During 1989, employees purchased Options terminated . . (551,675) 14,803
Options cancelled —
ment of the projected benefit obligation was 7,292,894 shares, all of which were treasury
SARs exercised (77,659) —
based on discount rates ranging from to shares, for which $687 million was paid to IBM.
Options exercised . . . . (765,301) —
10% in both 1989 and 1988, and long-term At December 31,1989, 2,379,443 shares Options expired — (1,453,638)
rates of compensation increase ranging from 3% remain available for purchase. Shares available
to 81/2% in both 1989 and 1988. under long-term
Long-Term Award Plans performance plan . . — 5,012,794
Shares distributed
Postretirement Benefits In April 1989, the stockholders approved the
under long-term
The company and its U.S. subsidiaries have med- IBM long-term performance plan, which provides performance plan . . — (11,700)
ical, dental and life insurance plans for retirees, for incentive awards to be made to officers and Balance at
the estimated cost of which is fully accrued, other key employees. The plan is administered by December 31,1989 • 20,909,547 1,214,110
principally at retirement.This cost amounted to the Executive Compensation Committee of the
Exercisable at
$303 million, $105 million and $50 million Board of Directors. The Committee determines December 31,1989 • 12,404,456
in 1989,1988 and 1987, respectively. the type of award to be granted, which may
Cost in 1989 was higher than in 1988 include a stock option, stock appreciation right
The options exercised during 1989 were at
primarily because of amounts recorded for (SAR), capital stock, cash or any combination
an average option price of $64.66 per share. The
employees who will retire in 1990 as a result of thereof All future stock options will be granted
20,909,547 shares under option at December 31,
the announced U.S. restructuring. Cost in under this plan.
1989, are at option prices ranging from $55.25
1988 was higher than in 1987 primarily because Options allow the purchase of IBM's
to $ 159.50 per share.
of an increased number of retirees, resulting capital stock at 100% of the market price on the
from the manufacturing and headquarters con- date of grant and have a maximum duration
Stock Repurchase Programs
solidations in 1988. For more information, of 10 years. Payment by the optionee upon exercise
Under programs for purchasing IBM stock,
see the note on page 36. of an option may be made using IBM stock
16,085,900 shares were purchased during 1989
It is the company's practice to fund amounts as well as cash.
at a cost of $1,759 million, 8,611,396 shares
for postretirement benefits, with an independent SARs offer optionees the alternative of
were repurchased during 1988 at a cost of $992
trustee, as deemed appropriate from time to time. electing not to exercise the related stock option,
million and 11,252,000 shares during 1987 at a
Certain of the company's non-US. sub- but to receive payment in cash and/or stock,
cost of $1,425 million. The repurchased
sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However, equivalent to the difference between the option
shares were retired and restored to the status
many retirees outside the US. are covered price and the average market price of IBM stock
of authorized but unissued shares.
by government sponsored and administered pro- on the date of exercising the right.
In late 1989, the Board of Directors
grams. As a result, the cost of company sponsored
authorized the company to purchase from time
programs outside the U.S. is not significant.
to time shares of its capital stock not to
exceed $5,000 million. At December 31,1989,
$4,887 million of that authorization remained.

===== PAGE 44 =====
Segment Information
IBM is in the field of advanced information of consolidated revenue, operating profit and better understanding of IBM's operations. Material
technology. The company operates primarily in identifiable assets. The schedule below shows interdependencies and overlaps exist among
the single industry segment which offers revenue by industry segments and by classes of IBM's operating units and, therefore, the informa-
customers solutions that incorporate information similar products or services within the informa- tion may not be indicative of the financial
processing systems, software, communica- tion technology segment. results of, or investments in, the reported areas
tions systems and other products and services. Financial information by geographic area were they independent organizations.
This segment represents more than 90% is summarized on the next page to provide a
Revenue by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services
Consolidated U.S. Only
((DDoollllaarrss iinn mmiilllliioonnss)) 1989 I988t 1987 + 1989 I988t 1987I
Information Technology:
Processors* $ 16,087 $ 15,077 $ 13,983 $ 5,800 $ 5,586 $ 5,509
Workstations:
Personal Systems* . . . 8,242 6,934 6,034 3,698 3,004 3,114
Other Workstations . . 4,019 4,550 4,405 1,429 1,745 1,862
Peripherals 11,021 11,280 10,186 3,932 4,764 4,656
Software 8,424 7,927 6,836 3,139 2,925 2,817
Maintenance Services . . .. 7,070 7,347 7,691 2,959 3,102 3,688
Other 5,841 4,470 3,816 2,782 2,103 1,562
60,704 57,585 52,951 23,739 23,229 23,208
Federal Systems 2,006 2,065 2,238 2,006 2,065 2,238
Other Business — 31 67 — 26 58
Total $ 62,710 $ 59,681 $ 55,256 $ 25,745 $ 25,320 $ 25,504
tReclassified to conform with 1989 presentation.
*Excludes peripheral functions not embedded, software and maintenance.
While IBM operates primarily in a single Peripheral functions embedded in processors are to be functionally integrated with a display,
industry segment and manages its worldwide classified with Processors. Software includes a telecommunication device and a processor to
business as such, revenue has been categorized both applications and systems software. Mainte- form a workstation. Such interchangeability and
into major classes of product. nance Services consist of separately billed technological progress tend to make year-to-year
For purposes of classifying similar infor- charges for maintenance. Other consists princi- comparisons less valid than they would be in
mation technology products, user programmable pally of customer solution services, financing an industry less subject to rapid change.
equipment having the capability of manipulat- revenue and supplies. Federal Systems consists of specialized
ing data arithmetically or logically and making Some products logically fit in more than information technology products and services
calculations, in a manner directly addressable one class and are assigned to a specific class primarily for the United States defense, space and
by the user through the operation of a stored based on a variety of factors. Over time, products other agencies.
program, has been classified as Processors, tend to overlap, merge into or split from Other Business consists of training and
except that Personal Systems are included under existing classes as a result of changing technolo- testing materials for school, home and industrial
Workstations. Workstations also include gies, market perceptions, and/or customer use offered by Science Research Associates,
typewriters and other display based terminals. use. For example, market demand may create which was sold by IBM in 1988.
Peripherals include printers, storage and requirements for technological enhancements to
telecommunication devices. permit a peripheral product (e.g., printer).

===== PAGE 45 =====
Geographic Areas (Dollars in millions) 1989 I988t 1987
United States
Revenue-Customers $ 25,745 $ 25,320 $ 25,504
Interarea transfers 5,476 4,951 3,994
Total $ 31,221 $ 30,271 $ 29,498
Net earnings (325) 1,408 1,936
Assets at December 31 41,635 39,245 36,026
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Revenue-Customers $ 23,170 $ 21,600 $ 19,588
Interarea transfers 1,101 955 1,008
Total $ 24,271 $ 22,555 $ 20,596
Net earnings 2,676 2,349 2,209
Assets at December 31 24,732 22,745 24,625
Asia/Pacific
Revenue-Customers $ 9,202 $ 8,824 $ 6,910
Interarea transfers 1,673 1,837 1,431
Total $ 10,875 $ 10,661 $ 8,341
Net earnings 1,296 1,394 780
Assets at December 31 7,666 7,633 6,840
Americas
Revenue-Customers $ 4,593 $ 3,937 $ 3,254
Interarea transfers 1,461 1,290 850
Total $ 6,054 $ 5,227 $ 4,104
Net earnings 173 328 341
Assets at December 31 5,395 4,915 4,188
Eliminations
Revenue $ (9,711) $ (9,033) $ (7,283)
Net earnings (62) 12 (8)
Assets $ (1,694) (1,501) (1,650)
Consolidated
Revenue $ 62,710 $ 59,681 $ 55,256
Net earnings $ 3,758 $ 5,491 $ 5,258
Assets at December 31 $ 77,734 $ 73,037 $ 70,029
11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes.
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, The cost and service charges that relate to fixed
currency environment account for approxi- European operations accounted for approximately asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or
mately 90% of the company's non-U S. revenue. 95% of revenue in 1989,1988 and 1987. amortized by the importing area. Interarea
The remaining 10% is from subsidiaries and Interarea transfers consist principally of accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of
branches, predominantly in the Americas, completed machines, subassemblies and parts, service charges, and the net change during the
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose eco- and software. These transfers are generally priced year in unamortized service charges have been
nomic environment is highly inflationary. at cost plus an appropriate service charge. eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
For the year:
Revenue $ 62,710 $ 59,681 $ 55,256 $52,160 $50,718
Net earnings before cumulative
effect of accounting change 3,758 5,491 5,258 4,789 6,555
Per share 6.47 9.27 8.72 7.81 10.67
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting for income taxes — 315 — — —
Per share — .53 — — —
Net earnings 3,758 5,806 5,258 4,789 6,555
Per share 6.47 9.80 8.72 7.81 10.67
Cash dividends paid 2,752 2,609 2,654 2,698 2,703
Per share 4.73 4.40 4.40 4.40 4.40
Investment in plant, rental machines
and other property 6,410 5,431 4,312 4,644 6,434
Return on stockholders' equity 9.6% 14.9% 14.5% 14.4% 22.4
At end of year:
Total assets $ 77,734 $ 73,037 $70,029 $63,020 $ 56,983
Net investment in plant, rental
machines and other property 24,943 23,426 22,967 21,310 19,713
Working capital 14,175 17,956 18,430 15,546 14,958
Long-term debt 10,825 8,518 7,108 6,923 6,368
Stockholders' equity 38,509 39,509 38,263 34,374 31,990
Selected Quarterly Data
Gross Net Per Share Stock Prices
(Dollars in millions cxcept per share and stock prices) Revenue Profit Earnings Earnings Dividends High Low
1989 First Quarter $ 12,730 $ 7,212 $ 950 $1.61 $1.10 $130.88 $107.63
Second Quarter 15,213 8,481 1,340 2.31 1.21 115.75 106.25
Third Quarter 14,305 7,900 877 1.51 1.21 119.38 107.75
Fourth Quarter 20,462 11,416 591 1.04 1.21 109.75 93.38
Total $ 62,710 $35,009 $3,758 $6.47 $4.73
1988 First Quarter $ 12,058 $ 6,853 $ 1,248$ 2.10$ $ 1.10 124.00 $ 104.50
Second Quarter 13,907 7,936 964 1.63 1.10 128.38 105.63
Third Quarter 13,714 7,826 1,247 2.10 1.10 129.50 109.50
Fourth Quarter 20,002 11,418 2,347 3.97 1.10 125.00 112.75
Total $ 59,681 $ 34,033 $ 5,806 $9.80 $4.40
tlncludes $ 315 million, or $.53 per share, cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes.
There were 815,580 stockholders of record The regular quarterly cash dividend payable The stock prices reflect the high and low
at December 31,1989. During 1989, stockhold- March 10,1990 will be at the rate of $1.21 prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York Stock
ers received $ 2,752 million in cash dividends. per share.This dividend will be IBM's 300th Exchange composite tape for the last two years.
consecutive quarterly cash dividend.

===== PAGE 47 =====
IBM Corporation John F. Akers Chairman of the Board, IBM BOARD COMMITTEES:
Executive Committee:
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif-
engineering and construction John R. Opel, Chairman
Harold Brown Chairman, Foreign Policy Institute,The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. John F. Akers
James E. Burke Chairman, Strategic Planning Committee, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J.- Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
health care products James E. Burke
FrankT. Cary Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM FrankT. Cary
WilliamT. Coleman, Jr Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C.-attorneys at law Jack D. Kuehler
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. Chairman of the Board, Hospital Corporation of America, Nashville, Tenn.-health services J. Richard Munro
Fritz Gerber Chairman of the Boards of F. Hotfrnann-La Roche, Ltd., Basel, Switzerland-health care, Retirement Plans Committee:
and Zurich Insurance Company, Zurich-insurance Jack D. Kuehler, Chairman
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; Partner, Riker, Danzig, Scherer & Hyland, Harold Brown
Morristown, N.J-attorneys at law William T. Coleman, Jr.
Nannerl O. Keohane President, Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass. Fritz Gerber
Jack D. Kuehler President, IBM Edgar S. Woolard, Jr.
Richard W. Lyman Director, Institute for International Studies, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif Compensation Committee:
J. Richard Munro Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Time Warner Inc., James E. Burke, Chairman
New York, NY.-broadcasting and publishing Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr.
Thomas S. Murphy Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., Thomas F. Frist, Jr
New York, N.Y.-broadcasting and publishing J Richard Munro
John R.Opel Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM Thomas S. Murphy
Helmut Sihier President and Chief Executive Officer, Henkel KGaA, Dilsseldorf, West Germany- Audit Committee:
chemical products
Richard W. Lyman,Chairman
John B. Slaughter President, Occidental College, Los Angeles, Calif
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach
Edgar S. Woolard, Jr. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.,
Nannerl O. Keohane
Wilmington, Del.-chemical products
Helmut Sihier
John B. Slaughter
Advisory Board: George B. Beitzel Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Kaspar V.Cassanit Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
John M. Fox Retired Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.
G. Keith Funston Retired President, New York Stock Exchange, New York, N.Y.
George L. Hinman Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kartell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law
John N. Irwin II Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y. -attorneys at law
Gilbert E. Jones Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM
Grayson Kirk President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y.
Allen J. Krowe Retired Executive Vice President, IBM; Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Texaco Inc., White Plains, N.Y.
T. Vincent Learson Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM
Jacques G. Maisonrouge Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
William McChesneyMartin, Jr Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Dean R. McKay Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller Chief Executive Officer, A.P Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark
William H. Moore Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Tmst Company, New York, N.Y.
Dean P Phypers Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Emanuel R. Piore Retired Vice President, IBM
Paul J. Rizzo Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Dean, Graduate School of Business Administration,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
William W. Scranton Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania, Scranton, Pa.
Irving S. Shapiro Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, Wilmington, Del.-attorneys at law
Cyrus R. Vance Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. Chairman Emeritus, IBM
Officers: Chairman of the Board Vice Presidents Richard T. Gerstner David E. McDowell Secretary
John F. Akers John A. Armstrong Victor J. Goldberg Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. William W.K. Rich
President Michael J. Attardo William 0. Grabe Ennio Presutti Treasurer
Jack D. Kuehler James A. Cannavino Joseph M. Guglielmi M. Bernard Puckett Robert Ripp
Ralph W. Clark Lutz F. Hahne Michael J. Quinlan
Senior Vice Presidents Controller
Robert J Corrigan Ellen M. Hancock Renato Riverso
C. Michael Armstrong Michael H. Van Vranken*
John P Cunningham Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. Edward F. Rogers*
Walton E. Burdick Assistant Treasurers
Kenneth W. Dam Hans-Olaf Henkel Peter R. Schneider
George H. Conrades James E. Dezell, Jr John J Higgins* Stephen B. Schwartz Joe Grills
Carl J. Conti Nicholas M. Donofrio Harry L. Kavetas Takeo Shiina Ira D.Hall
Donato A. Evangelista, Gerald W. Ebker Edward J. Kfoury Robert M. Stephenson Robert N. Mattson
Ter G r e y n R e . r al L a C u o te u n n b s a el c h Howard G. Figueroa Robert J LaBant Nancy H. Teeters John H. Stewart
David E. McKinney Lucie J Fjeldstad Ned C. Lautenbach David M.Thomas*
Frank A. Metz, Jr., Larry J. Ford Paul R. Low John M.Thompson
Finance and Planning James J. Forese Edward E. Lucente JamesT. Vanderslice tEffective i/s/90
Patrick A.Toole Heinz K. Fridrich Marvin L. Mann Earl E Wheeler 'Elected i/30/90

===== PAGE 48 =====
IBM World Trade Sir Roderick Carnegie Former President, Business Council of Australia, Melbourne, Australia
Asia Pacific Board: Neil R. Clark Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, National Australia Bank, Ltd., Melbourne, Australia
Jill K.Conway Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.;
former President of Smith College, Northampton, Mass.
Kenneth W. Dam Vice President, IBM
David A.GIedhill Chairman, John Swire & Sons (H.K.), Ltd., Hong Kong
Douglas Hsu President, Far Eastern Textile, Ltd.,Taiwan
David K. P Li Director and Chief Executive,The Bank of East Asia, Ltd., Hong Kong
Edward E. Lucente Vice President, IBM; President, IBM Asia Pacific
Nobuyuki Nakahara President,Toa Nenryo Kogyo Co., Ltd.,Tokyo, Japan
Mohamed Noordin Sopiee Director General, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Kenichi Ohmae Managing Director, McKinsey & Company, Inc.,Tokyo, Japan
Ralph A. Pfeifter, Jr Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
Takeo Shiina Vice President, IBM; President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan Ltd.
Tan Chok Kian Executive Chairman, Stock Exchange of Singapore; Singapore's Trade Representative to Taiwan
Dr. Snoh Unakul Chairman,Thailand Development Research Institute Foundation, Bangkok,Thailand
Jiro Ushio Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ushio, Inc.,Tokyo, Japan
IBM World Trade Eric Bourdais de Charbonniere .... Executive Vice President, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Paris, France
Europe/Middle East/Juan Antonio Garcia Diez Attorney; Chairman, URALITA S.A., Madrid, Spain
Africa Corporation Pierre L. Gousseland Honorary Chairman, AMAX, Inc., Greenwich, Conn.
Board of Directors: Lutz F. Hahne Vice President, IBM; Assistant General Manager, IBM U.S. Financial Analysis
Hans-Olaf Henkel Vice President, IBM; President, IBM Germany
Jacc]ues G. Maisonrouge Retired Senior Vice President, IBM
David E. McKinney Senior Vice President, IBM; President Directeur General, IBM Europe, S. A.;
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM WorldTrade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation
Umberto Nordio Chairman, Overseas Partners, Inc., New York, N.Y.;
Retired Chairman, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy
Renato Riverso Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe, S. A.
Bo Rydin Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Svenska Cellulosa AB, Sundsvall, Sweden
Sir Philip Shelbourne Chairman, Henry Ansbacher Holdings FIX, London, England
Otto Sturzenegger Chairman of the Board, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y
Nancy H. Teeters Vice President and Chief Economist, IBM
Patrick A.Toole Senior Vice President, IBM; General Manager, IBMTechnology Products
Kurt Werner Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany
IBM World Trade Manuel F. Ayau President Emeritus, Universidad Francisco Marroquin, Guatemala City, Guatemala
Latin America Roberto Konder Bornhausen Vice Chairman, Unibanco, Sao Paulo, Brazil
Board: William A. Etherington Vice President and Assistant General Manager, IBM Latin America
James J. Forese Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM WorldTrade Americas Group
Jaime Garcia Parra President, Acerias Paz del Rio, S. A., Bogota, Colombia
Julio J. Gomez Vice President and General Manager, Banco Shaw, S. A,, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Claudio X. Gonzalez Chairman of the Board and Director General, Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico
Rodrigo Guerra B President and General Manager, IBM Mexico
Rudolf Hohn President and General Manager, IBM Brazil
Robeli J. Libero PresicJent and General Manager, IBM Latin America
Eliodoro Matte L Vice Chairman, Compania Manufacturera de Papeles y Cartones, S. A., Santiago, Chile
Paulo D Villares Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S. A., Sao Paulo, Brazil
Gustavo J. Vollmer Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S. A., Caracas, Venezuela
Richard Webb Chairman, Cuanto, S.A., Lima, Peru

===== PAGE 49 =====
The following information is provided as a convenient reference for IBM stockholders:
The 1990 Annual Meeting The following information may be obtained IBM Investor Relations
of stockholders will be held on Monday, without charge from First Chicago Trust Company IBM Corporation, Investor Relations,
April 30, at 10 a.m., at the Phoenix Civic Plaza of New York, P.O. Box y8p6, Church Street Station, Old Orchard Road, Armonk, N.Y. 10504.
Convention Center, Phoenix, Ariz. New York, N.Y. io242-y8p6. Call (212) j^^-yooo. Call (914) 765-7777
Notice of Annual Meeting, The Form 10-K Annual Report IBM Stock is Traded
Proxy Statement and Proxy Voting Card to the Securities and Exchange Commission on the New York Stock Exchange, other
are mailed to each stockholder in March. The provides further details on IBM's business, exchanges in the United States, and exchanges
Proxy Statement describes the items of business including a list of subsidiaries, summarized in in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England,
to be voted on at the Annual Meeting and the Annual Report. Form 10-K is available France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and
provides biographies of the Board's nominees in April. the Netheriands.
for director and their principal affiliations
The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report For Information
with other companies or organizations, as well
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is General questions about IBM
as other information about the company.
available in May, August and November. from within the continental U.S.,
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, call (800) 426-3333.
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes Outside the continental U. S.,
is available in June.
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including call (201) 329-7113.
a report on the company, questions and answers IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet
International Business Machines
of general interest, and the results of voting explains how stockholders may automatically
Corporation
on items of business. reinvest dividends toward the purchase of
Corporate Headquarters
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make
IBM Stockholder Records Armonk, NY. 10504
optional additional investments for that purpose.
For information on your stockholder account,
call First Chicago Trust Company of New York, IBM Business Conduct Guidelines *AIX, Application Systcm/^00, InfoWindow, PS/2
(212) 735-7000. is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide and Personal Systcni/2 arc registered trademarks of
the Intcrnationai Business Maciiincs Corporation.
Stockholders wishing to write should use the describing the ethical and business principles that AiyCycic, AS/400, CIM Advantage, SAA, Systems
the company sets for the conduct of its business. Application Architecture,System/syo, and 3090,
following addresses:
are trademarks of the International Business Machines
Account Questions: Equal Opportunity, Affirmative Corporation.
First Chicago Trust Company of New York Action and Community Programs *UN1X is a registered trademark of American Telephone
P.O. Box 7896 in IBM are outlined in a document that describes and Telegraph Co.
386 and i486 are trademarks of Intel Corporation.
Church Street Station programs in the United States for women,
New York, NY 10242-7896 minorities and handicapped persons, and reviews
Transfer of Stock: IBM's affirmative action efforts in the community.
First Chicago Trust Company of New York
IBM Annual Report Translations
30 West Broadway
and Recordings
New York, N.Y 10007-2192
are available. The report is translated into
Stock certificates are valuable and should be French and Japanese. An audiocassette recording
safeguarded since replacement takes time and in English is available for the blind.
requires payment of a surety bond premium by
A Service for Hearing-Impaired Stockholders
the stockholder If a stock certificate is lost,
provided by First Chicago Trust Company of
stolen or destroyed, First Chicago Trust Company
New York enables hearing-impaired stockhold-
of New York should be notified. Registered mail
ers who have access to a telecommunications
should be used whenever stock is mailed.
device to communicate with First Chicago Trust
Company of New York. Stockholders who wish
to use this service should call (212) 571-0022.
4 8 IBM 1989 Annual Report G505-1989-00 PRINTED IN USA

===== PAGE 50 =====


===== PAGE 51 =====
>
P ? =
•TD
o O n ry i
GO
5- 2 2
Z
^ o W^
n
o
ri ^
O
2