

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
stockholder information
IBM STOCKHOLDER SERVICES IBM INVESTOR SERVICES PROGRAM
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
EquiServe Trust Company, N.A. provided for IBMstockholders and potential IBMinvestors, including
P.O.Box 43072 the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3072 IBMstock certificates for safekeeping. Call (888) 421-8860 for a copy
(888) IBM-6700 of the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
should call (781) 575-2727. Investors with other requests may write to:
IBM Corporation
Stockholders can also reach EquiServe Trust Company, N.A.via e-mail
Stockholder Relations
at: ibm@equiserve.com
New Orchard Road
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Armonk, New York 10504
device (TDD) can communicate directly with EquiServe Trust Company,
N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the IBM STOCK
United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694. IBMcommon stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and
on other exchanges in the United States and around the world.
IBM ON THE INTERNET
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found via the IBMhome ANNUAL MEETING
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM The IBMAnnual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
products, services and other activities can also be found via that address. April 27, 2004, at 10 a.m. at the Rhode Island Convention Center,
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and One Sabin Street, Providence, Rhode Island.
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
via the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). STOCKHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS
Stockholders in the United States and Canada can get quarterly
Stockholders of record can also consent to receive future IBM financial results, listen to a summary of the Annual Meeting remarks
Annual Reports and Proxy Statements online through the Internet
and hear voting results from the meeting by calling (800) IBM-7800.
at this site.
Callers can also request printed copies of the information via mail
IBMfiles reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission or fax. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and
(SEC), including annual reports on Form 10-K,quarterly reports Puerto Rico should call (402) 573-9861.
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-Kand any other filings
required by the SEC. Certifications by IBM’s Chief Executive LITERATURE FOR IBM STOCKHOLDERS
The following literature on IBMis available without charge from: Officer and Chief Financial Officer are included in SECreports
EquiServe Trust Company, N.A.
as required.
P.O. Box 43072
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3072
information about IBM, including our annual report on Form 10-K, (888) IBM-6700
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable
should call (781) 575-2727.
after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the
SEC(www.ibm.com/investor). These materials are available free of The Form 10-KAnnual Report and Form 10-QQuarterly Reports to
charge on or through our website. the SECprovide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released in March; 10-Qreports are released in May, August
IBM’s website also includes our Corporate Governance Guidelines
and November.
and the charters for our Audit Committee, Executive Compensation
and Management Resources Committee, and Directors and Corporate An audio cassette recording of the 2003 Annual Report will be
Governance Committee (www.ibm.com/investor/corporategovernance). available for sight-impaired stockholders in June.
In addition, our website contains IBM’s Business Conduct Guidelines
“What is the value of a company? IBMCorporate Responsibility
(BCGs), which is our code of business conduct and ethics for our
Report” reports on IBM’s community relations programs and employee directors, executive officers and employees. Any amendment to
programs, its commitment to improving education, the company’s
our BCGs that applies to our directors or executive officers will
corporate governance and management system, its health and safety be disclosed on IBM’s website, and any waiver of the BCGs for
programs, environmental and energy priorities, and the importance
directors or executive officers may be made only by the IBM
for IBMof diversity in the workplace and the marketplace. Board of Directors or a Board committee and will be disclosed on
IBM’s website. These materials are also available in print to any
GENERAL INFORMATION
stockholder who requests them.
For answers to general questions about IBMfrom within
The public may read and copy any materials we file with the SECat the continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU.
the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 450 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, From outside the United States, call (404) 238-1234.
DC20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of
the Public Reference Room by calling the SECat (800) SEC-0330. CORPORATE OFFICES
The SECmaintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains International Business Machines Corporation
reports, proxy and information statements, and other information New Orchard Road
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
hpargohtiL
nosrednA
:gnitnirP
niktiW
naitsirhC
,sretniW
naD
,gnillamS
kraM
,oarreS
solraC
,ssooI
retlaW
,daorB
nailuJ
:yhpargotohP
yramirP
ogacihC
,.cnI
,srentraPASV
:ngiseD
AIX, Blue Gene, DB2, e-business on demand, e-business Hosting, IBM, iSeries, Lotus, Lotus Notes, POWER, PowerPC, pSeries, Rational, System/360, ThinkVantage, Tivoli,
WebSphere, xSeries and zSeries are registered trademarks or trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Intel is a registered
trademark of Intel Corporation.Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds. PayPal is a registered trademark of eBay Company. Microsoft, Windows and Xbox are registered trademarks
or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. JAVAis a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. UNIXis a registered trademark of The Open Group in the United States and other
countries. Other company, product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
Printed in the U.S.A. G507-0501-09

===== PAGE 3 =====
As we look at the world of business
today—including our clients and their
industries—we like what we see.
Even better, we like what they see.
We are certainly encouraged by IBM’s recent performance in a
tough economy and by our future growth prospects. But what gives
us even more hope for the future is the way companies, leaders and
institutions of all kinds are coming to share in a highly promising
consensus about the direction—and the very nature—of business.
About the potential of technology for integration, not just automation.
About the power of innovation that combines invention and insight.
About the links among openness, standards and trust.
Sometimes, consensus is driven by reaction and fear. But at other times,
it’s fueled by hope. This is one of those times. Which is very good news,
both for IBM and for a new era of global business growth.
So, while it’s certainly nice to be a company that’s doing well…
it’s even nicer to be doing so in such good company.

===== PAGE 4 =====
SAMUEL J. PALMISANO
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
2

===== PAGE 5 =====
Dear IBM Investor,
Last year, I told you that we were repositioning IBM
for leadership, in all the ways that a business can lead.
I described how IBM defines leadership, along with our
plans to achieve it. And I said that I believed the results
of this repositioning would roll out in meaningful ways
in the years and decades to come.
twelve months later,it’s clear that the future we Our revenue from continuing operations, at
envisioned is arriving, and more rapidly than we $89.1 billion (a company record), increased by
expected. This is in part because of the hopeful signs 10 percent. Earnings from continuing operations were
we’re seeing of economic recovery, with the promise $7.6 billion compared to $5.3 billion in 2002, which
of renewed business investment in information tech- included $1.6 billion of after-tax charges for second
nology. It’s partly because of the rapid adoption of our and fourth quarter 2002 actions. We continued to gain
on demand strategy by clients, partners andthe overall market share across all our core businesses. IBMtoday
ITindustry. But it’s also something more—something is the market leader in servers, middleware,business
specific to this company and its people, and something transformation services and strategic outsourcing.
longer lasting than a particular economic cycle. Highlights for the year included revenue growth
IBMtoday is a very different enterprise than it in every server segment, a WebSphere middleware
was just a few years ago. Our business model has been platform that grew 12 percent and gained market
quietly but substantially reshaped to capitalize on the share, and 14 percent growth in strategic outsourcing.
most promising growth and profit opportunities in Our success with clients was evident in faster-than-
the market. Even more important for the long term, market growth for five of IBM’s six industry sectors.
our operations and culture are being transformed as For example, in the public sector, which includes
well. We arenow focused with an intensity and unity our relationships with governments and health care
I haven’t seen since the heyday of the mainframe. As a providers, we grew by 15 percent; in communications
result, we are poised to take IBMto the next level, and by 8 percent; in industrial by 14 percent; and in
to redraw and extend the boundaries of the ITindustry. financial services by 13 percent.
We again generated excellent cash flows. After
Avery good year, for a very different company investing $5.1 billion in R&D, we had $12.7 billion in
IBM’s 2003 is the kind of year on which it’s gratifying to cash available for investment and distribution to
look back—both for our overall achievements and for shareholders. We invested $3.9 billion of that in net
the strong momentum with which we ended the year. capital expenditures and $1.8 billion in acquisitions to
3

===== PAGE 6 =====
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
strengthen our portfolio. And we were able to return clients or shareholders. In a word,we lost sight of
$5.4 billion to investors—$4.3 billion through share IBM’s mission, of what had always set us apart.
repurchase and $1.1 billion through dividends—ending Well, we’ve regained our focus now. IBMis an inno-
the year in a strong cash position, with $7.6 billion, vator—in every dimension of that word. We know that
including marketable securities. IBMand IBMers are at their best when they create
Overall, despite facing serious challenges, the IBM value that our clients cannot get from anyone else.
team executed with discipline. And indications for the That means we will provide leading-edge technology,
year ahead are encouraging, including a strong demand services, expertise and intellectual capital, and will
pipeline (enlarged by more than $17 billion of services integrate these capabilities for each client to provide
signings in the fourth quarter) and a growing number them with competitive advantage.
of alliances with business partners and software We commit to that. We commit to innovating to
companies committed to leading with IBM’s open, deliver client success. And that is something for which
standards-based platforms. clients are willing to pay a premium.
All in all, a very good performance. But is it sustain- This may seem like a truism, but it actually commits
able? Can we, in fact, improve upon it and keep grow- us to a very focused strategy, based on a choice between
ing for the foreseeable future? I believe so, and let me the two primary sources of growth and profit in IT
tell you why. today: the high-volume, undifferentiated product
play; and the high-value, innovation and integration
Recommitting to high value play, focused on the enterprise. It is this high-value
For the past couple of decades, if you were to look at space we have chosen to lead.
IBM’s performance in any given year or over several We believe this is the right choice for IBMand our
years, what would you see? You’d see a very large global investors. By focusing on this space, we believe we can,
company in which some businesses are growing rapidly, on a sustainable, long-term basis, generate superior
some are flat and some are declining. Add it up, and it returns compared to the overall ITindustry, command
would average out to steady profitability—but perhaps leading share position in our selected businesses, out-
uninspiring growth. For people with comparatively perform the average of the S&P500 on return on
short memories, this might be the only IBMthey’d invested capital, and produce strong cash flows.
ever known. And it would be legitimate to ask if the In recent years, we’ve taken many steps to seize this
company is capable of more. position. Before I talk about those steps, I want to spend
The answer is: We certainly are. In fact, over most a minute on what constitutes “high value” for clients
of our nearly 100-year history, IBMwas consistently today, and what will do so for the foreseeable future. It’s
a company that outperformed others in our markets embodied in what we call the on demand enterprise.
and generated superior returns. And that was because And that, in turn, is all about a new kind of integration.
we were singularly focused on leading, and most
often creating and defining, the high-value spaces The next wave of integration
in our industry. After two decades of disaggregation, the ITindustry
Of course, with a company of IBM’s breadth and is re-integrating. This is being driven simultaneously
global presence, there are always ups and downs that by a major shift in client demand, and a major shift
result from economic cycles, product and technology in technology.
transitions, and sometimes issues of execution. But Companies have come to realize that if they’re
it’s also apparent that, somewhere along the line, we going to respond rapidly and effectively to today’s
became more focused on defending our existing lead- volatile marketplace, they need to do more than
ership position than on creating the next one. We Web-enable discrete systems, processes or business
weren’t particularly bold or imaginative in getting into units. They need to pull together all of the systems
new markets or developing new businesses, products they’ve already got and integrate them securely with
and services, even when our strategic analyses indicat- their core business activities—horizontally, across
ed that something new was coming. And, just as not just their whole company but their entire value
important, we hesitated to reinvent or get out of busi- chain, from customers to suppliers. This is an
nesses that no longer representedhigh value for either on demand enterprise.
4

===== PAGE 7 =====
4.7$
99
9.7$
00
1.8$
01
3.5$
02
6.7$
03
7.01$
99
3.11$
00
0.21$
01
5.01$
02
7.21$
Focus on High Value
, ,
IBMGlobal Services generated In IBMearned U.S. IBMGlobal Financing pre-tax
 . ,
billion in services signings patents, breaking the record income was billion for
, 
in including seven con- for patents received in a single representing a percent year-

tracts over billion and an year and eclipsing the nearest to-year increase.
 ,
additional contracts in excess company by more than
,
 In revenue from IBM
of million each. patents. During the past eleven

middleware increased percent
years, the U.S. Patent Office has

IBMSystems Group revenue , to billion, primarily driven by
issued IBMmore than
 
increased percent to billion continued strength in demand for
patents—nearly triple the total
 
in .It outpaced competitors WebSphere ( percent growth),
of any U.S. ITcompetitor

with double-digit growth in DB2database ( percent growth)
during this time.

strategic UNIX, blade and and Tivoli ( percent growth)
Intel-based servers, and storage middleware products.
systems products.
TOTAL REVENUE BY BUSINESS SEGMENT
15%
16%
40% 4% 32% 3%
2% 1%
39% 48%
99 00 01 02
REVENUES IN ALL SIX OF IBM’S INDUSTRY SECTORS GREW FOR THE FULL YEAR,
WITH THE FINANCIAL SERVICES SECTOR, INDUSTRIAL SECTOR AND PUBLIC
SECTOR AMONG THE STRONGEST, AND WITH CONTINUED GOOD RESULTS IN THE
SMALL AND MEDIUM BUSINESS SECTOR.
03
INCOME FROM CASH AVAILABLE FOR
CONTINUING OPERATIONS INVESTMENT AND FOR DISTRIBUTION
($ IN BILLIONS) TO SHAREHOLDERS*
($ IN BILLIONS)
3.38$ 1.58$ 1.38$ 2.18$ 1.98$
GLOBAL SERVICES
HARDWARE
SOFTWARE
GLOBAL FINANCING
03 ENTERPRISE
INVESTMENTS/OTHER
REVENUE
($ IN BILLIONS) 1999 2003
INDUSTRY SECTOR GROWTH YEAR TO YEAR (2002-2003)
FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRIAL COMMUNICATIONS
12.8% 14.0% 8.1%
PUBLIC DISTRIBUTION SMALL & MEDIUM BUSINESS
14.8% 4.2% 14.0%
* This represents management’s view of cash available for investment and for distribution to shareholders.
See the company’s Management Discussion section on pages 64 and 65 for a reconciliation of these
amounts to GAAP net cash from operating activities and basis for its presentation.
incubated new businesses emerging growth areas
• In its first year, IBM’s Engineering &
• In just three years, Life Sciences has • In China, India, Russia and Brazil, IBM Technology Services business designed
become a $1 billion business, more than generated revenue of $3 billion in 2003 and products for Medtronic, New York Stock
doubling its revenue each year. It has saw double-digit growth. Exchange, Raytheon, Mayo Clinic and
grown from two employees in 2001 to others, generating more than $160 million
more than 1,000 employees in 2003. • IBMBusiness Consulting Services’ in revenue in 2003.
Business Transformation Outsourcing
supply chain improvements
• IBM’s Digital Media business grew 60 per- (BTO) unit generated fourth-quarter
centto $1.7 billion in revenue in 2003. 2003 signings of nearly $3 billion. Major
• By the end of 2003, the work of transforming
• Application Management Services grew contracts are in place with clients including and integrating the supply chain resulted in
30 percent and contributed more than BP, Procter & Gamble, Sprint, Raytheon the lowest inventory levels for IBMin more
$1 billion in new revenue since the line Aircraft, Dresdner Bank of Germany, and than 20 years.
of business was created two years ago. United Technologies Corporation.
• IBM’s supply chain transformation efforts
• In 2003, Linux revenue grew over • With more than 2,000 clients, e-business have reduced the amountof time the sales
50 percent to more than $2 billion, as Hosting Services revenue increased by force spends on activities like checking on
the rate of related software and services more than 20 percent each of the past order status, proposal generation and
combined nearly doubled year to year. three years, topping $1 billion in revenue contracts by 20 percent.
in 2003.
• IBM’s Pervasive Computing business • By speeding inventory turns and improving
generated more than $2.4 billion in revenue • IBMclients have more than $10 billion client collections and supplier payment
in 2003, 36 percent growth mainly from in dormant computing capacity installed, terms, IBM’s supply chain efforts generated
services and software installations. which can be turned on and paid foron more than $700 million in cash in 2003.
demand. More than $500 million in
capacity was turned on in 2003.

===== PAGE 8 =====
Financial Highlights
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions except per share amounts)
FOR THE YEAR 2003 2002
Revenue $89,131 $81,186
Income from continuing operations 7,613 5,334
Loss from discontinued operations (30) (1,755))
Net income 7,583 3,579
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations 4.34 3.07
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.01))
Total 4.32 2.06
Basic:
Continuing operations 4.42 3.13
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.03)
Total 4.40 2.10
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations 14,569 13,788
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 4,393 4,753
Cash dividends paid on common stock 1,085 1,005
Per share of common stock 0.63 0.59
AT YEAR END
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities 7,647 5,975
Total assets 104,457 96,484
Working capital 7,098 7,502*
Total debt 23,632 26,017
Stockholders’ equity 27,864 22,782
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 1,695 1,722
Market capitalization 157,047 133,483
Stock price per common share 92.68 77.50
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 319,273 315,889
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
6

===== PAGE 9 =====
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
Becoming one is dauntingly hard to pull off. It For our part, we’ve decided. The two parallel trajec-
requires both the end-to-end integration of the tech- toriesof integration—in client demand and in what the
nology—which niche product vendors simply cannot technology requires—play directly to IBM’s historic
do—and the integration of technology with business strengths. However, even with everything IBMbrought
processes. This in turn requires deep business knowl- to this table, we needed more. That’s why we’ve made
edge and industry expertise that few traditional acquisitions such as PricewaterhouseCoopers
technology companies have, and significant technical Consulting (PwCC), Rational software and 19 other
knowledge and research strengths that few consulting companies in the past two years. And it’s why we reset
firms possess. our priorities in R&Dto develop more technologies
Integration is also an emerging force in core tech- and services specifically for client needs in the
nology and computing architectures. To cite one on demand era.
example, advances in semiconductor devices have On demand integration is also why we’ve placed a
been largely propelled by increasing the clock speed huge bet on standards, from the Internet protocols
of the microprocessor chip; this is like revving up the and Linux to grid computing and Web services.
RPMof a car engine. But while advances in raw speed Without open technical interfaces and agreed-upon
are continuing apace, they are no longer enough to standards, even integration within a single enterprise
increase chip and overall system performance. For one would remain a gargantuan task. And forget about
thing, chips have become so densely packed with integration with the other companies, business
transistors that they produce more heat than can be processes, applications, pervasive computing devices,
cost-effectively dissipated. laws, regulations, customs and cultures that make up
The solution is integration—putting multiple, often the ever-more-global marketplace of the 21st century.
less-than-top-speed processors on the same chip, along An ITcompany’s position on open standards—not
with additional functions like fast memory and high- just its rhetoric, but its actions—is a clear indicator
performance input/output. This is the approach IBM of whether it faces forward or backward, is serving
engineers have taken in developing our Blue Gene the needs of clients or protecting its market position.
supercomputer. Integration of this sophistication is In addition to the opportunities I’ve described, our
beyond the reach of most chip and systems companies. move into on demand has opened up some very large
It requires expertise not just in semiconductors but businesses beyond the frontiers of the traditional IT
in advanced systems architecture, custom logic industry—opportunities that remain out of reach for
design, operating systems and software tools. This most of our competitors.
is the kind of expertise that IBMhas built up over One promising example is Business Transformation
decades, and it is not easily replicated. And that’s Outsourcing (BTO), which was not even part of the
why technology leaders like Sony, Cisco, Apple and industry lexicon 18 months ago. In BTOengagements,
QUALCOMMhave partnered with IBMfor advanced IBMbecomes responsible for transforming—and
technology—and why last year Microsoft licensed actually providing—a client’s business process in
IBM’s microprocessor technology for use in its areas such as human resources, procurement, customer
next-generation Xbox game console. care, and finance and administration.Thanks to the
acquisition of PwCCand the formation of IBM
Bulking up in on demand Business Consulting Services, we generated nearly
Many ITcompanies will struggle with this world that $3 billion in BTOsignings during the fourth quarter of
is dawning—with the need to choose between open 2003 alone. To give a rough idea of the potential here,
and proprietary, between serving consumers and the current size of businesses’ outsourced spending on
enterprises, between redistributing other people’s sales, marketing,logistics, finance, HRand all other
intellectual capital and innovating. This is not about administrative processes is about $1 trillion a year. Of
making pronouncements or promises. Acompany that, there is an opportunity in excess of $1oo billion
cannot be all things to every client, every partner in the BTOareas we are pursuing. We are committed
and every investor. to extend our leadership position in BTOin 2004.
7

===== PAGE 10 =====
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
Remaking IBM become a $1 billion-plus revenue stream. In the areas
To some people, it may seem bold to have made all we’re targeting within life sciences and digital media
these moves during the worst market ever seen in the alone, third-party analysts see more than $60 billion
ITindustry. But I don’t believe it was particularly of market opportunity by 2006.
risky, because it was driven by client demand and the
While we do all this, we’re continuing relentlessly
realities of the technology. What’s really important
to improve execution. By becoming an on demand
for you to understand is that our commitment to lead-
business ourselves, we’ve made big strides in product
ership in the high-value spaces and in innovation isn’t
cycle time, new product introduction, sales productivi-
a mission statement. It’s a business model. And it
ty and simplification of our processes. Our inventories
commits us to continual reinvention of IBMitself.
are at their lowest level in more than 20 years, and our
Over the past several years, we’ve taken aggressive
continuing progress in integrating our supply chain
steps to remix our business so that we are positioned
took $7 billion of cost out of the business in 2003,
for long-term leadership and new opportunities in the
surpassing what we achieved in 2002.
high-value enterprise space, however that changes.
We have, since 1997: Business value, and a company’s values
As I mentioned last year, we’ve been spending a great
• exited or reduced our presence in such areas as
deal of time thinking, debating and determining the
application software, hard-disk drives, networking
fundamentals of this company. It has been important
hardware, low-end printers and retail PCs—which we
to do so. When IBMers have been crystal clear and
estimate have declined from 31 percent to 25 percent
united about our strategies and purpose, it’s amazing
of ITindustry revenue;
what we’ve been able to create and accomplish. When
• entered or increased our presence in distributed we’ve been uncertain, conflicted or hesitant, we’ve
middleware, non-hardware maintenance services, squandered opportunities and even made blunders
Intel-based servers and mobile PCs—which have that would have sunk smaller companies.
grown from 40 percent of industry revenue to It may not surprise you, then, that last year we
46 percent, and are expected to continue outper- examined IBM’s core values for the first time since
forming the overall ITmarket; the company’s founding. In this time of great change,
• increased our revenue in business and technology we needed to affirm IBM’s reason for being, what sets
consulting services, infrastructure services and the company apart and what should drive our actions
infrastructure software—which generate superior as individual IBMers.
long-term revenue growth, profit, cash and return Importantly, we needed to find a way to engage
on invested capital—from 48 percent to 64 percent everyone in the company and get them to speak up on
of our total, with expectations of increasing that these important issues. Given the realities of a smart,
going forward; global, independent-minded, 21st-century workforce
like ours, I don’t believe something as vital and personal
• grown aggressively in emerging markets; in China,
as values could be dictated from the top.
India, Russia and Brazil we generated revenue of
So, for 72 hours last summer, we invited all 319,000
$3 billion last year and saw double-digit growth;
IBMers around the world to engage in an open
• upped our rate of new account growth, giving us a
“values jam” on our global intranet. IBMers by the
total of 730,000 large, medium and small enterprise
tens of thousands weighed in. They were thoughtful
clients—with IBM’s small-and-medium business
and passionate about the company they want to be a
segment alone growing 14 percent to outperform the
part of. They were also brutally honest. Some of what
market in 2003, adding $2.4 billion in revenue; and
they wrote was painful to read, because they pointed
• incubated successful new high-growth businesses out all the bureaucratic and dysfunctionalthings that
such as life sciences, digital media, application man- get in the way of serving clients, working as a team
agement services, e-business hosting services, Linux or implementing new ideas. But we were resolute in
and pervasive computing—each of which has already keeping the dialog free-flowing and candid. And I don’t
8

===== PAGE 11 =====
CHAIRMAN’S LETTER
think what resulted—broad, enthusiastic, grass-roots To me, it’s also just common sense. In today’s world,
consensus—could have been obtained in any other way. where everyone is so interconnected and interdepend-
In the end, IBMers determined that our actions will ent, it is simply essential that we work for each other’s
be driven by these values: success. If we’re going to solve the biggest, thorniest
and most widespread problems in business and society,
•Dedication to every client’s success
we have to innovate in ways that truly matter. And we
•Innovation that matters, for our company and
have to do all this by taking personal responsibility
for the world
for all of our relationships—with clients, colleagues,
•Trust and personal responsibility in all relationships
partners, investors and the public at large. This is IBM’s
I must tell you, this process has been very meaningful
mission as an enterprise, and a goal toward which
to me. We are getting back in touch with what IBMhas
we hope to work with many others, in our industry
always been about—and always will be about—in
and beyond.
a very concrete way. And I feel that I’ve been handed
something every CEOcraves: a mandate, for exactly the Playing offense
right kinds of transformation, from an entire workforce. Put it all together—a more focused business model,
Where will this lead? It is a work in progress, and an industry shift that plays to our strengths, bets that
many of the implications remain to be discovered. are paying off in the near term, and a workforce that
What I can tell you is that we are rolling up our is united and impatient to become the great company
sleeves to bring IBM’s values to life in our policies, we all aspire to be—and I feel good about IBMand
procedures and daily operations. our prospects.
I’ve already touched on a number of things relating Without the prod of fear or of a “burning platform,”
to clients and innovation, but our values of trust and we’ve begun a substantial transformation of our
personal responsibility are being managed just as seri- company. For the first time in a very long time—
ously—from changes in how we measure and reward probably since my early days with IBM30 years
performance, to how we equip and support IBMers’ ago—I’m seeing a company ready to focus more on
community volunteerism. opportunities than on threats, more intent on setting
Our values underpin our relationships with investors, the agenda than on reacting to the moves of others.
as well. In late February, the board of directors approved Our deep-seated optimism—a fundamental belief that
sweeping changes in executive compensation. They IBMers have always possessed in progress, science
include innovative programs that ensure investors first and the improvability of the human condition—is
receive meaningful returns—a 10 percent increasein reasserting itself. IBMers are ready to reclaim a
the stock price—before IBM’s top 300 executives can position of leadership—in our industry and in the
realize a penny of profit from their stock option grants. larger world of business.
Putting that into perspective, IBM’s market value Which is a very exciting place to be. For me
would have to increase by $17 billion before executives and my colleagues, it’s just terrific to be part of an
saw any benefit from this year’s option awards. In energized IBMcompany that is once again ready
addition, these executives will be able to acquire mar- to play some offense.
ket-priced stock options only if they first invest their
own money in IBMstock. We believe these programs
are unprecedented, certainly in our industry and
perhaps in business.
Clearly, leading by values is very different from some
SAMUEL J. PALMISANO
kinds of leadership demonstrated in the past by busi-
Chairman, President and
ness. It is empowering, and I think that’s much healthier. Chief Executive Officer
Rather than burden our people withexcessive controls,
we are trusting them to make decisions and to act
based on values—values they themselves shaped.
9

===== PAGE 12 =====
In the
company
leaders
of
if you want to understand the changes
21st
shaping global business in the century,
take a look into the corner office.
We’re seeing the rise of a new generation of CEOs, who share a
common point of view about how value is created today, how to
exploit technology for tangible benefit, how to build different kinds
of business relationships—and why those relationships, spanning all
their company’s constituencies, are vital to its success.
You’ll also, more and more, find a leader who is actively driving
the integration of business and technology and changing the way
the organization operates—becoming what we at IBM call an
on demand business.
For IBM, this shared point of view shapes everything we do—
from our work with clients to the way we innovate. We have a new
understanding of the potential for business in the world today. And
we didn’t just think it up on our own.
10

===== PAGE 13 =====
“If you can’t differentiate yourself in
this world, you get commoditized
instantaneously. So we are constantly
driving for more innovation, more
differentiation and more technology.
When I rally people inside GE,
I say, ‘Growth is out there to be had,
but it’s going to be uneven. Unless
you are willing to make investments
in the future, to take steps and stands,
this is not a tide that’s going to raise
every boat. There are going to be
clear winners and losers.’”
Jeffrey R. Immelt
CHAIRMAN AND CEO, GE
Tracing its origin to Thomas Edison’s 1878
electric light company, GE has grown to become
the world’s most valuable company,
with a market capitalization of more than
$132 billion and 315,000 employees.
11

===== PAGE 14 =====
Jorma Ollila
CHAIRMAN AND CEO, NOKIA
“Nokia sees a future where the
mobile phone industry can help
companies mobilize their business
processes, so they can be more
competitive, innovative and flexible,
and where users will enjoy the true
benefits of enterprise mobility—
connection to the people who matter,
and to the data and processes that
matter. Building this future requires
strong industry cooperation and
relies on an open business ecosystem
to implement it successfully.”
Nokia is the world leader in mobile
communications, driving the growth
and sustainability of the broader mobility
industry. Nokia is dedicated to enhancing
people’s lives and productivity by providing
easy-to-use and secure products like
mobile phones, and solutions for
imaging, games, media, mobile
network operators and businesses.
12

===== PAGE 15 =====
Meg Whitman
PRESIDENT AND CEO, EBAY
“eBay is an on demand business.
Our industry is incredibly dynamic,
and we have to be the fastest moving,
most flexible, most single-focused:
a very simple company, actually.
89
We have million customers
24 7
who expect us to be up by , and
their needs are constantly changing.”
AT IBM’S BUSINESS LEADERSHIP FORUM, NOV. 12, 2003
With 971 million listings in 2003, representing
$24 billion in gross merchandise sales, eBay defines
the category of online marketplace. Along with nearly
95 million confirmed registered users, eBay hosts
more than 150,000 stores online and provides
services such as its payment solution, PayPal.
13

===== PAGE 16 =====
Michael L. Eskew
CHAIRMAN AND CEO, UPS
“On demand and synchronized
commerce are about treating every
customer—and for us, every package—
as if it were the only one we have.
13
With million packages a day going
9
to and from million customers, that’s
a tall order. Bringing synchronized
solutions to our customers will allow
the small to act big, the big to act
small, and everyone to act global.”
Founded in 1907, UPS has grown into a $30 billion
corporation, and is a leading global provider of
specialized transportation and logistics services.
UPS operates in more than 200 countries and
territories worldwide. Its innovative digital content
management solution has streamlined and automated
its workflow and approval routing processes.
14

===== PAGE 17 =====
John Chambers
PRESIDENT AND CEO, CISCO SYSTEMS, INC.
“The corporations who win in
the future will be those that
thrive on change. Companies
that build a culture of accepting
change, that build a process
implementation that allows
for rapid change and
standardization are uniquely
positioned to take advantage
of market transitions.”
Cisco Systems, Inc., is the worldwide leader
in networking for the Internet. The IBM
and Cisco strategic alliance provides
our clients with industry-leading, adaptive,
integrated and secure network-enabled solutions
to solve business problems, reduce complexity,
and enhance business opportunities.
15

===== PAGE 18 =====
W. James McNerney, Jr.
CHAIRMAN AND CEO, 3M COMPANY
“The best and most sustainable
innovation occurs where creativity
and customer needs intersect.
Good ideas don’t just leap out
of laboratories—they are called out
by the clear voice of the customer
and need to be reinforced with
the right resources.”
With operations in 60 countries and clients in
more than 200, 3M is one of the United States’
largest global manufacturers and a diversified
technology company that has become an
icon of innovation. Its creativity spans many
markets—from display and graphics to
electronics and communications, health care,
safety, security and protection services,
transportation and beyond.
16

===== PAGE 19 =====
Sir John Bond
HSBC GROUP CHAIRMAN
“HSBC has to be flexible to succeed.
Companies today have to reinvent
themselves constantly. You have to
preserve the best of what’s gone before,
jettison what’s no longer relevant
and build the new. And you have to
maintain your essential character
while doing it.”
HSBC is the world’s second largest
banking and financial services organization.
Its international network, linked by innovative
advanced technology, includes more than
9,500 offices in 79 countries and territories
in Europe, the Asia-Pacific region, the
Americas, the Middle East and Africa—and
serves more than 110 million customers.
17

===== PAGE 20 =====
In the
company
of
innovators
innovation is not just “invention.” It’s
what results when technical invention meets
business insight. And it crosses fields of study,
as well as industries.
What results? New business models. New ways to envision and
build the physical environment. New ways of integrating knowledge
and technology to enhance health and extend life. New ways to
serve clients. New forms of creative expression.
This is how IBM pursues innovation—and this is the kind of
innovation we pursue—every day, in our clients’ workplaces, and in
our own. Together, we apply intelligence, reason and science to make
not just a product or a profit, but a difference. Because, while invention
can be a solitary activity, innovation is always a collaboration.
1188

===== PAGE 21 =====
ibm has been working with the airline industrysince the
top 20 airlines
1960s. Today, 18 of the world’s are ibm clients,
including deltaair lines, air canada, japan airlines and
american airlines.
what are an airline’s assets,
and how do they gener-
ate revenue? There are the fleet and routes, of course—but there is
also a vast and continually growing store of data about travel and
purchase histories. The problem is, this asset has been essentially
Finnair
unused. But what if that data could be analyzed and integrated with
marketing programs and processes to predict buying patterns and
higher math
sales appeal? Customer relationship management would then
become customer equity management. And that would be a whole
new way to run an airline.
That’s how Finnair’s long-term relationship with IBMtook a
new turn this past year, with the deployment of mathematical mod-
eling and optimization algorithms designed by researchers from
IBM’s Zurich Research Lab. Processing frequent-flier data has a
potential impact of reducing marketing costs by 20 percent while
improving marketing response rates by as much as 10 percent. And
that means big money—in increased revenues and in savings.
Still only a prototype, IBM’s Customer Equity Management
solution already has an 80 percent accuracy rate for predicting the
eventual value a customer represents. By forecasting a frequent
flier’s future travel decisions, it’s also helped improve the airline’s
customer satisfaction rate by 10 percent. And all from pulling
numbers out of Finnair.
“With the many ills the airline industry faces today,
and in a highly logistical business, managing processes
by applying technology more widely
and more innovatively is a necessity.”
EERO AHOLA, SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT, CORPORATE BUSINESS
DEVELOPMENT AND STRATEGY, FINNAIR
01. 02.
OTHER DESTINATIONS GETTING UPGRADED
Finnair now uses IBM’s Customer Equity Finnair’s relationship with IBM began decades
Management system to understand its best ago, in the mainframe era. Since 2002, IBM has
customers much more deeply, and to tailor run the airline’s data center operations, as well.
marketing programs to them—even aligning But with Customer Equity Management, IBM
company strategy around their needs. And future and Finnair are taking a whole new trip together.
applications could be broader still—helping make “They’ve gone from being a supplier to being our
decisions about fleet deployment, the allocation data center to being a partner,” says Eero Ahola.
of new routes, and contingency plans for some of “It’s a totally different relationship.”
the most serious challenges facing airlines today.
19

===== PAGE 22 =====
Frank Gehry
thinking outside the box
“This technology provides a way for me to get closer to
the craft. It felt like I’d been speaking a foreign language,
and now, all of a sudden, the craftsman understands me.
In this case, the computer is not dehumanizing;
it’s an interpreter.”
FRANK GEHRY, ARCHITECT
WALT DISNEY CONCERT HALL,
LOS ANGELES
20

===== PAGE 23 =====
replacing boxy buildings
with bold, reflective,
curvilinear designs takes courage and vision—especially when
dealing with large-scale public works.
Master architect Frank Gehry is so excited about the potential
of software to free architects from the constraints of paper, pencil 01.
and two-dimensional design programs that he recently created
Gehry Technologies. This IBM-certified business partner sells the FIRST COMES CREATIVITY…
concept and the software itself to other architects and designers to A crumpled napkin. The movement of water
help them unleash their own creativity. around the bow of a boat. Who knows what will
Gehry was inspired by his experience designing Los Angeles’ spark the creative mind? But the more unusual
the design, the greater the risks. Can it be built?
Walt Disney Concert Hall. Collaborative virtual product design
What will it cost? Will it perform as intended?
software originally developed by IBM and Dassault Systèmes for Innovators like Frank Gehry have embraced new
the aerospace and automotive industries allowed craftspeople to tools to tame this uncertainty principle—and to
understand Gehry’s novel, three-dimensional designs precisely. let their creativity take flight.
With the technology, IBMProduct Lifecycle Management Solutions,
02.
they knew how much material the design required and how the
complex components would come together.
…FOLLOWED BY SAVINGS…
That helped in both creative and pragmatic ways. Removing
uncertainties reduced costs as much as one-third, which proved Complex, free-form surfaces excite designers
and delight the eye. CATIA(computer-aided three-
critical in overcoming a raft of obstacles—from an economic down-
dimensional interactive application) software makes
turn to a major earthquake—standing in the high-profile project’s way. even the most complex and unconventional designs
The result: One of the most acoustically sophisticated concert readily understandable and gives craftspeople
halls in the world, an instant global architectural landmark and the tools they need to fabricate and assemble
components efficiently.
the centerpiece of a $1.2 billion redevelopment project in L.A.’s
downtown Bunker Hill district.
03.
…AND THEN THE APPLAUSE
The Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra per-
formed the first concert in its new home on
October 23, 2003. Music critics marveled at
the concert hall’s acoustics. Architecture critics
praised the “exquisite craftsmanship” of the
“stunning organic sculpture.” One critic pronounced
it a “rhapsody in steel.” Yet another was confident
that, “over time, it will be to Los Angeles what
the Eiffel Tower is to Paris.”
90,000 business partners
in 2003, independentsoftware vendors with whom ibm has a more than worldwide
strategic alliance influenced more than
$10 billion
(consultants, integrators, software vendors, value-added
of ibm services, hardware and software revenue, more than resellers and distributors) generated more than1/3 of ibm’s
double the amountinfluenced in 2001. revenue in 2003.
21

===== PAGE 24 =====
flip a switch,
and thousands of people and buildings
instantly appear. Flip it off, and they go away. On. Off. On. Off.
Sounds like a cartoon, doesn’t it?
For Threshold Digital Research Lab, a digital production
company that’s really in the business of intellectual property man- 01.
agement, it is a cartoon…or a full-length film, a television show, or
THE VIRTUAL STUDIO
a Web site. It’s whatever high-end graphic, animation and special
effects power they need right at that moment. On. Off. Major film studios used to need up to 500 acres
They have all the ITmuscle they need to challenge far larger of sets, props, costumes and characters. Today,
Threshold’s “virtual backlot” is making a feature
competitors without breaking the bank, because this groundbreak-
with more of all of these than the largest epics of
ing studio pays only for the computing capacity as it’s needed—an the past—in a studio of less than 10,000 square
especially attractive pricing model for an entertainment company, feet. And when filming “wraps,” Threshold doesn’t
which faces surges in demand (“opening next week, everywhere”) have to destroy the sets and send its character
actors packing. They remain intact and accessible
and periods of lower-intensity use (“coming next fall to a theater
for modification and future use by other
near you”). Think of it as supercomputing on demand: IBMhosts
Threshold artists.
the computing in New York, and Threshold animators and artists in
California apply their super-creative talents to make the most of it. 02.
Threshold’s upcoming full-length animated feature, Foodfight!,
will include 138 speaking characters, more than 6,000 “extras” ON TIME AND ON BUDGET
and 174 sets with nearly 5,000 buildings—all digital, and all ready Even popular films often lose money simply
for an early call at the flip of a switch, anytime they’re needed. So because they cost too much to make. Threshold’s
despite the complexity of the project, Threshold has been able to on demand e-studio avoids the large permanent
overhead some of its competitors must support.
use IBM’s Deep Computing Capacity On Demand Center to
And it uses human capital just as efficiently.
shorten its production cycle to 18 months—less than a third of Threshold’s core group of animators can tap
the time it takes to produce most animated films. the talents of remotely based colleagues
using industry-standard IBMworkstations.
Chairman and CEOLarry Kasanoff believes
his on demand business model can cut costs
as much as 40 percent.
some customers tap into ibm’s deep computing capacity
on demand center, while others have capacityon demand
sitting in their ibm machines, waiting to be turned on.
in fact, more than
$500 million
of that capacity
$10 billion
on demand was turned on in 2003,with another
stillin the marketplace.
22

===== PAGE 25 =====
Threshold Digital Research Lab
ready for its close-up
LARRY KASANOFF (ABOVE, FAR RIGHT) MEETS WITH MEMBERS OF THE CREATIVE TEAM OF FOODFIGHT!
(OPPOSITE PAGE) A SCENE FROM FOODFIGHT!
“IBM on demand technology is allowing us to
compete against people who may have more resources
than we do, in the following very simple way:
It allows us to make our entertainment
better, faster and cheaper.
The On Demand Center takes away the words,
‘I can’t,’ and makes you say,
‘Hey, I can do anything I can think up.’”
LARRY KASANOFF, CHAIRMAN AND CEO, THRESHOLD ENTERTAINMENT
23

===== PAGE 26 =====
GILFAM
real-time real estate
“We have to set a legal framework in order
to provide a land register available to everybody,
yet we have to satisfy specific conditions,
such as insuring privacy and safeguarding against misuse.”
JEAN-LUC VALLENS, JUDGE, PRESIDENT OF THE PUBLIC
GROUP FOR THE COMPUTERIZATION OF THE LAND REGISTER OF
ALSACE AND MOSELLE (GILFAM)
over the lastfive years, ibm’s business with governments in the united states, ibm hardware, software and services
90 percent
worldwide has more than doubled—growing atarate can be found in more than of federal agencies.
five times
in 2003 more than the industryaverage in
europe, the middle eastand africacombined, and more than
seven times the industry averagein the americas.

===== PAGE 27 =====
in the alsace and moselle
jurisdictions of
eastern France, what worked to ensure the rights of property
owners has worked against the needs of modern business
development.
Local law in the region keeps things very local. Only 01.
original documents can be used for all land title transactions.
Also, the documents may not leave their regions. And their THE MORE THINGS NEED TO STAY THE SAME…
authenticity has to be guaranteed—signed—by the local Land title archives for the three government jurisdic-
judge. The rules are in some ways unique, due in part to the tions that make up GILFAM—Moselle and the Upper
inheritance of regulations and customs from periods of and Lower Rhine divisions of Alsace—go back 300
years and have at different times been written in
Frenchand German sovereignty.
French, German and Gothic German. An elementary
The problem was, owners and mortgage bankers could but necessary step was turning all these deeds—
barely conduct business away from the local courthouse. So 2.5 million sheets of paper in 40,000 registers held
GILFAM, the government bureau that oversees the comput- in 46 registry offices—into digital documents.
As a result of the system created by IBM, the
erization of the land registry for this part of France, worked
transfer of real estate titles will now combine the
with IBMto create a novel system for on demand security and assurance of a secure system with robust user
the authenticity of digitized titles and deeds. The result is authentication, to maintain the registry’s integrity,
useful not just for land registries, but for many other regulatory as required by law. Something a judge has (such as
a hardware token), plus something the judge knows
agencies requiring official approvals and notarizations.
(a personal password), and something the judge
Using smartcards, biometric identification tools and “is” (a biometric pattern like a fingerprint) will
time stamps, judges will be able to sign registry documents produce something everyone can use and trust.
in digital fashion, making them available online for buyers,
builders and lenders as well. The GILFAMregistry and process 02.
have thus been virtualized—one of the keys to making the
…THE MORE THINGS NEED TO CHANGE
business of government on demand.
The project for a computerized land registry (livre
foncier informatisé)is a good example of the integra-
tion of technology and law in effective e-government.
New processes and supporting technology were created
by the IBMteam to support the GILFAM mission, but
new laws had to be passed by the French government
to support the validity of digital signatures and the
authenticity of an e-business registry office.
This model can apply to governments everywhere
as they transform themselves to become on demand.
In the United States, for example, the Food and Drug
Administration has issued regulations that permit
the use of electronic records and digital signatures
in place of paper and handwriting once the outlined
requirements are met. The end result for these
agencies is greater flexibility and efficiency, as
well as easier access for citizens and corporations.
25

===== PAGE 28 =====
in academic circles,
it’s widely known as the
“traveling salesman problem”: Take a finite number of points and
the cost of travel between each pair of them. Then find the most
cost-effective way to visit all the points and return the traveling
salesman to where he started. But for a leading limousine company 01.
serving thousands of traveling salespeople and other professionals
every day, it was a complex business problem, as well. NOW SERVING ATLANTA
When BostonCoach initially asked IBMto install a global- Despite the name, BostonCoach has operations
positioning system, so that its dispatchers could find optimal in nine major cities, with affiliates in more than
routes, it inspired us to see the fleet itself as an organic system. 450 other cities globally and with as many as
1,000 to 1,400 rides per day in its largest markets.
In the process, we rethought how a limo company (with thousands
Normally, establishing service in a new city would
of customers, rides and routes on any given day) could become an require BostonCoach to create a new dispatch
on demand business, with continual response and analysis of data center operating 24 hours a day, 7 days a week,
in the search for maximum efficiency. right at startup. With the efficiencies of the
Fleet Optimization System, in 2003 the
With the solution developed by IBM, the drivers’ assign-
company entered an entirely new market—in
ments are still made by fleet controllers—real people with years Atlanta—by relying completely on its existing
of experience. But the system now uses an algorithm developed dispatch centers.
by IBMresearchers to solve the problem of scheduling. By consid-
ering positioning data, business “rules” and even driver pay rates 02.
and FAAschedules, the Fleet Optimization System maps the
BETTER SERVICE WITH BETTER SCHEDULES
location of drivers and customers and suggests to dispatchers
the best matchups. BostonCoach leads in the van, limousine and
As a result, while other travel companies have experienced sedan service industry for on-time pickup, but
leadership used to come at a cost. Before the
declines in revenue and customer loyalty, BostonCoach is on target
system created by IBM’s On Demand Innovation
to achieve a 20 percent increase in productivity and a 10 percent Services, dispatchers would often turn down
increase in sales. last-minute reservations—or send two cars to
meet a single customer—rather than risk brand-
damaging disappointment. Now, fleet controllers
can accept more business and use cars more
efficiently, with a system that optimizes sched-
ules for three different time scales: daily, every
15 minutes and even several times per minute.
26

===== PAGE 29 =====
on demand innovation services is IBM’s first formal client-focused
arm within IBM Research.clients can access anyof ibm’s
3,000
researchers worldwide who specialize in
business transformation and technologyconsulting.
BostonCoach
your ride is here
“The real differentiation is in the quality
of service that you deliver. More likely than not,
technology initiatives will become a commodity
down the road, so you really want to be
first to market—to get in first
and hook customers.”
RUSS COOKE, PRESIDENT, BOSTONCOACH
27

===== PAGE 30 =====
Mayo Clinic
refining the art of healing
(LEFT) HUGH C. SMITH, M.D., VICE PRESIDENT, AND CHAIR, BOARD OF GOVERNORS, MAYO CLINIC IN ROCHESTER, MINN.
(RIGHT) DENIS A. CORTESE, M.D., PRESIDENT AND CEO, MAYO CLINIC
“Wouldn’t it be marvelous if I knew not just the
exact location of the patient’s cancer but its gene characteristics,
500
and the outcomes with the last patients at Mayo
with cancer in that identical location and with those
identical genetic characteristics?”
DR. HUGH SMITH, MAYO CLINIC
PATIENT RECORD ARCHIVES AT MAYO CLINIC. (NO PATIENT PRIVACY OR
CONFIDENTIALITY WAS COMPROMISED FOR THESE PHOTOGRAPHS.)
28

===== PAGE 31 =====
in three years, Life Sciences has become a$ 1 billion business in the areaof medicaldevices and diagnostics, more than
for ibm, more than doubling revenueeach year since its 60 leading analytical instrument and tools companiesnowbase their
offerings on ibm technology, including ibm middleware,
formation in 2000. newclients include 25 of the top
server platforms and services.
pharmaceuticaland biotechnologycompanies.
01.
2,400 HEADS ARE BETTER THAN ONE
The new system will provide Mayo Clinic’s 2,400
physicians with differing levels of on demand
access to medical data to support diagnoses
and treatment decisions based on information
collected from millions of informed, consenting
patients. To ensure patient privacy and confiden-
for a medical center, tiality are maintained, physicians conducting
loss means something far more research will access only general information
serious than it does for almost any other business. (“a 38-year-old female with a family history of
And the prospect of loss becomes maddening if there’s any heart disease”), while the treating doctor accesses
the records of her specific patient—no matter
possibility information for treatment and cure might already
where those records originated or physically reside.
exist—but be hidden inside archived case files, or in trends across
millions of records, requiring lengthy, expensive studies to uncover.
02.
If only doctors could tap data from consenting patients with
similar epidemiological or genetic makeup, much faster, more FROM MONTHS TO MINUTES
effective, individualized therapy would be possible.
The Mayo Clinic Life Sciences System can perform
Now, with IBM’s help, the world-famous Mayo Clinic is complex, cross-patient correlations across patient
increasing exponentially the ability to sift through their warehouse demographics, diagnostics and laboratory results—
of patient data—and helping doctors make sense of it. As a result, for all of the 4.4 million patient histories in their
vast data warehouse. Medical searches by symp-
medicine can become less about the science of trial-and-error and
tom, patient age, laboratory result, drugs pre-
more about the art of healing. scribed and other factors—searches that once took
It was Mayo Clinic that originally pioneered the idea of months—are completed in a matter of minutes,
collaborative medicine—the joint application of the greatest giving physician investigators the information
they need, where and how they need it, facilitating
medical minds to treat an illness and cure a disease. And now they’ve
discovery and patient care improvement.
expanded that collaborative approach into the realm of patient
histories. Through IBM’s on demand solution, trends and correla- 03.
tives become identifiable—speeding the course of discovery and
enhancing patient care. CHANGING HOW MEDICINE IS PRACTICED
As the understanding of genetics increases,
the system will aggregate patient genomic
information, as well as proteomic data and
research information, from a variety of sources.
This will help quicken the pace of clinical
research, identify likely participants in clinical
trials, help researchers understand illness on a
molecular level, and allow physicians to treat
patients and practice preventive medicine
based on an individual’s own physical makeup.

===== PAGE 32 =====
In the
company
of
visionaries
there is a growing—we think unstoppable—
realization that neither technology nor business
will for long be controlled by a small number
of people or companies. Aside from the obvious
economic advantages of an “open” approach,
there is simply no other way to bring about
the world we envision—the world we need.
The implications are far-reaching and broadly empowering.
Opening access to other people and their information creates
relationships that didn’t exist before, which then become engines
of creation themselves. Crossing barriers—between languages or
even areas of expertise—opens up opportunities for the creation
of new economic, business and societal value.
Connections arise between people and ideas, technologies
and processes—and what started as a commitment or passion just
a few years ago may end up as the leading position. And once
you’re there, it’s good to find out that you’re not alone.
30

===== PAGE 33 =====


===== PAGE 34 =====
32

===== PAGE 35 =====
33

===== PAGE 36 =====
34

===== PAGE 37 =====


===== PAGE 38 =====


===== PAGE 39 =====
37

===== PAGE 40 =====


===== PAGE 41 =====
39

===== PAGE 42 =====
Inthe
company
IBMers
of
A publicly held corporation is a legal entity, but it is also a set of
relationships—between the company’s people and its shareholders,
and among clients, suppliers, distributors, organizations and the
319,000
communities where its people live and work. For IBMers
around the world, relationships are the context for our work,
where collaboration fosters innovation and leads to client success.
2003
In July , tens of thousands of IBMers reexamined their
72
relationship with this company and with each other in a -hour
online discussion that took place via IBM’s global intranet. They
discussed, debated and explored what it means to be an IBMer
today and what needs to change to keep them motivated for
tomorrow. In the end, they shaped and committed to three values
that will guide everything we do.
IBMers value:
• Dedication to every client’s success
• Innovation that matters—for our company and for the world
• Trust and personal responsibility in all relationships
40

===== PAGE 43 =====
report of management
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 42
report of independentauditors
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 42
management discussion
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 43
ROAD MAP_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 43
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 44
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 45
YEAR IN REVIEW_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 51
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 61
LOOKING FORWARD_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 63
EMPLOYEES AND RELATED WORKFORCE_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 69
GLOBAL FINANCING_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 69
consolidated financial statements
EARNINGS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 74
FINANCIAL POSITION_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 75
STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 76
CASH FLOWS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 79
notes to consolidated financial statements
A SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 80
B ACCOUNTING CHANGES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 86
C ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 89
D FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS (EXCLUDING DERIVATIVES) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 92
E INVENTORIES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 93
report
of F FINANCING RECEIVABLES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 93
financials G PLANT, RENTAL MACHINES AND OTHER PROPERTY _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 93
H INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 94
I INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 94
J SALE AND SECURITIZATION OF RECEIVABLES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 95
K BORROWINGS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 95
L DERIVATIVES AND HEDGING TRANSACTIONS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 96
M OTHER LIABILITIES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 99
N STOCKHOLDERS’ EQUITY ACTIVITY_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 100
O CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 101
P TAXES_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 103
Q ADVERTISING AND PROMOTIONAL EXPENSE_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 104
R RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 104
S 2002 ACTIONS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 105
T EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 108
U RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 109
V STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION PLANS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 109
W RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 110
X SEGMENT INFORMATION_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 117
five-year comparison of
selected financial data
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 122
selected quarterly data
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 123
board of directors and
senior executive officers
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 124
stockholder information
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Inside back cover
41

===== PAGE 44 =====
Report of Management
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distributed
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized
management. The accompanying financial statements through internal programs to assure that they are understood
have been prepared in conformity with generally accepted and followed.
accounting principles, applying certain estimates and judg- PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, independent auditors, is
ments as required. retained to examine IBM’s financial statements. Its accom-
IBMmaintains an effective internal control structure. It panying report is based on an examination conducted in
consists, in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly accordance with generally accepted auditing standards,
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of authority, including a review of the internal control structure and tests
and comprehensive systems and control procedures. We of accounting procedures and records.
believe this structure provides reasonable assurance that The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is com-
transactions are executed in accordance with management posed solely of independent, non-management directors,
authorization, and that they are appropriately recorded in and is responsible for recommending to the Board the inde-
order to permit preparation of financial statements in con- pendent auditing firm to be retained for the coming year,
formity with generally accepted accounting principles and to subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain accountability of meets periodically and privately with the independent audi-
assets. An important element of the control environment is tors, with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with
an ongoing internal audit program. IBMmanagement, to review accounting, auditing, internal
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, control structure and financial reporting matters.
we carefully select and train our employees, develop and dis-
seminate written policies and procedures, provide appropriate
communication channels, and foster an environment con-
ducive to the effective functioning of controls. We believe
that it is essential for the company to conduct its business SAMUEL J. PALMISANO JOHN R. JOYCE
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical standards, as Chairman of the Board, Senior Vice President and
set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These President and Chief Executive Officer Chief Financial Officer
Report of Independent Auditors
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of Those statements were audited by other auditors whose
International Business Machines Corporation: report thereon has been furnished to us, and our opinion
In our opinion, based on our audits and the report of other expressed herein, insofar as it relates to the amounts included
auditors, the accompanying consolidated financial state- for the company’s Business Consulting Services Reporting
ments appearing on pages 74 through 121 present fairly, in all Unit, is based solely on the report of the other auditors. We
material respects, the financial position of International conducted our audits of these statements in accordance with
Business Machines Corporation and subsidiary companies at auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
December 31, 2003 and 2002, and the results of their opera- America, which require that we plan and perform the audit
tions and their cash flows for each of the three years in the to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial
period ended December 31, 2003, in conformity with statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes
accounting principles generally accepted in the United examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
States of America. These financial statements are the and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the
responsibility of the company’s management; our responsi- accounting principles used and significant estimates made by
bility is to express an opinion on these financial statements management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
based on our audits. We did not audit the financial state- presentation. We believe that our audits and the report of
ments of the company’s Business Consulting Services other auditors provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Reporting Unit (which includes the consulting practice
acquired from us as discussed in note C) for the year ended
December 31, 2003 and the three months ended December
31, 2002, which statements reflect total revenues of 14.5 per- PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP
cent and 4.3 percent of the related consolidated totals in the New York, New York
periods ended December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. January 15, 2004
42

===== PAGE 45 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
road map
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers
with a view of the company’s results and certain factors
The financial section of the International Business
that may affect future prospects from the perspective of
Machines Corporation (IBM) 2003 Annual Report, consist-
the company’s management. Anew snapshot of the key
ing of this Management Discussion, the Consolidated
messages in the Management Discussion has been added
Financial Statements that follow and the related notes
on page 44 immediately following the Road Map. While
thereto, comprises 81 pages of information. This Road Map
the details of the Management Discussion remain, readers
is designed to provide you with some perspective regarding
will be able to assess quickly the most important and key
the information contained in the financial section and a few
drivers within this brief overview.
helpful hints for reading these 81 pages.
• The Management Discussion was redesigned to reflect
IBM’S BUSINESS MODEL the company’s continued and improving strength in
IBM’s business model is built to support two principal goals: providing broad client solutions, as opposed to a “piece
helping clients become more efficient and competitive parts” conglomeration of many hardware, software and
through the use of business insight and information tech- services businesses. The Description of Business begin-
nology (IT) solutions; and providing long-term value to ning on page 45 (introduced in the 2002 Annual Report),
shareholders. In support of these objectives, the business Results of Continuing Operations on page 51, Financial
model has been developed over time through strategic Position on page 57, and Looking Forward on page 63
investments in services and technologies that have the best sections, all are now written from the perspective of the
long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the consolidated entity. Detailed analysis for each of the com-
value they deliver to clients. In addition, IBMis committed pany’s segments follows the consolidated perspective and
to its employees and the communities in which it operates. appears on pages 55 t0 57.
The model is designed to allow for flexibility and periodic
• Aseparate Global Financing section beginning on page 69
rebalancing, as demonstrated with the 2002 acquisition of
(introduced in the 2002 Annual Report) is retained and
PricewaterhouseCoopers’ (PwC) consulting business (PwCC),
not included in the consolidated perspective that is
the acquisition of Rational Software Corp. (Rational) in
referred to above. This section was separately retained
2003, and the 2002 divestiture of the company’s hard disk
given its unique impact on the company’s financial condi-
drive (HDD) business.
tion and leverage.
The company’s portfolio of capabilities ranges from serv-
• The Liquidity and Capital Resources section beginning on
ices that include business transformation consulting to soft-
page 64 was expanded to provide greater insight on the
ware, hardware, fundamental research, financing and the
strength and factors affecting the company’s liquidity.
component technologies used to build larger systems. These
capabilities are combined to provide business insight and
HELPFUL HINTS
solutions in the enterprise computing space. Organization of Information
In terms of financial performance, over the last two years,
• This Management Discussion section provides the
IBMincreased its participation in the high-growth areas of
reader of the financial statements with a narrative on the
its industry, while at the same time maintaining a breadth of
company’s financial results. It contains the results of
capabilities that has allowed it to gain market share during
operations for each segment of the business, followed by
weak economic environments. In general, this strategy
a description of the company’s financial position, as
results in less volatile returns overall, because each individual
well as certain employee data. It is useful to read the
capability has unique financial attributes. Some involve con-
Management Discussion in conjunction with note X,
tractual long-term cash and income streams while others
“Segment Information,” on pages 117 through 121.
involve cyclical transaction-based sales.
• Pages 74 through 79 include the Consolidated Financial
In terms of marketplace performance—i.e., the ability to
Statements. These statements provide an overview of the
deliver client value—it is important to understand that the
company’s income and cash flow performance and its
fundamental strength of this business model is not found in
financial position.
the breadth of the portfolio alone, but in the way the com-
pany creates business solutions from among its capabilities • The notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements.
and relationships. Among other things, the notes contain the company’s
accounting policies (pages 80 to 86), detailed information
TRANSPARENCY on specific items within the financial statements, certain
Transparency is a primary goal of successful financial reporting. contingencies and commitments (pages 101 to 103), and
The following are additional improvements you will find in the results of each IBMsegment (pages 117 to 121).
this year’s Annual Report:
43

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
• The selected reference to constant currency in the CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Management Discussion is made so that the financial The increase in IBM’s 2003 Income from continuing oper-
results can be viewed without the impacts of changing for- ations and diluted earnings per share from continuing
eign currency exchange rates and therefore facilitates a operations as compared to 2002 was due to:
comparative view of business growth.
• The results of the company’s productivity and efficiency
initiatives, including the benefits from the 2002
Discontinued Operations
Microelectronics and productivity actions
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its HDDbusiness
to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). The HDDbusiness was accounted • Stronger demand associated with the improving economy
for as a discontinued operation under generally accepted (especially during the fourth quarter) and continued mar-
accounting principles (GAAP). This means that 2002 and 2001 ket share gains
income statement and cash flow information were reformatted • The charges recorded in 2002 for the 2002 actions
to separate the divested business from the company’s con-
• Favorable impact of currency translation, partly offset by
tinuing operations. This presentation is required by GAAP
related hedging activities
and facilitates historical and future trend analysis of IBM’s
continuing operations. On page 92, the company discusses The increase in revenue in 2003 as compared to 2002 was
this transaction and the accounting for the divestiture. due to:
• Stronger demand associated with the improving economy
management discussion snapshot (especially during the fourth quarter) and continued market
share gains
(dollars and shares in millions except per share amounts) • The impact of the fourth quarter 2002 acquisition of
YR. TO YR. PwCCand the first quarter 2003 acquisition of Rational,
PERCENT/
MARGIN partially offset by decreases in revenue due to Technology
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Group divestitures
Revenue $«««89,131 $«81,186 9.8% *
• The favorable impact from currency translation
Gross profit margin 37.0% 37.3% (0.3)pts.
Total expense and With regard to the way that management reviews the busi-
other income $«««22,144 $«22,760 (2.7)%
ness, as-reported and constant currency revenue trends were
Total expense and
all positive for most of the company’s segments, geographies
other income to
and industry sectors. See page 51 for the summary trend rates
revenue ratio 24.8% 28.0% (3.2)pts.
on an as-reported and constant currency basis, as well as such
Provision for
income taxes $«««««3,261 $«««2,190 48.9% information for each segment on pages 55 to 57.
Income from Gross profit margins remained relatively flat. Increases in
continuing operations $«««««7,613 $«««5,334 42.7% Hardware and Software margins resulting from the ongoing
Earnings per share benefits from the company’s integrated supply chain initiatives
from continuing and favorable currency translation were offset by decreases
operations:
in Global Services margins driven primarily by investment
Assuming dilution $«««««««4.34 $«««««3.07 41.4%
costs on the early stages of a Strategic Outsourcing (SO)
Basic $«««««««4.42 $«««««3.13 41.2%
contract and the company’s changing mix of revenue toward
Weighted-average
Business Consulting Services (BCS).
shares outstanding:
As discussed above, there were several charges in 2002
Assuming dilution 1,756.1 1,730.9 1.5%
that impacted the year-to-year expense comparison. These
Basic 1,721.6 «1,703.2 1.1%
items contributed 2.8 points of the improvement in the Total
Assets** $«104,457 $«96,484 8.3%
expense and other income-to-revenue ratio. The remaining
Liabilities** $«««76,593 $«73,702 3.9%
improvement was primarily due to the results of productivity
Equity** $«««27,864 $«22,782 22.3%
and efficiency initiatives partially offset by an increase in
* 2.8 percent at constant currency retirement-related plans cost.
**at December 31
44

===== PAGE 47 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The company’s effective tax rate increased by almost 1 point In its relationships with its clients, IBMhas found that a
primarily due to a less favorable mix of geographic income majority of enterprises are concerned with four main issues:
and the absence of the tax benefit associated with the
• Demand for faster innovation
Microelectronics actions taken in the second quarter of 2002.
• Reducing expenses
With regard to Total Assets, approximately $7 billion of
the increase relates to the impact of currency translation. • Integration across the organization’s “value chain” (repre-
The remaining increase primarily consists of an increase in senting every transaction or interaction within an enterprise,
Goodwill associated with recent acquisitions and increased with other enterprises and with individuals)
pension assets, as well as strong cash performance. The • Demand for predictable return on investment
increase in cash during 2003 was due to the combination of
By redesigning their business processes and organizational
stronger operating results and lower pension funding in
structure, supported by and enabled by new systems operat-
2003. The company reduced non-Global Financing debt in
ing environments, these clients are seeking to become on
2003 as a result of strong 2003 cash flows from operations.
demand businesses.
Global Financing debt decreased, but the company’s Global
IBM defines an on demand business as an enterprise
Financing debt-to-equity ratio remained flat at 6.9 to 1 and
whose business processes are:
within the company’s target range.
Looking forward, the company’s business model targets • Responsive to any client demand, market opportunity or
revenue to grow in the mid to high single digits and earnings external threat;
per share to grow at low double digits over the long term. • Integrated end-to-end across the company; and
The company’s ability to meet these objectives depends on a
• Integrated across industry value nets, interconnected chains
number of factors, including those outlined on page 50 and
of partners, suppliers and clients.
on pages 101 and 102.
Global Services signings were $55 billion in 2003 as com- An essential aspect of an on demand operating environment
pared to $53 billion in 2002. The Global Services backlog is is that its infrastructure is based on industry-wide standards
$120 billion at December 31, 2003. (commonly referred to as “open standards”). In IBM’s view,
an investment in such an infrastructure provides the greatest
returns rather than relying on proprietary control by a single
description of business
company or affiliation of companies. One positive devel-
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-Kfiled on or about opment in this regard is the emergence of “open source”
March 8, 2004, with the Securities and Exchange Commission operating systems and programming languages that benefit
(SEC) for a more detailed version of this Description of Business, from further development by the business and ITcommuni-
especially the detailed “Significant Factors Affecting IBM’s ties, as in the case of the Linux operating system or the Java
Business” section. programming language.
IBMfocuses on the intersection of business insight and However, to realize the full benefits of an on demand
technological innovation for enterprise clients. environment, solutions with the highest returns also require
Over the past decade, IBMhas been a leader in the IT the transformation and integration of business processes
market’s shift of focus from selling hardware, software and within and among institutions.
services, to the creation of solutions to clients’ business IBM’s clients include many different kinds of enterprises,
problems. During the early years of the Internet’s entry into from sole proprietorships to the world’s largest organizations,
mainstream commerce, communications and business oper- governments and companies representing every major
ations in the mid- to late- 1990s, value was created first industry and endeavor. Over the last decade, IBMhas exited
through providing widespread access and then through the or greatly de-emphasized its involvement in consumer markets
integration of business processes, such as supply chain, and divested itself of other non-core businesses to concentrate
client relationships and human resources. Today, IBMis once on the enterprise market. In IBM’s view, the enterprise market
again leading the industry toward the more fundamental, represents approximately two-thirds of the IT industry’s
industry-specific transformations of on demand business. revenue, as well as twice the growth and three times the
45

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
profits compared to consumer areas of the industry. As a Business Value
result, IBMhas made acquisitions and invested in emerging overview
business opportunities important to its enterprise clients. Services and software to improve business performance for
Many of these investments have since grown to a point Enterprise Computing clients. IBM helps its Enterprise
where their revenue and opportunity now can be considered Computing clients transform their business processes and
part of IBM’s mainline businesses. The majority of the com- gain competitive advantage by applying its skills and experi-
pany’s enterprise business, which excludes the company’s ence to processes specific to the client’s industry or to business
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology busi- challenges across industries and processes. The company
ness, occurs in industries that are broadly grouped into six enters into long-term relationships and creates solutions for
sectors around which the company’s sales and distribution clients, on its own or in partnership with other companies,
activities, as well as an increasing number of its services and drawing upon its broad product and service offerings, and
products businesses are organized: relying on its BCS organization, the capabilities of IBM
Research, its experience in chip design and application, and
SECTOR INDUSTRIES
the company’s own viewpoint of developing trends in business
Financial Services Banking and technology.
Financial Markets
strategy
Insurance
Drive on demand business innovation.
Public Education
capabilities
Government
Business Consulting Services – Delivery of value to clients
Health Care
through consulting services for application innovation and
Life Sciences
systems integration, client relationship management, financial
Industrial Aerospace
management, human capital, business strategy and change,
Automotive
supply chain management and the transformation of business
Defense
processes and operations. (Global Services)
Chemical and Petroleum
Electronics Customer financing – Lease and loan financing to clients and
internal clients for terms generally between two and five years.
Distribution Consumer Products
(Global Financing)
Retail
Travel Engineering & Technology Services (E&TS) – System and com-
Transportation ponent design services, strategic outsourcing of clients’ design
teams, and technology and manufacturing consulting services.
Communications Energy and Utilities
(Technology Group)
Media and Entertainment
Telecommunications On Demand Innovation Services (ODIS) – IBMResearch scien-
Small & Medium Business The majority of businesses tists and experts work with BCS consultants to analyze
in this sector have fewer clients’ business challenges and provide solutions that
than 1,000 employees address these challenges. ODIS offers a number of cross-
industry micropractices with deep expertise in business
optimization, security, mobile enablement, information
THE IT INDUSTRY AND IBM’S STRATEGY
mining and more. (Global Services)
IBM operates in both the business services and IT indus-
tries, which comprise the following three categories: Software and services to meet industry-specific needs – Solutions
and applications built on an on demand, standards-based
• Business Value
infrastructure to transform a process that is unique to
• Infrastructure Value
specific industries. (All IBMGroups)
• Component Value
The primary rationale for IBM’s investments in the Compo- Infrastructure Value
nent Value category is to provide a competitive advantage in overview
the Infrastructure Value category, which in turn is consid- Hardware, software and services integrated into a comput-
ered a competitive advantage in the Business Value category. ing environment. Infrastructure Value concerns systems,
IBM sees a shift in revenue and profit growth up from such as high-volume server computers; middleware software
Component Value to Infrastructure Value and into the that can interconnect disparate operating systems and applica-
Business Value category, where revenue and profit potential tions with data; storage networks; and devices. It also refers
are thought to be greatest in the decade ahead. to such services as infrastructure management—whether on
46

===== PAGE 49 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
the client’s premises or managed remotely at IBM’s own Rational software – Integrated tools designed to improve an
facilities—and consulting about how to improve and organization’s software development processes and capabili-
strengthen the infrastructure and realize greater return on ties. (Software)
investment in it. Central to IBM’s approach for building value Remarketing – The sale and lease of used equipment (primarily
in the infrastructure category is its support of open standards sourced from the conclusion of lease transactions) to new or
and its active promotion of Linux, the open source operating existing clients. (Global Financing)
system, which helps IBM’s clients control costs and allows
Retail Store Solutions – Point-of-sale retail checkout equip-
them to benefit from the latest developments created by the
ment, software and solutions. (Personal Systems Group)
Linux development community around the world. To support
Servers – IBMeServer systems using IBMoperating systems
Linux development and deployment, IBM has enabled its
(zSeries and iSeries), as well as AIX, the IBMUNIXoperat-
servers and storage products to operate with Linux, IBM’s
ing system (pSeries) and the Microsoft Windows operating
leading middleware products are designed to work in a Linux
system (xSeries). All servers can also run Linux, a key open-
environment, and Linux is a preferred choice for many of the
source operating system. (Systems Group and Software).
company’s services and consulting engagements.
strategy Storage – Data storage products, including disk, tape and
storage area networks. IBMcontinues to be a leading vendor
Deliver open and integrated offerings; expand partnerships;
in storage services. (System Group)
continue to exit select markets, such as application software.
Strategic Outsourcing Services – Competitive cost advantages
capabilities
through the outsourcing of processes and operations.
Application Management Services – Application development,
(Global Services)
management, maintenance and support services for pack-
aged software, as well as custom and legacy applications. Tivoli software – Software for infrastructure management,
including security, change, configuration, job scheduling,
(Global Services)
storage capability, performance and availability. (Software)
Commercial financing – Short-term inventory and accounts
receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of ITprod- WebSphere software – Management of a wide variety of business
processes using open standards to interconnect applications,
ucts. (Global Financing)
data and operating systems. (Software)
DB2 information management software – Advanced database
and content management software solutions that enable Component Value
clients to leverage information on demand. (Software) overview
e-business Hosting Services – Solutions for the management of Component Value describes advanced semiconductor devel-
clients’ Web-based infrastructure and business applications, opment and manufacturing for IBM’s server and storage
as well as a growing portfolio of industry-specific independent offerings, and services, technology and licenses provided to
software vendor (ISV) solutions that are delivered as a service. OEMs that create and market products requiring advanced
(Global Services) chips and other core technology elements.
Integrated Technology Services (ITS) – Design, implementation strategy
and maintenance of clients’ technology infrastructures. Leverage components for Infrastructure Value; and continue
(Global Services) to participate in select markets and to pursue outsourcing
for manufacturing of select products.
Lotus software – Collaboration and messaging software that
allows a company’s employees, clients, vendors and partners capabilities
to engage in real-time and asynchronous communication and Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASICs)– Manufacturing
knowledge management. (Software) of customized semiconductor products for clients.
Personal computers – Desktop and notebook computers featur- (Technology Group)
ing ThinkVantage technologies that provide enterprises and Advanced Foundry – Full suite of semiconductor manufactur-
end users with increased productivity and cost-effectiveness. ing and integrated supply chain services using either a
(Personal Systems Group) client’s or IBM’s design. (Technology Group)
Printing Systems – Production print solutions, on demand Standard products and custom microprocessors – Semiconductors
print-related solutions, enterprise workgroup print technolo- designed and manufactured primarily based upon IBM’s
gies,and print management software and services. (Personal PowerPC architecture. (Technology Group)
Systems Group)
47

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
BUSINESS SEGMENTS Personal Systems Groupincludes the company’s lines of personal
Organizationally, the company’s major operations comprise a computers, printers and point-of-sale terminals. These
Global Services segment; three hardware product segments— offerings are designed to assist clients to improve productivity
Systems Group, Personal Systems Group and Technology and to reduce clients’ total cost of ownership.
Group; a Software segment; and a Global Financing segment.
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating
See the ITIndustry and IBM’s Strategy section on pages 46
systems software. Middleware software enables clients to
and 47 for the specific capabilities relating to these busi-
integrate systems, processes and applications across the
ness segments.
clients’ enterprises through the use of open standards.
Global Servicesis an important part of the company’s strategy Middleware is designed to be the underlying support for
of providing insight and solutions to clients. While solutions applications provided by ISVs who build industry- or
often include industry-leading IBMsoftware and hardware, process-specific applications according to open industry
other suppliers’ products are also used if a specific client standards. Operating systems are the engines that run com-
solution requires it. Global Services outsourcing contracts as puters. Approximately 70 percent of Software volumes are
well as BCScontracts with the U.S.federal government and
directly with the end-user clients and about 20 percent are
its agencies are typically seven to ten years in duration. Other
through Business Partners. While appropriately not reported
contracts range in periods generally up to one year, including
as external revenue, the remainder is deployed internally to
consulting contracts and ITS.
support Global Services solutions.
The company’s new Business Transformation Outsourcing
Approximately 40 percent of external Software revenue
(BTO) capabilities combine the insight of BCS with the
relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements whereby the
company’s process outsourcing capabilities to assume responsi-
client pays one up-front payment for a lifetime license.
bility for the operations and management of a client’s business
Typically, arrangements for the sale of OTCsoftware include
processes in areas including human resources,procurement,
one year of maintenance. The client can also purchase ongo-
customer relationship management, finance and administra-
ing maintenance after the first year, which includes product
tion, among others. The company will only enter into BTO
upgrades and technical support. The remaining software is
agreements with clients when it believes that IBMcan lever-
sold on a monthly license charge arrangement.
age its business knowledge and technology to drive client
productivity and cost improvements. These generally are Global Financing is described on pages 69 to 73.
large-scale, multiyear contracts ranging up to ten years in
Enterprise Investments develops and provides industry-
length that include the operation, strategic change and
specific ITsolutions supporting the Hardware, Software and
transformation of the client’s business processes. BTO
Global Services segments of the company. Primary product
engagements may include support and involvement of
lines include product life cycle management software and
various business units that have capabilities such as BCS,
document processing technologies. Product life cycle man-
Application Management Services, e-business Hosting
agement software primarily serves the Industrial sector and
Services, middleware and hardware.
helps clients manage the development and manufacturing of
Systems Groupprovides business solutions to clients. Approxi- their products. Document processor products service the
mately half of the Systems Group’s sales transactions are Financial Services sector and include products that enable
through business partners and approximately 46 percent are electronic banking.
direct to clients, slightly more than half of which are through
the Web at ibm.com. While appropriately not reported as IBM WORLDWIDE ORGANIZATIONS
external revenue, hardware is also deployed to support Global The following three company-wide organizations play key
Services solutions. roles in IBM’s delivery of value to its clients:
• Sales & Distribution Organization and related sales
Technology Groupprovides leading semiconductor technology
channels
and products, packaging solutions and engineering technol-
ogy services to OEMclients (approximately 78 percent) and, • Research, Development and Intellectual Property
although appropriately not reported as external revenue, to • Supply Chain
the Systems Group (approximately 21 percent).
Using a “one-team” approach, Systems Group works Sales & Distribution Organization
hand-in-hand with the Technology Group on product plan- IBM offers its products through its Global Sales &
ning and strategy, given the high content level of Technology Distribution organizations. Consistent with IBM’s focus on
Group components inside Systems Group products. In Business Value, the company’s global corps of account repre-
recognition of the increasing degree of collaboration between sentatives combine a deep understanding of each client’s
the two segments and as discussed on page 118, the company organizational and industry-specific needs with comprehen-
combined the Systems Group and the Technology Group in sive knowledge of the products, technologies and services
the first quarter of 2004. offered by IBMand its network of business partners.
48

===== PAGE 51 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
IBM also offers its products through a variety of other and the culture of IBM’s R&D organization to be more
internal and external channels. Four of these channels com- closely linked to and be primarily driven by industry-specific
prise IBM’s Business Partner relationships, through which and client-specific needs. Significant successes have been
the company receives approximately one-third of its revenue. achieved by this changing focus, such as autonomic computing
and Linux developments, as previously mentioned.
internalroutes-to-market
In addition to producing world-class products and solu-
Global Services consultants – Particularly in selling end-to-end
tions for the company’s clients, the company’s investments in
solutions for large, complex business challenges, IBM very
R&Dalso result in intellectual property (IP) income. Some
often relies on the practitioners and consultants within its
of IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in
Global Services unit, as these challenges generally require
IBM products, while others are used by the company’s
integrating services and on demand solutions from IBMand
licensees for their products when that new technology is not
other suppliers.
strategic to IBM’s business goals. Athird group is both used
Hardware and software brand specialists – IBM’s own hardware
internally and licensed externally.
and software brand product specialists work face-to-face
In addition to these IP income sources, the company
with clients, selling IBM platforms as part of a discrete
also generates value from its patent portfolio through cross-
technology platform decision, typically to “self-integrating”
licensing arrangements and IPlicensed in divestiture trans-
ITdepartments.
actions. Cross-licensing arrangements involve licensing of
ibm.com – Online and telephone sales and assistance operations the company’s IPto a third party in exchange for the right to
handle basic commodity transactions for large enterprises use the third party’s IP. The value of these other two sources
and small-to-medium businesses. is not readily apparent in the financial results on pages 54
business partners routes-to-market and 74 due to the fact that income on cross-licensing
arrangements is recorded only to the extent cash is received.
Global/major independent software vendors – ISVs deliver busi-
The value received by IBMfor IPtransferred in divestiture
ness process or industry-specific applications and, in doing
transactions is included in the overall gain or loss from the
so, often influence the sale of IBM hardware, middleware
divestiture, not in the separately displayed IP income
and services.
amounts on pages 54 and 74.
Global/major systems integrators (SIs) – SIs identify business
problems and design solutions when Global Services is not Supply Chain
the preferred systems integrator; they also sell computing Just as IBMworks to transform its clients’ supply chains for
infrastructures from IBMand its competitors. greater efficiencies and responsiveness to market conditions,
Regional ISVs and SIs – SIs identify the business problems, IBM has undertaken a large-scale initiative to recast IBM’s
and ISVs deliver business process or industry-specific appli- own supply chain as an on demand business operation, thereby
cations to medium-sized and large businesses requiring IBM turning what had previously been a cost/expense to be
computing infrastructure offerings. managed, into a strategic advantage for the company and,
ultimately, for its clients.
Solutions providers, resellers and distributors – Resellers sell
IBM spends nearly $39 billion annually in its supply
IBMplatforms and value-added services as part of a discrete
chain, procuring materials and services around the world.
technology platform decision to clients wanting third-
Prior to 2002, the company’s supply, manufacturing and
party assistance.
distribution operations were spread across its product
Research, Development and Intellectual Property brands and service offerings. These are now integrated in
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differen- one operating unit that can:
tiate IBMfrom its competitors. IBMannually spends approx- • Understand and respond to marketplace opportunities
imately $5 billion for R&D, including capitalized software and external risks, as well as the needs of clients, employ-
costs, focusing its investments in high-growth opportunities. ees and partners
Recent such efforts include e-business, initiatives to support
• Convert fixed costs to variable costs
Linux, middleware software products, autonomic computing,
advanced semiconductor technology and other technologies • Simplify and streamline internal operations to improve
sales force productivity and processes and thereby, contin-
supporting on demand. As a result of innovations in these
uing to improve the experiences of the company’s clients
and other areas, IBM was once again awarded more U.S.
patents in 2003 than any other company. This marks the 11th when working with IBM
year in a row that IBMachieved this distinction. • Reduce inventories
Akey transformation that has been taking place over the
past decade and continues today is the change in the focus
49

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The cost savings this unit generates provide two oppor- cost-effective workforce structure, and continuing to make
tunities for the company: directly improve financial results, the company’s compensation programs competitive and
mostly through improved gross profit margins, or improve aligned with organizational units. The degree of continued
competitiveness and market share by passing some or all of success in this area will impact the amount of company
the cost savings to clients. Accordingly, the cost savings gen- expense and cost structure improvements, as well as the
erated by this unit will not always result in a dollar-for-dollar amount of competitive leverage it can apply by passing such
apparent gross margin improvement in the company’s savings along to clients.
Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Technology Innovations
While these efforts are largely concerned with product
IBMinvests for new and innovative products and services.
manufacturing and delivery, IBM is also applying supply
IBMhas been moving away from commoditized categories
chain principles to service delivery across its solutions and
of the ITindustry and into areas in which it can differentiate
services lines of business.
itself through innovation, and by leveraging its investments
By the end of 2003, the work of transforming and integrat-
in R&D. Examples include IBM’s leadership position in the
ingits supply chain resulted in the lowest inventory levels for
design and fabrication of ASICs; the design of smaller, faster
IBMin more than 20 years.
and energy-efficient semiconductor devices (using industry-
In addition to its own manufacturing operations, the
leading innovations such as copper technology, silicon on
company uses a number of contract manufacturing (CM)
insulator, silicon germanium, low-K dielectric and nano-
companies around the world to manufacture IBM-designed
technology); the design of “autonomic” or self-managing
products. The use of CMcompanies is intended to generate
computing systems and “grid” computing networks that allow
cost efficiencies and reduce time-to-market for certain IBM
computers to share processing power; and the company’s
products. Some of the company’s relationships with CM
efforts to advance open technology standards such as Linux.
companies are exclusive. The company has key relationships
In the highly competitive ITindustry with large diversified
with Sanmina-SCIfor the manufacture of many Intel-based
competitors as well as smaller and nimble single-technology
products and with Solectron for a significant portion of the
competitors, IBM’s ability to continue its cutting-edge
manufacturing operations of Global Asset Recovery
innovation is critical to maintaining and increasing market
Services—an operation of Global Financing that restores
share. IBM is managing this risk by more closely linking its
end-of-lease personal computers and other ITequipment for
R&D organization to industry-specific and client-specific
resale. Further, some IBM-branded products are manufac-
needs, as discussed on page 49.
tured by third-party OEMs and then purchased by IBMand
resold under the IBMbrand.
Open Standards
The broad adoption of open standards is essential to the
KEY BUSINESS DRIVERS
computing model for e-business on demand. Without the
Economic Environment and Corporate ITSpending Budgets
open standards that enable all manner of computing platforms
If overall demand for hardware, software and services
to communicate and work with one another, the integration
changes, whether due to general economic conditions or a
of any client’s internal systems, applications and processes
shift in corporate buying patterns, sales performance could
remains a monumental and expensive task. The broad-based
be impacted. IBM’s diverse portfolio of products and offerings
acceptance of open standards—rather than closed, proprietary
is designed to gain market share in strong and weak economic
architectures—also allows the computing infrastructure to
climates. The company accomplishes this by not only having
more easily absorb new technical innovations. IBM is
a mix of offerings with long-term cash and income streams as
committed to fostering open standards because they benefit
well as cyclical transaction-based sales, but also by developing
clients, because they are vital to the on demand computing
competitive products and solutions, and by effectively man-
model, and because their acceptance will expand growth
aging a skilled resource base.
opportunities across the entire business services and IT
Internal Business Transformation and Efficiency Initiatives industry. IBM’s support is evidenced by the enabling of its
Key to the success of IBM’s strategy are its ongoing efforts to products to support open standards such as Linux, as well as
drive greater productivity and cost savings as IBMcontinues its recent acquisition of Rational. Rational’s software devel-
to transform itself into an on demand enterprise. Integral to opment tools can be used to develop and upgrade any other
these efforts will be the internal supply chain initiatives dis- company’s software products. Accordingly, this acquisition is
cussed above as well as the company’s efforts to manage the a critical part of IBM’s open standards strategy.
cost of its resources worldwide. These efforts will continue
to include the rebalancing of skills, developing the most
50

===== PAGE 53 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
year in review
RESULTS OF CONTINUING OPERATIONS
Revenue
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
PERCENT
YR. TO YR. CHANGE
PERCENT CONSTANT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE CURRENCY
Statement of Earnings Revenue Presentation:
Global Services $«42,635 $«36,360 17.3% 9.3%
Hardware 28,239 27,456 2.9 (2.9)
Software 14,311 13,074 9.4 1.9
Global Financing 2,826 3,232 (12.6) (17.6)
Enterprise Investments/Other 1,120 1,064 5.2 (2.9)
Total $«89,131 $«81,186 9.8% 2.8%
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
PERCENT
YR. TO YR. CHANGE
PERCENT CONSTANT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* CHANGE CURRENCY
Industry Sector:
Financial Services $«22,323 $«19,799 12.8% 4.8%
Public 13,977 12,171 14.8 8.5
Industrial 11,763 10,320 14.0 6.3
Distribution 8,079 7,751 4.2 (1.9)
Communications 8,009 7,406 8.1 1.5
Small & Medium 19,809 17,371 14.0 6.0
OEM 2,634 3,350 (21.4) (21.8)
Other 2,537 3,018 (15.9) (17.3)
Total $«89,131 $«81,186 9.8% 2.8%
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
PERCENT
YR. TO YR. CHANGE
PERCENT CONSTANT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE CURRENCY
Geographies:
Americas $«38,078 $«36,423 4.5% 3.7%
Europe/Middle East/Africa 29,102 24,260 20.0 3.1
Asia Pacific 19,317 17,153 12.6 5.1
OEM 2,634 3,350 (21.4) (21.8)
Total $«89,131 $«81,186 9.8% 2.8%
Revenue for all industry sectors increased in 2003 on an as- Full-year geographic revenue increased across all geogra-
reported basis. The Financial Services sector, Public sector phies. In the Americas, U.S.and Canada, revenue grew as did
and Industrial sector were among the strongest, with continued Latin America, notably in Brazil. In Europe/Middle East/
growth in the Small & Medium Business sector. These results Africa, revenue performance was highest in the U.K.,
reflect the company’s go-to-market strategy of designing Central Europe and Middle East and Africa. In Asia Pacific,
industry-specific solutions. See the discussion on page 52 for 2003 revenue for Japan, which is 60 percent of the
the decrease in OEM. The decline in Other sector revenue region’s revenue, increased compared with 2002, while the
was due to a decrease in customer revenue not allocated to Australia/New Zealand and ASEAN regions achieved the
an industry sector and other adjustments. strongest performance.
51

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
While OEMrevenue, representing three percent of the Gross Profit
company’s revenue, declined, such decline was smaller than
YR. TO YR.
the prior year decline. The year-to-year percent change in FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
revenue reflects, in large part, the company’s exit from its Gross Profit Margin:
interconnect products business in 2002, as well as sluggish Global Services 25.2% 26.3% (1.1) pts.
demand from certain OEMclients. Hardware 27.8 27.1 0.7
The increase in Global Services revenue was driven by Software 86.5 84.4 2.1
SO, as a result of new signings, as well as BCS, as a result of Global Financing 55.8 56.2 (0.4)
the acquisition of PwCCin the fourth quarter of 2002. For Enterprise Investments/
Other 43.4 42.6 0.8
Hardware, Systems Group revenue increased as pSeries
servers, xSeries servers, zSeries servers and Storage System Total 37.0% 37.3% (0.3) pts.
revenue increased in 2003 versus 2002. pSeries server revenue
The decline in Global Services margin was due to invest-
increased due to increased demand for both low-end servers
mentcosts during the early stages of an SOcontract and the
and high-end servers. xSeries server revenue increased due
company’s changing mix of revenue toward BCS. These
to continued success in the company’s new blade server
decreases were partially offset by an increase in gross margin
offerings. Storage revenue increased due to increased
for Maintenance due to lower labor and parts costs and
demand for external disk and tape products. zSeries server
benefits from the 2002 productivity actions.
revenue increased as total deliveries of computing power as
The increase in Hardware margin was achieved by cost
measured in MIPS (millions of instructions per second)
improvements in zSeries and pSeries primarily due to the new
increased more than 28 percent in 2003 versus 2002. This
product announcement of the z990 server and increased
increase was offset by lower average price per MIPSin 2003
demand associated with the pSeries high-end servers. xSeries
versus 2002. Personal Systems Group revenue increased.
servers also increased as a result of cost improvements and
Increases in mobile personal computer revenue were offset
the success of the company’s blade strategy. In addition,
by lower revenue for desktop personal computers reflecting
Technology Group margin increased primarily due to the
industry-wide price pressures. The decline in Technology
productivity and cost savings resulting from the 2002
Group revenue in 2003 was primarily due to divestitures in
Microelectronics actions taken in the second quarter of 2002.
the Technology Group in 2002 as well as sluggish demand
The Software margin increased due to growth in Software
from certain OEM clients. With respect to Software,
revenue principally as a result of currency translation.
improved demand helped to drive middleware revenue
The decrease in the Global Financing margin was driven
increases. The WebSphere family of products, Data
by a mix change toward lower margin remarketing sales and
Management DB2database software, and Tivoli security and
away from financing income, partially offset by lower bor-
storage software were middleware software categories with
rowing costs related to the current interest rate environment.
revenue growth. Operating system software increased due to
The cost savings generated by IBM’s supply chain initiatives
the favorable impact of currencies. Offsetting these
also contributed to the company’s overall margin improvement,
increases were lower demand for DB2tools,Lotus advanced
but as discussed on pages 49 and 50, the company will and has
collaboration software and other middleware. Overall, the
passed a portion of the savings to clients to improve competi-
increase in total Software revenue was mainly due to the
tive leadership and gain market share in key industry sectors.
acquisition of Rational in the first quarter of 2003. The
decline in Global Financing revenue in 2003 versus 2002 was Expense
primarily a result of lower interest rates and the decline in
(dollars in millions)
the average asset balance primarily driven by lower origina- FOR THE YEAR YR. TO YR.
tions in prior years. See pages 69 to 73 for additional infor- ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Total expense and
mation regarding Global Financing results.
other income $«22,144 $«22,760 (2.7)%
The following table presents each segment’s revenue as a
E/R 24.8% 28.0% (3.2)pts.
percentage of the company’s total.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 The Total expense and other income expense-to-revenue ratio
declined 3.2 percentage points to 24.8 percent in 2003 versus
Global Services 47.8% 44.8%
2002. This decline was a result of revenue increasing by 9.8 per-
Hardware 31.7 33.8
cent in 2003 versus 2002, while Total expense and other income
Software 16.1 16.1
declined 2.7 percent in 2003 versus 2002 due primarily to pro-
Global Financing 3.2 4.0
ductivity and efficiency initiatives, and the 2002 actions par-
Enterprise Investments/Other 1.2 1.3
tially offset by an increase in retirement-related plan costs. For
Total 100.0% 100.0% additional information regarding the decline in Total expense
and other income, see the following analyses by category.
52

===== PAGE 55 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
sg&a
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Selling, general and administrative expense:
Selling, general and administrative—base $«15,826 $«14,557 8.7%
Advertising 1,406 1,427 (1.5)
Workforce reductions—ongoing 454 300 51.3
Bad debt 205 673 (69.5)
2002 actions (39) 1,489 NM NM
Acquisition-related charges—PwCC — 292 NM NM
Total $«17,852 $«18,738 (4.7)%
NM—not meaningful
Total SG&A expense decreased 4.7 percent (9 percent at These decreases were partially offset by higher expenses
constant currency) in 2003 primarily due to ongoing produc- resulting from 2003 having a full year of expenses for PwCC
tivity and efficiency initiatives, including the related benefit (acquired in the fourth quarter of 2002) and the expense asso-
associated with the 2002 actions. In addition, the decrease ciated with Rational, which was acquired during the first
was due to the absence in 2003 of charges for the 2002 quarter of 2003. Included in these expenses is the amortization
actions recorded in 2002. The 2002 actions, principally of intangible assets relating to PwCCand Rational. Despite
workforce reductions, comprise the Microelectronics and these higher expenses associated with acquisitions, the
productivity actions taken in the second quarter of 2002 as expense-to-revenue ratio for the SG&A-base category declined
well as the fourth quarter 2002 actions related to the acqui- from 2002 to 2003 (17.9 percent to 17.8 percent, respectively)
sition of PwCC. See pages 105 through 107 for additional due, in part, to the benefits associated with the 2002 pro-
information on the 2002 actions. In addition, Bad debt ductivity actions. The amount of Workforce reductions—
expense declined in 2003 versus 2002 reflective of the ongoing will vary from year to year depending upon needed
increased provision the company recorded in 2002 to reflect skills, the competitive landscape and economic conditions. The
the general economic environment as well as exposure in 2002 amount excludes workforce reductions that took place
specific sectors, particularly the Communications sector. in the second quarter of 2002. These 2002 second-quarter
These issues have stabilized and contributed to the lower workforce reductions were recorded in the 2002 actions
year-to-year bad debt charges. amount above. See note S, “2002 Actions,” on pages 105 to 107.
other (income) and expense
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Other (income) and expense:
Foreign currency transaction losses/(gains) $«411 $÷(39) NM NM
Interest income (152) (127) 19.7%
Net realized gains on sales of securities and other investments (54) (63) (14.3)
Writedowns of impaired investment assets 50 58 (13.8)
Net realized losses/(gains) from certain real estate activities 16 (66) (124.2)
2002 actions 2 513 NM NM
Other (35) (49) (28.6)
Total $«238 $«227 5.0%
NM—not meaningful
Other (income) and expense in 2003 versus 2002 was generally transaction losses/ (gains) relate primarily to losses on certain
flat. Foreign currency transaction losses/(gains) increased as hedge contracts offset by gains on the settlement of foreign
the dollar weakened against other currencies. This increase currency receivables and payables. See pages 67 and 68 for
was more than offset by the absence of 2002 actions, prin- additional discussion of currency impacts on the company’s
cipally losses associated with the exiting of a business and financial results.
the vacant space accruals in 2002. The foreign currency
53

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
research, developmentand engineering
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Research, development and engineering:
Total $«5,077 $«4,750 6.9%
The increase in Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense in 2003 versus 2002 was primarily the result of
Software acquisitions.
intellectualpropertyand custom developmentincome
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Intellectual property and custom development income:
Sales and other transfers of intellectual property $÷÷562 $««««511 10.0%
Licensing/royalty-based fees 338 351 (3.7)
Custom development income 268 238 12.6
Total $«1,168 $«1,100 6.1%
IPand custom development income increased in 2003 versus 2002. The timing and amount of Sales and other transfers of IP
may vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing of new patents and know-how development, timing of
divestitures, economic conditions and industry consolidation. There were no 2003 agreements that individually had income
of more than $100 million.
interestexpense
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Interest expense:
Total $«145 $«145 0.0%
Interest expense is presented in Cost of Global Financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related external
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. See pages 72 and 73 for additional information regarding
Global Financing debt and interest expense.
Retirement-Related Benefits
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost/(income) for all retirement-related plans. Cost/(income) amounts are included
as an addition to/reduction of, respectively, the company’s cost and expense amounts in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of the individuals participating in the plans.
(dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Retirement-related plans—cost/(income):
Defined benefit and contribution pension plans—cost/(income) $«««27 $«(619) NM NM
Nonpension postretirement benefits costs 335 371 (9.7)%
Total $«362 $«(248) NM NM
NM—not meaningful
54

===== PAGE 57 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
On January 1, 2003, the company reduced its expected SEGMENT DETAILS
long-term return assumption on the U.S. IBM Personal The following is an analysis of the 2003 versus 2002 external
Pension Plan’s (PPP) assets from 9.5 percent to 8 percent. On segment results. The analysis of 2002 versus 2001 external
December 31, 2002, the company lowered its discount rate segment results is on pages 61 and 62.
assumption from 7 percent to 6.75 percent, and lowered its
Global Services
rate of compensation increase from 6 percent to 4 percent.
Reductions in these rates also occurred in certain non-U.S. (dollars in millions)
countries. The company voluntarily fully funded the tax- YR.
TO YR.
qualified portion of the PPP, as measured by its accumulated FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* CHANGE
benefit obligation, through a contribution of cash and IBM Global Services Revenue: $«42,635 $«36,360 17.3%
stock totaling $3,963 million in the fourth quarter of 2002.
Strategic Outsourcing $«17,124 $«14,995 14.2%
These assumption changes and funding action had the col-
Business Consulting 12,955 9,424 37.5
lective net effect of causing the reduction in the Retirement-
Integrated Technology 7,099 6,871 3.3
related plans—cost/(income) amount displayed on page 54.
Maintenance 5,457 5,070 7.6
See the Looking Forward section on page 64 for the impact
of assumption changes on the 2004 Retirement-related *Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
plans—cost/(income). Also see pages 110 to 117 for addi-
Global Services revenue increased 17.3 percent (9.3 percent
tional information relating to the company’s retirement-
at constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002. SO revenue
related plans including assumptions and method used to
increased in 2003 primarily driven by new signings. SOcon-
determine assumptions.
tinued to demonstrate its competitive advantage in delivering
on demand solutions by leveraging its business transformation
Provision for Income Taxes
skills and its scale during 2003. e-business Hosting Services,
The provision for income taxes resulted in an effective tax
an offering that provides Web infrastructure and application
rate of 30.0 percent for 2003, compared with the 2002 effec-
management as an Internet-based service, continued its
tive tax rate of 29.1 percent. The increase in the effective tax
strong pattern of revenue growth. BCSrevenue increased in
rate in 2003 versus 2002 was primarily due to a less favorable
2003 due to the acquisition of PwCCin the fourth quarter of
mix of geographic income and the absence of the tax benefit
2002. ITSrevenue increased due to the favorable impact of
associated with the Microelectronics actions taken in the
currency movements. During 2003, the company changed its
second quarter of 2002.
reporting for certain OEM hardware sales to IBM clients
Weighted-Average Common Shares from gross to net revenue treatment based upon a review of
the terms of these sales. The company determined that the
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE agent-like characteristics of these transactions were more
appropriately recorded on a net revenue basis. Due to the
Earnings per share from
continuing operations: amounts involved, the prior year amounts were not adjusted.
Assuming dilution $«««««4.34 $«««««3.07 41.4% As a result of this change in 2003, revenue and costs for ITS
Basic 4.42 3.13 41.2 were lower by $279 million in 2003 as compared to 2002,
Weighted-average shares partially offsetting the currency impact discussed above.
outstanding: (in millions) This change had no impact on the company’s gross profit
Assuming dilution 1,756.1 1,730.9 1.5% dollars, net income or cash flows.
Basic 1,721.6 1,703.2 1.1 (dollars in millions)
YR. TO YR.
The average number of common shares outstanding assuming FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
dilution was higher by 25.2 million shares in 2003 versus Global Services:
2002. The increase was primarily the result of the company’s Gross profit $«10,732 $«9,548 12.4%
use of common shares to fund a portion of its fourth quarter Gross profit margin 25.2% 26.3% (1.1)pts.
2002 contribution to the PPPand common shares associated
with the acquisition of PwCC, partially offset by the
company’s common share repurchase program. See note N,
“Stockholders’ Equity Activity,” on pages 100 and 101 for
additional information regarding the common share activities.
Also see note T, “Earnings Per Share of Common Stock,” on
page 108.
55

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The Global Services gross profit dollars increased primarily 2002. This increase was offset by lower average price per
due to the corresponding increase in revenue. The gross MIPSin 2003 versus 2002. The zSeries servers are often an
profit margin declined due to investment costs on the early integral part of clients’ restructuring into an on demand
stages of an SO contract and the company’s changing mix environment. Revenue from the iSeries servers increased in
toward BCS. These decreases in the gross profit margin were all four quarters of 2003 when compared to 2002. An impor-
partially offset by the benefit from the 2002 productivity tant competitive differentiator for this platform is its ability
actions, as well as an increase in the gross margin for Main- to consolidate and integrate heterogeneous workloads.
tenance, due to lower labor costs, as a result of improved Storage Systems revenue increased due to growth in external
product serviceability and increased automation, as well as disk and tape products.
lower parts costs. Personal Systems Group revenue increased 3.1 percent
(down 2.5 percent at constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002.
Hardware
Revenue from mobile personal computers increased due to
(dollars in millions) strong demand and was offset by lower desktop personal
YR. TO YR. computer revenue. The decreased desktop revenue prima-
PERCENT
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE rily reflects the fact that increased volume gains were not
Hardware Revenue: $«28,260 $«27,630 2.3% enough to offset a reduction in price due to decreasing com-
Systems Group $«14,002 $«12,646 10.7% modity costs.
zSeries 7.4 Technology Group revenue declined 27.0 percent
iSeries 7.1 (27.5 percent at constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002
pSeries 12.5 driven by actions taken in 2002 to refocus and redirect its
xSeries 16.8 Microelectronics business to the high-end foundry, ASICs
Storage Systems 9.8 and standard products, while creating a new technology
Personal Systems Group 11,387 11,049 3.1 services business. These actions included the divestiture of
Personal Computers 3.5 multiple non-core businesses. See pages 105 and 106 for addi-
Retail Store Solutions 9.3 tional information. There was also sluggish demand from
Printer Systems (2.7) certain OEM clients that contributed to this decline. The
Technology Group 2,871 3,935 (27.0) Technology Group’s advanced technologies provide the
Microelectronics (28.6) Systems Group with a competitive advantage in performance
Engineering & and cost, drivers for the Systems Group’s strong performance.
Technology Services 65.6 See page 118 for a discussion of the first quarter 2004 com-
Other (41.2) binationof the Systems Group and the Technology Group.
(dollars in millions)
Systems Group revenue increased 10.7 percent (3.3 percent
YR. TO YR.
at constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002 driven by xSeries FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
server products due to growth in sales of high-volume Hardware:
servers supported by strong growth in blades. The company Gross profit $«8,136 $«7,399 10.0%
is now the industry leader in blade servers and just recently Gross profit margin 28.8% 26.8% 2.0pts.
announced the industry’s most powerful 4-way blade solution
at close to one-fourth the size of the competitors’ offerings.A Hardware gross profit dollars and gross profit margin
blade is an independent server with its own processors, increased in 2003 versus 2002. The increases were primarily
memory, storage, network controllers, operating system and driven by increases in Technology Group and Systems
applications. Blade servers slide into the bays in a single Group, and a more favorable mix of revenue toward the
chassis, sharing power, fans, floppy drives, switches and Systems Group, which has a higher gross profit margin than
ports with other blade servers, thereby reducing the cost of the other Hardware groups. The increase in Technology
ownership by making it easier for clients to maintain the Group was primarily due to the productivity and cost savings
machines. The pSeries server revenues increased due to resulting from the 2002 Microelectronics actions taken in
strong demand for the 64-bit POWERsystems across both the second quarter of 2002. The Systems Group gross margin
the low-end and high-end server offerings. The company increases were due to improvements across most products,
expects to gain market share in both the xSeries and pSeries as a result of improved component costs partly attributable
server businesses. to the company’s supply chain initiatives and reduced inven-
Revenue from the zSeries servers increased. The total tory losses.
delivery of zSeries computing power as measured in MIPS
increased more than 28 percent in 2003 as compared to
56

===== PAGE 59 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Software The increase in Operating system software revenue
correlates to the increases in the related eServer increases.
(dollars in millions)
YR. (dollars in millions)
TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* CHANGE YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Software Revenue: $«14,311 $«13,074 9.4%
Software:
Middleware $«11,242 $«10,117 11.1%
Gross profit $«12,384 $«11,031 12.3%
WebSphere family 11.8
Gross profit margin 86.5% 84.4% 2.1pts.
Data Management 4.7
Lotus 0.9 The increase in the Software gross profit dollars and gross
Tivoli 12.0 profit margin was primarily driven by the growth in Software
Rational NA revenue and the positive impact from currency.
Other middleware 5.5
Operating systems 2,450 2,307 6.2 Global Financing
Other 619 650 (4.7) See page 70 for a discussion of Global Financing’s revenue
and gross profit.
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
Enterprise Investments
Software revenue increased 9.4 percent (1.9 percent at con-
Revenue from Enterprise Investments increased 4.2 percent
stant currency) in 2003 versus 2002, especially for Middleware
(down 5.1 percent at constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002.
software products. The WebSphere family of software offerings
The decline was attributable to demand for product life-cycle
revenue increased as clients continue to focus on the higher
management software in the European market, especially in
function products that integrate Web-based applications,
the automotive and aerospace industries.
including advanced collaboration technology, on a user’s
Gross profit dollars increased 12.9 percent and gross
desktop. The lower-function WebSphere application server
profit margin increased 3.4 percentage points to 43.6 percent
continued to commoditize. Improved demand was also
noted for Data Management DB2database software. Revenue in 2003 versus 2002 primarily driven by the growth in product
life-cycle management software attributable to the positive
from Tivoli products increased as clients continue to realize
effects from currency.
the on demand attributes of Tivoli products, enabling busi-
nesses to securely automate many of their processes and gain
FINANCIAL POSITION
operational efficiencies. Operating system software revenue
Dynamics
increased due to the favorable impacts of currency move-
The assets and debt associated with the company’s Global
ments. Offsetting these increases were lower demand for
Financing business are a significant part of IBM’s financial
DB2 tools, Lotus advanced collaboration software and
condition. Accordingly, although the financial position
Other middleware software. Anew Lotus messaging plat-
amounts appearing below and on pages 58 and 59 are the
form became generally available during the 2003 fourth
company’s consolidated amounts including Global Financing,
quarter and helped to drive momentum in the Lotus Notes
to the extent the Global Financing business is a major driver
family of products toward the end of 2003. Overall, the
of the consolidated financial position, reference in the nar-
increase in total Software revenue was mainly due to the
rative section will be made to the separate Global Financing
acquisition of Rational in the first quarter of 2003. When
section in this Management Discussion on pages 69 to 73.
compared to the separately reported 2002 external revenue
The amounts appearing in the separate Global Financing
amounts for Rational, its revenue increased approximately
section are supplementary data presented to facilitate an
6 percent in 2003.
understanding of the company’s Global Financing business.
The company’s momentum with ISVs has continued to
build as 155 partnership agreements were signed in 2003. Working Capital
These ISVs have committed to open standards and to lead
(dollars in millions)
with platforms such as DB2, WebSphere, Linux and eServer. AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002*
The company is rapidly evolving its Middleware business,
Current assets $«44,998 $«41,722
including sales, marketing, development and ISV pro-
Current liabilities 37,900 34,220
grams, to a greater focus on industry solutions and business
Working capital $«««7,098 $«««7,502
transformations.
Current ratio 1.19:1 1.22:1
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
57

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Current assets increased $3,276 million due primarily to and a $397 million true-up for the 2002 acquisition of PwCC)
an increase of $1,672 million in Cash and cash equivalents than in 2002 (primarily a $2,852 million net cash payment for
and Marketable securities. See the Cash Flow analysis below. PwCC) and a decrease in capital expenditures as the com-
In addition, short-term receivables increased $1,565 million pany completes its 300 millimeter semiconductor facility.
due to currency impacts. These increases were offset by the reduction in cash
Current liabilities increased $3,680 million due primarily received from divestitures ($97 million in 2003 versus $1,233
to a $1,546 million increase in Deferred income primarily million primarily for the HDD divestiture in 2002). The
from the impact of foreign currencies, an $830 million increase in cash used in financing activities in 2003 com-
increase in Accounts payable driven primarily by the impact pared to 2002 was primarily the result of a reduction of debt,
of foreign currencies and the company’s outsourcing of some increased stock repurchases and dividends during 2003.
of its manufacturing, which changed the timing and amount
Non-Current Assets and Liabilities
of related accounts payable, a $615 million increase in Short-
term debt (primarily associated with the Global Financing (dollars in millions)
business, see pages 72 and 73), as well as a $743 million increase YR.
TO YR.
in Other accrued expenses and liabilities driven by increases AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* CHANGE
in short-term derivatives that are in a liability position.
Non-current assets $«59,459 $«54,762 8.6%
Long-term debt 16,986 19,986 (15.0)
Cash Flow
Non-current liabilities
The company’s cash flow from operating, investing and
(excluding debt) 21,707 19,496 11.3
financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated State-
ment of Cash Flows on page 79, are summarized in the table *Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
below. These amounts include the cash flows associated with
The increase in Non-current assets during 2003 was prima-
the company’s Global Financing business. See pages 69 to 73.
rily due to the $2,423 million increase in Prepaid pension
(dollars in millions) assets associated with net periodic pension income (see
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 pages 110 to 117) as well as a $1,015 million impact due to for-
Net cash provided by/(used in) eign currencies and a $2,806 million increase in Goodwill,
continuing operations: which was primarily driven by the acquisition of Rational, as
Operating activities $«14,569 $«13,788 discussed on pages 89 and 90. These increases were partially
Investing activities (5,122) (6,897) offset by the decrease of $699 million in Long-term financ-
Financing activities (7,798) (7,265) ing receivables (see pages 69 through 73) due to lower origi-
Effect of exchange rate changes nations in sales type leases and lower amounts outstanding
on cash and cash equivalents 421 148
of syndicated loans.
Net cash used in discontinued
Long-term debt decreased $3,000 million primarily driven
operations* (162) (722)
by the decrease in non-Global Financing debt (see below).
Net change in cash and cash
Other non-current liabilities increased $2,211 million pri-
equivalents $«««1,908 $«««««(948)
marily due to a $1,036 million increase in Retirement and
*Does not include approximately $97 million in 2003 and $1,170 million in 2002 of net nonpension postretirement benefit obligations, a $384 mil-
proceeds from the sale of the HDD business. Such proceeds are included in Net cash
lion increase in non-current deferred taxes and a $433 million
provided by investing activities in the table above.
increase in non-current Deferred income. The increase in
Net cash provided by operating activities for the year ended
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obliga-
December 31, 2003 increased as compared to 2002. This
tions was primarily attributable to the required accounting for
increase was driven primarily by lower pension contributions
the unfunded status of the non-U.S.pension plans as discussed
of approximately $1.6 billion and improved cash results from
on pages 110 through 115, as well as accrued pension costs and
operations represented by the combined effect of improved
foreign exchange impact. The increase in both non-current
profitability and accounts payable management. These
deferred taxes and non-current Deferred income was prima-
increases were partially offset by lower cash generated by the
rily attributable to the impact of foreign currencies.
Global Financing business (see discussion on pages 69 to 73)
in 2003 and lower cash received from the monetization of Debt
interest rate swaps in 2003 as compared to 2002. The mone- The company’s funding requirements are continually moni-
tization of interest rate swaps did not affect net income. tored and strategies are executed to manage the company’s
The decrease in cash flows in investing activities during overall asset and liability profile. Additionally, the company
2003 was primarily attributable to fewer acquisitions in 2003 maintains sufficient flexibility to access global funding
(primarily a $1,042 million net cash payment for Rational sources as needed.
58

===== PAGE 61 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions) CONSOLIDATED FOURTH QUARTER RESULTS
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
(dollars and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Total company debt $«23,632 $«26,017 YR. TO YR.
Non-Global Financing debt* ««««««368 «««2,189 FOR FOURTH QUARTER: 2003 2002 CHANGE
Non-Global Financing debt/ Revenue $«25,913 $«23,684 9.4% *
capitalization 1.5% 10.2% Gross profit margin 38.4% 38.8% (0.4)pts.
Total expense and
*Non-Global Financing debt is the company’s total external debt less the Global Financing
other income $«««6,097 $«««6,479 (5.9)%
debt described in the Global Financing balance sheet on pages 70, 72 and 73.
Total expense and other
During the fourth quarter of 2002, the company increased income-to-revenue ratio 23.5% 27.4% (3.9)pts.
its non-Global Financing debt to position itself for potential Provision for
year-end pension funding levels and the possible acquisition income taxes $«««1,162 $««««««801 45.0%
of Rational, especially given the cash paid for PwCCduring Income from continuing
operations $«««2,716 $«««1,911 42.2%
the 2002 fourth quarter. Based upon the strong cash flows
Earnings per share from
from operations in 2003, the company reduced non-Global
continuing operations:
Financing debt.
Assuming dilution $«««««1.56 $«««««1.11 40.5%
Equity Basic $«««««1.59 $«««««1.12 42.0%
Weighted-average shares
(dollars in millions)
outstanding:
YR. TO YR.
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 CHANGE Assuming dilution 1,745.7 1,728.7 1.0%
Stockholders’ equity: Basic 1,708.5 1,699.1 0.6%
Total $«27,864 $«22,782 22.3%
*0.8 percent increase at constant currency
The company’s total consolidated Stockholders’ equity Continuing Operations
increased $5,082 million during 2003 primarily due to an The increase in IBM’s fourth quarter 2003 Income from
increase in the company’s retained earnings partially offset continuing operations and diluted earnings per share from
by the company’s ongoing stock repurchase program and continuing operations as compared to the fourth quarter of
higher dividend payments. 2002 was due to:
• The increased demand for the company’s offerings as a
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
result of the reviving economy as well as the company’s
The company, in the ordinary course of business, entered
market share gains
into off-balance sheet arrangements as defined by the SEC
• The charges recorded in the fourth quarter of 2002 asso-
Final Rule 67 (FR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s
ciated with the acquisition of PwCC(approximately half
Discussion and Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet
of the increase)
Arrangements and Aggregate Contractual Obligations,”
including: certain guarantees, indemnifications and retained • Favorable impact of currency translation partly offset by
interests in assets transferred to an unconsolidated entity for related hedging activity
securitization purposes.
The following is an analysis of external segment results.
None of these off-balance sheet arrangements either has,
or is reasonably likely to have, a material current or future The company achieved Global Services signings of over $17
effect on financial condition, changes in financial condition, billion, including three over $1 billion, and additionally, 18
revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capital over $100 million. Included were several key signings for the
expenditures or capital resources. See pages 65 and 66 for the company’s relatively new BTObusiness, which totaled nearly
company’s contractual obligations. $3 billion in signings. Global Services revenue increased 8.3
See note O, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages percent (1 percent decrease at constant currency). The
102 and 103, for detailed information about the company’s decline at constant currency was mainly due to lower BCS
guarantees on certain loans and financial commitments, revenue as the positive impact of the economy had not yet
indemnification arrangements and loans receivable securiti- driven increased corporate spending in this area by year-end.
zation program. Although 2003 fourth quarter BCSrevenue declined year-to-
year, its BTOsignings are a positive sign for the unit’s future
prospects as well as the fact that revenue for the unit
increased sequentially from third quarter to fourth quarter.
59

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The company’s Systems Group revenue grew 17.5 percent The decline in the company’s Total expense and other
(8 percent at constant currency) driven by zSeries main- income was due to the $574 million pre-tax charge primarily
frames and xSeries servers. zSeries revenue increased due to associated with the fourth quarter 2002 acquisition of PwCC.
the successful introduction of the z990 products that This decline was partially as offset by increases in expenses
include additional memory capabilities, I/O channels, attributable to the newly acquired businesses (primarily
processors and secure-key cryptography. zSeries volumes Rational). The company’s expense-to-revenue ratio improved
increased 62 percent as measured in MIPScompared to the by 3.9 points, of which 2.4 points were associated with the
2002 fourth quarter. xSeries revenues increased due to the absence in the 2003 fourth quarter of the pre-tax charge that
company’s successful blade strategy. Increased demand was incurred in the 2002 fourth quarter. The remaining
drove higher revenue for pSeries and Storage. iSeries rev- 1.5 point improvement is associated with additional produc-
enue was generally flat. tivity and efficiency initiatives partially offset by the
Technology Group revenue declined 19.5 percent (20 per- increased expenses associated with the acquired businesses.
cent at constant currency) primarily driven by the impact of On specific expense items, retirement-related plans resulted
divestitures in 2002. Personal Systems Group revenue in $169 million of additional expense in the 2003 fourth
increased 15.9 percent (8 percent at constant currency) due quarter due to the net impact of assumption changes and
primarily to higher demand for personal computers, particu- contributions at year end 2002. The provision for doubtful
larly mobile products, as increased volumes more than offset accounts was $144 million lower in the 2003 fourth quarter
reductions in prices. due to the stabilization of the general economy and
Software revenue increased 11.8 percent (2 percent at specific client issues over the past twelve months.
constant currency) primarily due to continued strength in The company’s 2003 fourth quarter effective tax rate
demand for WebSphere, DB2Database and Tivoli middle- was 30.0 percent as compared to 29.5 percent in the 2002
ware products, as well as the acquisition of Rational. fourth quarter.
Rational, acquired during the 2003 first quarter, surpassed Share repurchases totaled approximately $3.1 billion in
expectations and yielded 28 percent revenue growth over its the fourth quarter. The weighted-average number of diluted
separately reported results for the 2002 fourth quarter. common shares outstanding in the quarter was 1,745.7 billion
Operating system revenue increased due to the favorable compared with 1,728.7 billion in the 2002 fourth quarter,
impact of currency movements. higher by 17.0 million shares. The increased amount of
Global Financing revenue declined 11.5 percent (18 percent shares was driven primarily by additional diluted shares
at constant currency) due primarily to lower interest rates related to the company’s higher share price compared with
and a lower average asset base. Given the unit’s annuity-like the prior-year period, and additional shares issued in con-
business, lower originations in years prior to 2003 resulted in junction with the company’s acquisition of PwCC and the
lower revenue in 2003. funding for the company’s PPPin the fourth quarter 2002,
The company’s gross profit margin declined slightly and offset by the company’s ongoing common share repurchase
was driven by declines in Global Services, Hardware and program in the fourth quarter of 2003.
Global Financing, partially offset by Software. In Global The company generated higher cash flows from opera-
Services, a 1.5 point decline was due to continued price pres- tions in the 2003 fourth quarter as compared to the 2002
sures given current industry demand, higher investment fourth quarter primarily due to the strong financial results
costs associated with the early stages of an SOcontract, and described above, as well as lower pension funding in the fourth
the rescoping of several outsourcing contracts. In Hardware, quarter of 2003 as compared to the fourth quarter of 2002.
margins were flat in Systems Group and up in Technology The company also reduced capital expenditures as it com-
Group, offset by a 3 point decline in the Personal Systems pletes the 300 millimeter semiconductor facility. Finally, the
Group driven by increased warranty costs associated with company repurchased $3,069 million in shares during the
desktop products and industry-wide price declines. The 2003 fourth quarter ($3,010 million was settled in cash and
decline in Global Financing margins of 3 points was driven by the remainder was reflected in accounts payable and will be
a mix change toward lower margin remarketing sales away settled in 2004). This compared with $74 million in shares
from financing income. repurchased during the 2002 fourth quarter.
60

===== PAGE 63 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
prior year in review
was essentially the same in 2002 as compared to 2001. Asia
Pacific’s revenue performance was slowed by a weak economy
(dollars and shares in millions except per share amounts)
in Japan (over 60 percent of Asia Pacific revenue), although
YR. TO YR.
FOR THE YEAR DECEMBER 31: 2002 2001 CHANGE revenue growth was achieved in the ASEAN region.
Revenue $«81,186 $«83,067 (2.3)% * Europe/Middle East/Africa’s revenue increased 1.1 percent,
Gross profit margin 37.3% 38.4% (1.1)pts. although it declined 4 percent at constant currency, primarily
Total expense and due to weakness in the U.K., France and Germany, offset by
other income $«22,760 $«20,439 11.4% good performance in Italy.
Total expense and other
The following is an analysis of external segment results.
income-to-revenue ratio 28.0% 24.6% 3.4pts.
Provision for
Global Services
income taxes $«««2,190 $«««3,304 (33.7)%
Revenue increased 4.0 percent (3 percent at constant cur-
Income from
rency) to $36,360 million as a result of the fourth quarter
continuing operations $«««5,334 $«««8,146 (34.5)%
2002 acquisition of PwCCinto the company’s BCSbusiness.
Earnings per share from
continuing operations: SOrevenue increased despite the economic downturn given
Assuming dilution $«««««3.07 $«««««4.59 (33.1)% its annuity-like characteristics. ITSrevenue also increased
Basic $«««««3.13 $«««««4.69 (33.3)% due to increased deployment of network hardware and
Discontinued operations: connectivity services, business continuity services and
Loss $«««1,755 $««««««423 NM NM OEMalliances. The PwCCacquisition accounted for all of
Diluted earnings BCS’s revenue increase. The company signed $53 billion of
per share $««««(1.01) $««««(0.24) NM NM services contracts in 2002, an increase of $2 billion versus
Basic earnings 2001. The estimated services backlog at December 31, 2002,
per share $««««(1.03) $««««(0.24) NM NM was $112 billion.
Weighted-average
shares outstanding: Hardware Segments
Assuming dilution 1,730.9 1,771.2 (2.3)% Revenue declined 10.5 percent (11 percent at constant cur-
Basic 1,703.2 1,733.3 (1.7)% rency) to $27,630 million and is more sensitive to changes in
Assets** $«96,484 $«90,303 6.8% the economy and corporate IT spending levels relative to
Liabilities** $«73,702 $«66,855 10.2% Global Services. Systems Group revenue declined 8.0 per-
Equity** $«22,782 $«23,448 (2.8)% cent (10 percent at constant currency) across zSeries, iSeries,
pSeries and storage, although zSeries MIPS deliveries
* 2.9 percent decrease at constant currency
increased 6 percent compared to 2001. xSeries also increased
**at December 31
NM—not meaningful as the company launched its blade offerings. Personal
Systems Group revenue declined 7.8 percent (9 percent at
CONTINUING OPERATIONS constant currency) for the same reasons cited above.
Income from continuing operations and diluted earnings
Technology Group revenue declined 23.6 percent (23 percent
per share from continuing operations each declined over 30
at constant currency) primarily due to divestiture of multi-
percent in 2002 as compared to 2001. Over half of the
ple, non-core businesses during the year, including display
decline was attributable to after-tax charges of $1.2 billion
and card manufacturing.
and $433 million associated with the 2002 second quarter
Microelectronics and productivity actions and the charges Software Group
related to the 2002 fourth quarter acquisition of PwCC, Revenue increased 1.0 percent (flat at constant currency) to
respectively. The remainder of the decline was primarily due $13,074 million. The company noted two trends in 2002.
to lower corporate spending on IT. Sector revenue in 2002 First, clients were spending more time on the selection
declined across all client sectors compared to 2001 with the process for software solutions and second, clients were more
exception of the Public sector, which had strong growth in a inclined to negotiate smaller software arrangements, which
continuing tough economic climate. The Small & Medium are perceived to provide a faster return on investment. The
Business sector gained traction despite the economy, reflect- company’s focus on client base expansion offset these two
ing the company’s increased focus on this client sector. trends. Modest growth in middleware products, particularly
Geographic revenue declines were due to lower corpo- in Data Management, WebSphere and Tivoli, offset declines
rate spending on IT given the economic trends prevalent in operating system revenue, which is somewhat dependent
from 2001 to 2002. Such declines were experienced in the on hardware volumes.
Americas compared with 2001, whereas Asia Pacific revenue
61

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Global Financing $3,963 million contribution to the PPPas well as an increase
See pages 69 through 73 for prior year review of Global in Goodwill primarily driven by the acquisition of PwCC.
Financing. Cash decreased almost $1 billion from December 31, 2001
to December 31, 2002. The primary drivers of the decrease
Enterprise Investments
were the $2.9 billion cash disbursed for PwCCand the $2.1
Revenue decreased 8.6 percent (10.6 percent at constant
billion cash contribution to the PPP. These were offset by
currency) to $1,022 million primarily as a result of lower rev-
cash received from the sale of the company’s HDDbusiness
enue from document processors, partially offset by increased
($1,170 million) and the monetization of interest rate swaps
revenue from product life-cycle management software.
($650 million), the collection of 2001 taxes and interest
The decline in the total company gross profit margin prima- ($460 million), as well as cash generated by operations and
rily related to the Hardware segments as a result of lower other sources (the remainder).
volumes. Small declines in the Global Services gross profit Liabilities increased in 2002 primarily due to an increase
margin, especially in the Communications and Financial in the company’s Retirement and nonpension postretirement
Services industry sectors were offset by modest increases in benefit obligations primarily attributable to the required
Software margins from productivity initiatives. accounting for the unfunded status of the non-U.S.pension
plans, an increase in other accruals due to the 2002 actions
The increase in the expense-to-revenue ratio was primarily
taken by the company as described in note S, “2002 Actions,”
due to:
on pages 105 through 107 and the impact of foreign currencies.
• The second quarter Microelectronics and productivity In addition, non-Global Financing debt increased almost
actions ($1,727 million) $600 million due to the acquisition of PwCCand the cash
• The fourth quarter actions associated with the acquisition contribution to the PPP.
of PwCC($614 million) Global Financing debt decreased $1.7 billion in line with
a decrease in Global Financing assets. The Global Financing
• An increase in bad debt expense resulting from the weaken-
debt to equity ratio increased from 6.8 to 6.9 at December
ing economy in 2002 and exposures in the Communica-
31, 2001 to December 31, 2002, respectively. These ratios are
tions sector ($183 million)
within management’s target range. The Global Financing
• An increase in SG&A-base expenses primarily due to the
allowance for doubtful accounts coverage increased from 2.4
acquired PwCCbusiness ($161 million)
percent to 3.5 percent as a result of economic trends in 2002
• Lower IPand custom development income ($376 million) and certain exposures in the Communications sector. The
• Lower retirement-related plans income due to changes ratio of unguaranteed residual value as a percentage of the
made to the pension assumptions at the beginning of 2002 related original amount financed remained relatively flat at
($245 million) December 31, 2002, as compared to December 31, 2001.
• Absence of goodwill amortization expense due to a new
DISCONTINUED OPERATIONS
accounting rule ($262 million) On December 31, 2002, the company sold its HDDbusiness
• Lower revenue to Hitachi for approximately $2 billion. The majority of the
cash was received in 2002 with the remaining due within one
These items were partially offset by:
and three years after closing. The HDD business was
• Lower advertising expense resulting from a strategic ini- accounted for as a discontinued operation whereby the
tiative to consolidate and centralize certain advertising results of operations and cash flows were removed from the
spending at the corporate level ($188 million) company’s results from continuing operations for all periods
• Lower RD&Eexpense resulting from productivity initia- presented.
tives ($236 million) The company incurred a loss on sale of $382 million, net-
of-tax. The increased loss from discontinued operations in
The effective tax rate increased from 28.9 percent in 2001 to
2002 as compared to 2001 was due to (amounts are net-of-tax):
29.1 percent in 2002. This increase was due primarily to a less
• The loss on sale noted above
favorable mix of geographic income offset by the tax effect
of the Microelectronics portion of the 2002 actions. • An increase in certain actions taken by the company in the
The company made a $3,963 million voluntary contribu- second and fourth quarters of 2002 ($508 million)
tion to the PPPconsisting of $1,871 million of company stock • An increase in inventory write-offs resulting from a strategic
and $2,092 million of cash in the fourth quarter of 2002. As decision to cease reworking and selling efforts for some of
a result, the PPPwas fully funded on an accumulated benefit the older HDDproducts after the announcement of the
obligation basis at December 31, 2002. divestiture plans ($217 million)
Assets increased in 2002 primarily due to the increase in
the company’s Prepaid pension assets from the company’s
62

===== PAGE 65 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
looking forward
The estimated Global Services backlog, including SO,
BCS, ITSand Maintenance, was $120 billion at December
The following key drivers impacting IBM’s business are
31, 2003. Backlog estimates are subject to change and are
discussed on page 50:
affected by several factors, including changes in scope of
• Economic environment and corporate ITspending budgets contracts (mainly long-term contracts), periodic revalidations
for Enterprise Computing
and currency assumptions used to approximate constant
• Internal business transformation and efficiency initiatives currency. Included in the numbers above are several
• Technological innovations significant BTO contract signings within its BCS business.
These key competitive wins represent strong momentum in
• Open standards, including Linux
the company’s goal to drive the BTO business into a
With respect to the economic environment, while it is always significant growth driver in the coming years.
difficult to predict future economic trends, year-end 2003 To improve margins over the next year, the company is
signals indicate that the ITindustry has stabilized and the targeting roughly a 4-point improvement in the utilization
next growth cycle in ITspending may be starting. The year- rate of its consultants, optimizing the labor mix, and work-
to-year and sequential quarterly growth trend comparisons ing to reduce overhead costs by 15 percent through addi-
achieved by the company are such signals (prior to considering tional productivity and efficiency initiatives.
the positive year-to-year comparison benefits associated The combination of the company’s Systems Group and
with the acquisitions of PwCCand Rational). Technology Group, as discussed on page 118, will continue to
With respect to business transformation and the contin- benefit the company’s ability to integrate key semiconductor
ual conversion of IBMinto an on demand business, the com- and other core technology innovations into solutions for
pany’s supply chain initiatives are expected to allow clients. The company continues to leverage its eServer
flexibility to drive additional competitive advantages. The zSeries mainframe technology investments across its server
company will focus on expense management and additional and storage portfolio. The ability to share elements of this
productivity initiatives with the aim of continuing to reduce technology, such as security, automation and virtualization,
the company’s expense-to-revenue ratios. with the more commoditized platforms is a key competitive
Finally, with respect to technology, in 2003 the company advantage for IBM.
has again been awarded more U.S. patents than any other The Technology Group’s 2003 fourth quarter pre-tax loss
company for the eleventh year in a row. was less than that for the third quarter, even with lower IP
From a client-set perspective, the strong momentum in income. With the backdrop of meeting very strong demand
2003 with respect to the Small & Medium Business sector for the Systems Group’s key needs, the recent arrangement
should continue while the Financial and Public sectors with Microsoft to supply technology for its new Xbox system
should also continue to benefit from, among other things, and the continued growth of the relatively new E&TSbusiness,
the company’s new z990 mainframes. The Communications, the company believes that its Microelectronics and E&TS
Distribution and Industrial sectors may not grow as fast. The Divisions will continue to strongly benefit IBM’s other busi-
company reorganized Global Services and Software to be nesses and to continue the modest momentum that began in
better aligned with the company’s industry sectors. This the fourth quarter 2003.
change will foster an even greater ability to create industry- Given the commoditized nature of the personal computer
specific solutions for clients. industry, future results may be more volatile than in the com-
From a Global Services perspective, the company finished pany’s other businesses. The company’s internal surveys,
2003 with strong signings. however, indicate that 57 percent of clients purchased IBM
personal computers due to unique IBM features such as
Global Services Signings
ThinkVantage technologies that often lower the cost to oper-
(dollars in millions) ate and maintain the machines. The company will attempt to
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 continue to build on these types of differentiating factors.
Longer-term* $«34,608 $«33,068 $«32,016 As for the company’s Software business, key to future
Shorter-term* 20,854 20,020 19,261 growth will be the continued leveraging of ISVs as an overall
Total $«55,462 $«53,088 $«51,277 business partner and an additional route to market. The new
Lotus workplace messaging platform became generally avail-
*Longer-term contracts generally 7 to 10 years in length and represent SO and BTO
able in late November 2003 and received positive reaction
contracts as well as BCS contracts with the U.S. federal government and its agencies.
Shorter-term contracts are generally 3 to 9 months in length and represent the remaining from both clients and industry analysts. Operating system
BCS and ITS contracts.
software growth will be dependent, in part, on the growth of
the underlying hardware sales.
See page 73 for forward-looking information regarding
Global Financing.
63

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Given the declining interest rate environment, the com- The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt
pany reduced its discount rate assumption for the PPPby 75 securities at December 31, 2003, appear in the table below
basis points. The company will keep the expected long-term and remain unchanged over the past 5 years. The company
return on PPPassets at 8 percent, despite the strong perform- has no contractual arrangements that, in the event of a
ance of the plan assets in 2003. With similar overall trends in change in credit rating, would result in a material adverse
these assumptions worldwide, as well as the impact of the effect on its financial position or liquidity.
recent years’ changes in the market value of plan assets, the
year-to-year impact from retirement-related plans on pre-tax STANDARD MOODY’S
AND INVESTORS FITCH
income in 2004 will be approximately $650 million (lower) as POOR’S SERVICE RATINGS
compared to year-to-year changes between 2002 and 2003 of Senior long-term debt A+ A1 AA-
approximately $600 million (lower in 2003 versus 2002). See Commercial paper A-1 Prime-1 f-1+
page 117 for a discussion of recently enacted Medicare legis-
lation with respect to nonpension postretirement benefits. The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash
The amount of IPand custom development income has Flows in accordance with Statement of Financial Accounting
been declining in recent years. Although it increased slightly Standards (SFAS) No. 95, “Statement of Cash Flows,” on
in 2003, the overall declining trend may continue as the com- page 79 and discusses causes and events underlying sources
pany does not expect it to be a contributor to growth. and uses of cash in that format on page 58. For purposes of
In the normal course of business, the company expects running its business, the company manages, monitors and
that its effective tax rate will approximate 30 percent. The analyzes cash flows in a different format.
rate will change year-to-year based on nonrecurring events As discussed on page 69, one of the company’s two pri-
(such as the tax effect of the Microelectronics Division’s mary objectives of its Global Financing business is to gener-
actions in 2002) as well as recurring factors, including the
ate strong return-on-equity. Increasing receivables is the
geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing and
basis for growth in a financing business. Accordingly, man-
amount of foreign dividends, state and local taxes, and the
agement considers Global Financing receivables as a profit-
interaction of various global tax strategies.
generating investment—not as working capital that should
In 2001, the World Trade Organization (WTO) determined
be minimized for efficiency. After classifying the Cash
that tax provisions of the FSC Repeal and Extraterritorial
(from)/for Global Financing receivables as an investment,
Income (ETI) Exclusion Act of 2000 constitute an export
the remaining net cash flow is viewed by the company as
subsidy prohibited by the WTO Agreement on Subsidies
the Cash available for investment and for distribution to
and Countervailing Measures Agreement. The U.S.govern-
shareholders. And with respect to the company’s cash flow
ment appealed the panel’s decision and lost its appeal. There
analysis for internal management purposes, Global Financing
are various proposals at this time before the U.S.Congress,
receivables are combined with Global Financing debt to
and the company anticipates that the U.S.will repeal the ETI
represent the Net Global Financing receivables (a profit-
regime. If the ETIexclusion is repealed and suitable replace-
generating investment).
ment legislation is not enacted, the loss of the ETI tax
Over the past 5 years, the company generated over
benefit may adversely impact the company’s tax rate.
$57 billion in Cash available for investment and for distri-
LIQUIDITY AND CAPITAL RESOURCES bution to shareholders. As a result, the company invested a
The company generates strong cash flow from operations, net $2.5 billion in its Global Financing business, made $22.5
providing a source of funds ranging between $8.8 billion and billion of net capital expenditures, invested $7.6 billion in
$14.6 billion per year over the past 5 years. The company strategic acquisitions, received $6.2 billion from divestitures
provides for additional liquidity through several sources—a and returned $32.9 billion to shareholders through dividends
sizable cash balance, access to global funding sources and and share repurchases. The amount of future year Returns to
two committed global credit facilities. The table below pro- shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases
vides a summary of these major sources of liquidity as of the vary based upon several factors including affordability,
ends of fiscal years 1999 through 2003. namely each year’s operating results, capital expenditures,
research and development, and acquisitions, as well as the
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
factors discussed immediately following the first table on
(dollars in billions) page 65.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Net cash from
operating activities $««9.0 $««8.8 $«14.0 $«13.8 $«14.6
Cash and marketable
securities 5.8 3.7 6.4 6.0 7.6
Size of global credit
facilities 10.0 10.0 12.0 12.0 10.0
64

===== PAGE 67 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The table below represents the way in which management reviews its cash flow as described above.
(dollars in billions)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Net cash from operating activities (comprised of): $««9.0 $««8.8 $«14.0 $«13.8 $«14.6
Cash (from)/for Global Financing accounts receivable (1.7) (2.5) 2.0 3.3 1.9
Cash available for investment and for distribution
to shareholders 10.7 11.3 12.0 10.5 12.7
Net Global Financing receivables (2.3) (0.6) 0.9 0.2 (0.7)
Net capital expenditures (4.8) (4.3) (4.9) (4.6) (3.9)
Net divestitures/(acquisitions) 3.5 (0.3) (0.9) (2.0) (1.7)
Returns to shareholders (8.2) (7.6) (6.5) (5.2) (5.4)
Other 0.8 — 2.2 0.2 0.9
Net change in cash and cash equivalents $«(0.3) $«(1.5) $«««2.8 $««(0.9) $«««1.9
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash the PPP’s accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) would be
flow dynamics discussed on page 64 include unexpected greater than its Plan assets. As discussed on pages 110 to 115,
adverse impacts from litigation or future pension funding such a situation may result in a voluntary contribution of
during periods of severe and prolonged downturns in the cash or stock to the PPPor a charge to stockholders’ equity.
capital markets. Whether any litigation has such an adverse The following table depicts the company’s firm contrac-
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more tual commitments and must be reviewed within the context
completely described on pages 101 and 102. With respect to of the discussion above. While these commitments may vary
pension funding, the company is not quantifying such from period to period and provide a view as to certain
impact because it is not possible to predict future timing or unavoidable cash outflows, they represent a small picture of
direction of the capital markets. However, for 2004, if actual the overall cash dynamics of the company in the table above.
returns on plan assets for the PPPwere less than 5 percent,
Contractual Obligations
(dollars in millions)
TOTAL
CONTRACTUAL PAYMENTS DUE IN
PAYMENT
STREAM 2004 2005-06 2007-08 AFTER 2008
Long-term debt obligations $«19,343 $«4,061 $«««5,846 $«1,508 $«««7,928
Capital (Finance) lease obligations 58 11 27 6 14
Operating lease obligations 6,414 1,401 2,078 1,533 1,402
Purchase obligations 3,362 2,024 1,063 210 65
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum pension funding (mandated)* 1,212 220 564 428 —
Executive compensation 657 79 82 90 406
Environmental liabilities 243 29 32 28 154
Long-term termination benefits 2,627 487 396 260 1,484
Other 255 47 125 64 19
Total $«34,171 $«8,359 $«10,213 $«4,127 $«11,472
*These amounts represent future pension payments that are mandated by local regulations or statute. They are all associated with non-U.S. pension plans. The projected payments
beyond 2008 are not currently determinable. See note W, “Retirement-Related Benefits,”on pages 110 to 115 for additional information on the non-U.S. plans’ investment strategies
and expected contributions.
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase value of the contract was included in the above table. If the
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur a
meet any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, penalty if cancelled, the dollar amount of the penalty was
(2) the company would incur a penalty if the agreement was included as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum
cancelled, or (3) the company must make specified minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included
payments even if it does not take delivery of the contracted in the above table as they represent the portion of each con-
products or services (“take-or-pay”). If the obligation to tract that is a firm commitment.
purchase goods or services is noncancelable, the entire
65

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters the actual return on plan assets and expected long-term
into contracts that specify that IBM will purchase all or a return on plan assets are recognized in the calculation of net
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commod- periodic pension cost/(income) over five years.
ity, or service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are As described on pages 110 through 115, if the fair value of
generally entered into in order to secure pricing or other the pension plan’s assets is below the plan’s ABO, the com-
negotiated terms. They do not specify fixed or minimum pany will be required to record a minimum liability. In some
quantities to be purchased and, therefore, the company does situations, the pension asset must be partially reversed
not consider them to be purchase obligations. through a charge to stockholders’ equity. If the amount of the
ABOin excess of the fair value of plan assets is large enough,
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES the company may be required, by law, to make an additional
The application of GAAP involves the exercise of varying
contribution to the pension plan. Actual results that differ
degrees of judgment. While the resulting accounting esti-
from the estimates may result in more or less future company
mates will, by definition, not always precisely equal the
funding into the pension plans than is planned by manage-
related actual results, eight of these estimates involve more
ment. See page 65 for additional information and near-term
judgment than others. Two of these estimates are the
sensitivities of actual returns on funding decisions.
allowance for uncollectible financing receivables and the fair
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes
value of lease residual values. See page 73 for a discussion of
such that management changes its expected long-term
these estimates. The others are discussed below.
return on plan assets assumptions, each 50 basis point
The sensitivity analyses used below are not meant to pro-
change in the expected long-term return on PPPplan assets
vide a reader with management’s predictions of the variabil-
assumption will have an estimated increase or decrease of
ity of the estimates used. Rather, the sensitivity levels
$225 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pen-
selected (e.g., 5 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to
sion income (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December
allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general-
31, 2003) depending upon whether the expected long-term
direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates.
return assumption increases or decreases, respectively.
Another key management assumption is the discount
Useful Lives of Technology Group Plant and Equipment
rate. See pages 110 through 115 for information regarding the
The company determines the estimated useful lives and
discount rate assumption. Changes in the discount rate
related depreciation charges for its plant and equipment. For
assumption will impact the interest cost component of the
the Technology Group, this estimate is based on projected
net periodic pension income calculation and due to the fact
product life-cycles that could change significantly due to
that the ABO is calculated on a net present value basis,
technical innovations and competitor actions in response to
changes in the discount rate assumption will also impact the
relatively severe industry cycles. To the extent actual useful
current ABO. As discussed above, the relationship between
lives are less than previously estimated lives, the company
the ABO and the fair value of plan assets determines any
will increase its depreciation charge or will write-off or
required funding of the pension plans.
writedown technically obsolete or non-strategic assets that
As discussed on page 64, the company reduced the dis-
have been abandoned or sold.
count rate assumption for the PPP by 75 basis points on
The company estimates useful lives of its Technology
December 31, 2003. This change will increase pre-tax cost
Group equipment by reference to the current and projected
and expense in 2004 by $184 million. Had the discount rate
dynamics in the semiconductor industry, product life-cycles
assumption for the PPP increased by 75 basis points on
and anticipated competitor actions.
December 31, 2003, 2004 pre-tax cost and expense would
To the extent that Technology Group actual useful lives
have increased by $21 million in 2004. As mentioned above,
differ from management’s estimates by 10 percent, consoli-
changes in the discount rate assumption will impact the
dated net income would be an estimated $57 million
ABO which, in turn, may impact the company’s funding
higher/lower based upon 2003 results depending upon
decisions if the ABOexceeds plan assets. In order to analyze
whether the actual lives were longer/shorter, respectively,
the sensitivity of discount rate movements, each 25 basis
than the estimates. To the extent that the actual lives were
point increase or decrease in the interest rate will cause a
shorter by 10 percent, it is estimated that there would have
corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s
also been a lower-of-cost-or-market inventory charge of less
ABOof an estimated $1 billion based upon December 31, 2003
than $5 million.
data. Page 113 presents the PPP’s ABO(after the reduction in
Pension Assumptions discount rate discussed above) and plan assets as of
The expected long-term return on plan assets is used in cal- December 31, 2003.
culating the net periodic pension cost/(income). See pages Impacts of these types of changes on the pension plans in
110 to 115 for information regarding the expected long-term other countries will vary depending upon the status of each
return on plan assets assumption. The differences between respective plan.
66

===== PAGE 69 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Costs to Complete Service Contracts Warranty Claims
The company enters into numerous service contracts through The company generally offers three-year warranties for its
its SOand BCSbusinesses. SOcontracts range for periods up personal computer products and one-year warranties on most
to ten years and BCS contracts can be for several years. of its other products. The company estimates the amountand
During the contractual period, revenue, cost and profits may cost of future warranty claims for its current period sales.
be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profitability of These estimates are used to record accrued warranty cost for
each contract, especially contracts for which the company current period product shipments. The company uses his-
uses the percentage-of-completion method of accounting. torical warranty claim information, as well as recent trends
See page 81 for the company’s services revenue recognition that might suggest that past cost information may differ
accounting policies. If at any time, these estimates indicate from future claims.
the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss Factors that could impact the estimated claim informa-
for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. tion include the success of the company’s productivity and
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of quality initiatives, as well as parts and labor costs.
its services contracts in order to determine whether the latest To the extent that actual claims costs differ from manage-
estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the ment’s estimates by 5 percent, consolidated net income will
company to estimate the future costs to complete each have improved/declined by an estimated $30 million in 2003,
contractare future labor costs and productivity efficiencies. depending upon whether the actual claims costs were
To the extent actual estimated “to go” margins on percent- lower/higher, respectively, than the estimates.
age of completion services contracts differ from management’s
quarterly estimates by 1 percentage point, the company’s Income Taxes
consolidated net income would have improved/declined by The company is subject to income taxes in both the U.S.and
an estimated $35 million using 2003 results, depending upon numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is
whether the actual results were higher/lower, respectively, required in determining the worldwide provision for income
than the estimates. This amount excludes any accrual result- taxes. During the ordinary course of business, there are many
ing from contracts in loss positions. For all long-term services transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax
contracts that are either in a “to go” loss position or have an determination is uncertain. The company recognizes liabilities
estimated “to go” profit of 5 percent or less, if actual “to go” for anticipated tax audit issues based on estimates of
costs were 5 percent greater than expected, the consolidated whether additional taxes will be due. To the extent that the
net income would be reduced by an estimated $13 million. final tax outcome of these matters is different from the
amounts that were initially recorded, such differences will
Net Realizable Value and Client Demand impact the income tax provision in the period in which such
The company reviews the net realizable value of and demand determination is made.
for its inventory on a quarterly basis to ensure recorded To the extent that the provision for income taxes
inventory is stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value increases/decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing
and that obsolete inventory is written off. Inventory at operations before income taxes, consolidated income from
higher risk for writedowns or write-offs are those in the continuing operations would have declined/improved by
industries that have lower relative gross margins and that are $109 million in 2003.
subject to a higher likelihood of changes in industry cycles.
The semiconductor and personal computer businesses are CURRENCY RATE FLUCTUATIONS
two such industries. Changes in the relative values of non-U.S.currencies to the
Factors that could impact estimated demand and selling U.S. dollar affect the company’s results. At December 31,
prices are the timing and success of future technological 2003, currency changes resulted in assets and liabilities
innovations and the economy. denominated in local currencies being translated into more
To the extent that semiconductor and personal computer dollars than at year-end 2002. The company uses a variety of
inventory losses differ from management estimates by 5 per- financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency
cent, the company’s consolidated net income in 2003 would risks related to financing transactions and other foreign
have improved/declined by an estimated $42 million using currency-based transactions. Further discussion of currency
2003 results, depending upon whether the actual results and hedging appears in note L, “Derivatives and Hedging
were better/worse, respectively, than expected. Transactions,” on pages 96 to 99.
67

===== PAGE 70 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The company earned approximately 56 percent of its net all derivative financial instruments. The company’s portfolio
income in currencies other than the U.S.dollar. In general, of derivative financial instruments generally includes interest
these currencies appreciated against the U.S. dollar during rate swaps, interest rate options, foreign currency swaps,
2003 so net income in these countries translated into more forward contracts and option contracts.
dollars than they would have in 2002. The company also To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses
maintains hedging programs to limit the volatility of currency the risk of loss in fair value from the effect of hypothetical
impacts on the company’s financial results. These hedging changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates
programs limit the impact of currency changes on the com- on market-sensitive instruments. The market values for
pany’s financial results but do not eliminate them. In addition interest and foreign currency exchange risk are computed
to the translation of earnings and the company’s hedging pro- based on the present value of future cash flows as affected by
grams, the impact of currency changes also may affect the the changes in rates that are attributable to the market risk
company’s pricing and sourcing actions, although the being measured. The discount rates used for the present
impact of these actions on net income is difficult to track value computations were selected based on market interest
and quantify. For these reasons, the company believes that and foreign currency exchange rates in effect at December
extended periods of dollar weakness are positive for net 31, 2003 and 2002. The differences in this comparison are the
income and extended periods of dollar strength are negative, hypothetical gains or losses associated with each type of risk.
although the precise impact is difficult to assess. Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the
U.S.dollars or whose economic environment is highly infla- company would incur under normal market conditions
tionary, translation adjustments are reflected in results of because, due to practical limitations, all variables other than
operations, as required by SFASNo. 52, “Foreign Currency the specific market risk factor are held constant. In addition,
Translation.” Generally, the company manages currency risk the results of the model are constrained by the fact that cer-
in these entities by linking prices and contracts to U.S.dollars tain items are specifically excluded from the analysis, while
and by entering into foreign currency hedge contracts. the financial instruments relating to the financing or hedging
of those items are included by definition. Excluded items
MARKET RISK include leased assets, forecasted foreign currency cash flows
In the normal course of business, the financial position of
and the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As
the company routinely is subject to a variety of risks. In
a consequence, reported changes in the values of some of the
addition to the market risk associated with interest rate and
financial instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity
currency movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S.dol-
analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes in the
lar denominated assets and liabilities, other examples of risk
values of the items that those instruments are designed to
include collectibility of accounts receivable and recoverability
finance or hedge.
of residual values on leased assets.
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31,
The company regularly assesses these risks and has estab-
2003, and December 31, 2002, are as follows:
lished policies and business practices to protect against the
adverse effects of these and other potential exposures. As a Interest Rate Risk
result, the company does not anticipate any material losses At December 31, 2003, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of
from these risks. interest rates with all other variables held constant would
The company’s debt in support of the Global Financing result in a decrease in the fair market value of the company’s
business and the geographic breadth of the company’s oper- financial instruments of $170 million as compared with a
ations contain an element of market risk from changes in decrease of $237 million at December 31, 2002. A10 percent
interest and currency rates. The company manages this risk, increase in the levels of interest rates with all other variables
in part, through the use of a variety of financial instruments held constant would result in an increase in the fair value of
including derivatives, as explained in note L, “Derivatives the company’s financial instruments of $152 million as com-
and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 96 to 99. pared to $210 million at December 31, 2002. Changes in the
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s financial
a sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
exposures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the
and other financial instruments. company’s debt maturity, interest rate profile and amount. In
The financial instruments that are included in the sensi- 2003 versus 2002, the reported decrease in interest rate sen-
tivity analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash sitivity is primarily due to a decrease in long-term fixed rate
equivalents, marketable securities, long-term non-lease debt outstanding at December 31, 2003.
receivables, investments, long-term and short-term debt and
68

===== PAGE 71 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
global financing
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2003, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
against foreign currencies with all other variables held con-
Global Financing is a business segment within IBM, but is
stant would result in a decrease in the fair value of the com-
managed (on an arm’s-length basis) and measured as if it
pany’s financial instruments of $283 million as compared
were a standalone entity. Accordingly, the information pre-
with a decrease of $640 million at December 31, 2002.
sented in this section is consistent with this separate com-
Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S.dollar against foreign
pany view.
currencies with all other variables held constant would result
The mission of Global Financing is to generate a return
in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial
on equity. It also facilitates the acquisition of IBMhardware,
instruments of $296 million compared to $660 million at
software and services.
December 31, 2002. In 2003 versus 2002, the reported
Global Financing invests in financing assets, manages the
decrease in foreign currency exchange rate sensitivity was
associated risks and leverages with debt, all with the objec-
primarily due to a reduction in foreign currency debt.
tive of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The
focus on IBMproducts and IBMclients mitigates the risks
FINANCING RISKS
See the Global Financing Description of Business (next col- normally associated with a financing company. Global
umn) for a discussion of the financing risks associated with Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its
the company’s Global Financing business and management’s customer base and a clear insight into the products that are
goals to mitigate such risks while striving for superior return being leased. This pairing allows Global Financing to manage
on Global Financing’s equity. two of the major risks (credit and residual value) that are nor-
mally associated with financing.
employees and related workforce Global Financing comprises three lines of business:
• Customer financing provides lease and loan financing to
end users and internal customers for terms generally
PERCENTAGE between two and five years. Internal financing is predom-
CHANGES
inantly in support of Global Services’ long-term customer
2003- 2002-
AT DECEMBER 31,: 2003 2002 2001 2002 2001 service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected
IBM/wholly owned portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily
subsidiaries 319,273 315,889 319,876 1.1 (1.2) for cash management purposes. All of these internal
Less-than-wholly financing arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are
owned subsidiaries 18,189 22,282 25,403 (18.4) (12.3) based upon market conditions.
Complementary 17,695 17,250 21,300 2.6 (19.0)
• Commercial financing provides primarily short-term
inventory and accounts receivable financing to dealers and
Employees at IBMand its wholly owned subsidiaries in 2003
remarketers of ITproducts. Global Financing also partic-
increased 3,384 from last year. The company continues to
ipates as a lender in selected syndicated loan facilities that
invest in Global Services and Software, growth areas of the
originated from 1999 through 2001. Syndicated loans are
business, through a combination of hiring and acquisitions
loans in which Global Financing purchased a fixed per-
(e.g., Rational). The company also continues to rebalance its
centage of a loan facility from a bank or other lending
workforce to improve IBM’s competitiveness in the market-
institution. Global Financing no longer participates in
place as well as to withdraw from certain businesses, thereby
new syndicated loan programs. There are, however,
offsetting some of the growth.
remaining amounts committed and outstanding.
In less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries, the number of
Outstandings represent less than 1 percent of total Global
employees decreased from last year, primarily as a result of
Financing assets at December 31, 2003, as compared to 2
the company’s services subsidiary in Australia being converted
percent at December 31, 2002.
to a wholly owned status.
• Remarketing includes the sale and lease of used equip-
The company’s complementary workforce is an approx-
ment to new or existing customers. This equipment is pri-
imation of equivalent full-time employees hired under
marily sourced from the conclusion of lease transactions.
temporary, part-time and limited-term employment arrange-
mentsto meet specific business needs in a flexible and cost- In addition to the strength of the economy and its impact on
effective manner. corporate ITbudgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results
are interest rates and originations. Originations, which
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like
business, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales
volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates.
69

===== PAGE 72 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Customer participation rates are the propensity of IBM’s profit margin were primarily driven by lower borrowing costs.
clients to finance their purchases through Global Financing Global Financing pre-tax income increased 23.8 percent
in lieu of paying IBMup-front cash. in 2003 versus 2002, following a decrease of 16.4 percent in
2002 versus 2001. The increase in 2003 was driven by a
RESULTS OF OPERATIONS decrease in bad debt expense partially offset by a decrease in
(dollars in millions) gross profit discussed above. The decrease in bad debt expense
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 is reflective of the improved general economic environment
External revenue $«2,827 $«3,203 $«3,407 and reduced exposure in specific sectors, particularly the
Internal revenue 1,300 939 836 Communications sector. (Also see pages 71 and 72 for an
additional discussion of Global Financing Receivable
Total revenue 4,127 4,142 4,243
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts.) The decrease in 2002
Cost 1,846 1,803 2,016
versus 2001 was due to increases in provisions for bad debt
Gross profit $«2,281 $«2,339 $«2,227
reflective of the general economic environment as well as
Gross profit margin 55.3% 56.5% 52.5%
specific client issues, such as the Communications sector,
Pre-tax income $«1,182 $««««955 $«1,143
partially offset by an increase in gross profit discussed previously.
After-tax income $««««766 $««««627 $««««727 The increase in return on equity from 2002 to 2003 was
Return on equity* 22.3% 17.2% 18.4% due to higher earnings primarily associated with a decrease
in provisions for bad debt expense. The decrease in return
*Return on equity is calculated using a five-point average of equity and an estimated tax
rate principally based on Global Financing’s geographic mix of earnings, as IBM’s on equity from 2001 to 2002 was due to lower earnings asso-
provision for income taxes is determined on a consolidated basis. See page 55 for the
ciated with an increased provision for bad debt expense.
IBM consolidated tax rate.
Global Financing revenue was flat in 2003 as compared to FINANCIAL CONDITION
2002. External revenue decreased 11.7 percent (18 percent at Balance Sheet
constant currency) in 2003 versus 2002 driven by lower (dollars in millions)
financing income, due to declining interest rates and a lower AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
average asset base, and a decrease in external used equip- Cash $««««««813 $«««1,157
ment sales. The lower average asset base was primarily due to Net investment in sales-type leases 11,969 12,314
lower originations in prior years. Internal revenue increased Equipment under operating leases:
38.4 percent in 2003 versus 2002 driven by internal used External customers 1,707 1,922
equipment sales, primarily zSeries. Global Financing remar- Internal customers(a)(b) 1,873 1,701
kets used equipment, primarily resulting from returns off of Customer loans 10,413 9,621
lease, both externally and internally. Externally remarketed
Total customer financing assets 25,962 25,558
equipment represents sales to clients and resellers, while
Commercial financing receivables 5,835 5,525
internally remarketed equipment primarily represents used
Intercompany financing
equipment that is sold internally and then remarketed exter- receivables(a)(b) 1,999 1,616
nally through the Hardware segment. Other receivables 270 445
Global Financing revenue decreased 2.4 percent in 2002 Other assets 1,037 941
versus 2001. The decrease in external revenue was driven
Total financing assets $«35,916 $«35,242
by lower financing income due to a lower average asset base
Intercompany payables(a) $«««6,754 $«««5,383
discussed above partially offset by an increase in external
Debt(c) 23,264 23,828
used equipment sales. The decline in external revenue was
Other liabilities 2,546 2,556
offset by an increase in internal revenue due to an increase in
Total financing liabilities 32,564 31,767
internalused equipment sales. See discussion above.
Total financing equity 3,352 3,475
Global Financing gross profit dollars decreased 2.5 percent
and the gross profit margin declined 1.2 points in 2003 versus Total financing liabilities and equity $«35,916 $«35,242
2002. The decrease in gross profit dollars was primarily
(a)Amounts eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore do not
driven by declining interest rates and a lower average asset appear on page 75.
base discussed above partially offset by improved financing (b)These assets, along with the other assets in this table, are leveraged using Global
Financing debt.
margins. The decrease in gross profit margin was driven by a
(c)Global Financing debt includes debt of the company and of the Global Financing units
mix change towards lower margin remarketing sales and away that support the Global Financing business.
from financing income partially offset by lower borrowing Sources and Uses of Funds
costs related to the current interest rate environment. The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate
Global Financing gross profit dollars increased 5.0 percent customer and commercial financing assets. Customer
and the gross profit margin increased 4.0 points in 2002 versus financing assets for end users consist primarily of IBMhard-
2001. The increases in 2002 gross profit dollars and gross ware, software and services, but also include non-IBMequip-
70

===== PAGE 73 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
ment, software and services to meet IBMclients’ total solu- Financing Assets by Sector
tions requirements. Customer financing assets are primarily The following are the percentage of external financing assets
sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for equip- by industry sector.
ment as well as loans for software and services with terms
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
generally for two to five years. Customer financing also
Financial Services 28% 31%
includes internal activity as described on page 69.
Commercial financing originations arise primarily from
Business Partners* 18 14
Industrial 17 18
inventory and accounts receivable financing for dealers and
Communications 11 12
remarketers of IBMand non-IBMproducts. Payment terms
Distribution 10 11
for inventory financing generally range from 30 to 75 days.
Public 10 10
Payment terms for accounts receivable financing generally
Other 6 4
range from 30 to 90 days. Syndicated loans are also included
Total 100% 100%
in commercial financing assets. See page 69 for discussion on
syndicated loans. *Business Partners financing assets represent a portion of commercial financing inventory
and accounts receivable financing for terms generally less than 90 days.
Originations
Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following are total external and internal financing
The following table presents external financing receivables,
originations.
excluding residual values, and the allowance for doubtful
(dollars in millions) accounts.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
(dollars in millions)
Customer finance:
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
External $«13,279 $«12,845 $«15,620
Financing receivables $«28,451 $«28,007
Internal 1,150 1,061 931
Specific allowance for
Commercial finance 24,291 22,546 25,071
doubtful accounts 666 787
Total $«38,720 $«36,452 $«41,622
Unallocated allowance for
doubtful accounts 199 184
New financing originations of customer and commercial Total allowance for
financing assets exceeded cash collections in 2003, which doubtful accounts 865 971
resulted in a net increase in financing assets at December 31, Net financing receivables $«27,586 $«27,036
2003, as compared to December 31, 2002. The increase in
Allowance for doubtful
originations was due to favorable currency movements offset accounts coverage 3.0% 3.5%
by a decline in participation rates. The decline in participa-
tion rates is in line with industry trends. Originations Roll-Forward of Financing Receivables Allowance
decreased in 2002 from 2001 due to lower demand for the for Doubtful Accounts
company’s ITequipment. Cash collections in 2003, 2002 and
(dollars in millions)
2001 included $105 million, $218 million and zero, respec-
ADDITIONS:
tively, generated through sales of portions of Global JAN. 1, RESERVE BAD DEBT DEC. 31,
2003 USED* EXPENSE OTHER** 2003
Financing’s syndicated loan portfolio. These sales transac-
$«971 $«(417) $«206 $«105 $«865
tions did not have a material impact on the company’s
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Additionally, funds * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during the period.
were generated through the sale and lease of used equipment **Primarily represents translation adjustments.
sourced primarily from prior years’ lease originations.
The percentage of financing receivables reserved decreased
Cash generated by Global Financing was deployed to pay
from 3.5 percent at December 31, 2002, to 3.0 percent at
dividends to IBMand to reduce debt.
December 31, 2003, primarily due to the write-off of receiv-
ables covered by specific reserves. Unallocated reserves
increased 8.2 percent from $184 million at December 31,
2002 to $199 million at December 31, 2003, and the receiv-
ables balance increased 1.6 percent over the same period.
The unallocated reserve coverage increased slightly during
the same period. While the overall credit quality of the portfo-
lio remains stable, the increased unallocated reserve primarily
reflects loss history. Specific reserves decreased 15.4 percent
from $787 million at December 31, 2002 to $666 million at
71

===== PAGE 74 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
December 31, 2003. The decrease in specific reserves was due Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced from
to the write-off of reserved receivables during the period com- equipment returned at end of lease, represented 40.5 per-
bined with lower requirements for additional specific reserves. cent of Global Financing’s revenue in 2003 and 32.1 percent
This lower requirement is generally due to improving eco- in 2002. The increase is driven by higher internal used equip-
nomic conditions as well as portfolio management to reduce ment sales, due to improved utilization of used inventory,
risk in areas of concern such as the Communications sector. primarily zSeries, combined with a decline in finance income
Global Financing’s bad debt expense declined to $206 driven by a lower average asset base. The gross margin on
million for the year ended December 31, 2003, compared these sales was 30.2 percent and 28.5 percent in 2003 and
with $576 million for the year ended December 31, 2002. The 2002, respectively. In addition to selling assets that are
decline was primarily attributed to higher reserve additions sourced from end of lease, Global Financing also leases used
required in 2002 primarily associated with the Communica- equipment to new customers or extends leasing arrange-
tions sector, as compared to 2003. This issue has stabilized ments with current customers. These are other ways that
and contributed to the lower year-to-year charges. Global Financing profitably recovers the residual values. The
following table presents the recorded amount of unguaran-
Residual Value teed residual value for sales-type and operating leases at
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and December 31, 2002 and 2003. In addition, the table presents
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to the residual value as a percentage of the original amount
accurately project future equipment values. Global financed, and a run out of the unguaranteed residual value
Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for the over the remaining lives of these leases at December 31,
IBM products under lease. Based upon this product infor- 2003. In addition to the unguaranteed residual value below,
mation, Global Financing continually monitors projections on a limited basis, Global Financing will purchase insurance
of future equipment values and compares them to the resid- to guarantee the future value of the equipment scheduled to
ual values reflected in the portfolio. See note A, “Significant be returned at end of lease.
Accounting Policies,” on page 85 for the company’s account-
ing policy for residual values.
Residual Value
(dollars in millions)
TOTAL RUN OUT OF 2003 BALANCE
2007 AND
AT DECEMBER 31: 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 BEYOND
Sales-type leases $««««««821 $««««««845 $«284 $«311 $«210 $«40
Operating leases 242 164 88 49 17 10
Total unguaranteed residual value $«««1,063 $«««1,009 $«372 $«360 $«227 $«50
Related original amount financed $«27,534* $«27,820
Percentage 3.9% 3.6%
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
The decrease in the percentage of residual value to original amount financed was due to an increase in the percentage of leases
that use bargain purchase options.
Debt Global Financing Assets and Debt
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
Debt to equity ratio 6.9x 6.9x
Global Financing funds its operations primarily through bor-
rowings using a debt-to-equity ratio of approximately 7 to 1.
The following table illustrates the correlation between
Global Financing assets and Global Financing debt. Both
assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing bal-
ance sheet on page 70.
■GLOBAL FINANCING ASSETS ■GLOBAL FINANCING DEBT
72

===== PAGE 75 =====
Management Discussion
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The company’s Global Financing business provides funding increases in future residual value are not recognized until the
predominantly for the company’s external customers but also equipment is remarketed. Factors that could cause actual
provides intercompany financing for the company (internal), as results to differ materially from the estimates include severe
described in the “Description of Business” on page 69. As pre- changes in the used equipment market brought on by unfore-
viously stated, IBMmanages and measures Global Financing as seen changes in technology innovations and any resulting
if it were a standalone entity and accordingly, interest expense changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external customer To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower
and internal business is included in the “Global Financing than management’s estimates by 5 percent, Global Financing’s
Results of Operations” on page 70 and in note X, “Segment net income will be lower by an estimated $18 million (using
Information,” on pages 117 to 120. 2003 data). If the actual residual value recovery is higher than
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on management’s estimates, the increase in net income will be
page 74, however, the interest expense supporting Global realized at the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed.
Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified
MARKET RISK
from Cost of financing to Interest expense.
See pages 68 and 69 for discussion of the company’s overall
Liquidity and Capital Resources market risk.
Global Financing is a segment of IBMand as such, is supported
by IBM’s liquidity position and access to capital markets. Cash LOOKING FORWARD
Given Global Financing’s mission of supporting IBM’s hard-
generated from operations in 2003 was deployed to reduce
ware, software and services businesses, originations for both
debt and pay dividends in order to maintain an appropriate
customer and commercial finance businesses will be depend-
debt to equity ratio.
ent upon the overall demand for IThardware, software and
CRITICAL ACCOUNTING ESTIMATES services, as well as the customer participation rates.
As discussed in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency
page 80, the application of GAAP involves the exercise of fluctuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross
varying degrees of judgment. The following areas require profit. The company’s interest rate risk management policy,
more judgment relative to the others and relate to Global however, combined with the Global Financing funding strategy
Financing. Also see Critical Accounting Estimates on page 66. (see page 72), should mitigate gross margin erosion due to
changes in interest rates. The company’s policy of matching
Financing Receivables Reserves
asset and liability positions in foreign currencies will limit
Global Financing reviews its financing receivables portfolio
the impacts of currency fluctuations.
at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. Adescription
The economy could impact the credit quality of the
of the methods used by management to estimate the amount
Global Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level
of uncollectible receivables is included on page 85. Factors
of provision for bad debt. Global Financing will continue to
that could result in actual receivable losses that are materially
apply rigorous credit policies in both the origination of new
different from the estimated reserve include sharp changes
business and the evaluation of the existing portfolio.
in the economy, or a large change in the health of a particular
As seen above, Global Financing has historically been able
industry segment that represents a concentration in Global
to manage residual value risk through both insight into the
Financing’s receivables portfolio.
product cycles as well as through its remarketing business.
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of
management’s estimates by 5 percent, Global Financing’s net
the key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined
income would be higher or lower by an estimated $28 million
with product and customer knowledge, should allow for the
(using 2003 data), depending upon whether the actual col-
prudent management of the business going forward, even
lectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates.
during periods of uncertainty with respect to the economy.
Residual Value
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equip- forward-looking and cautionarystatements
ment under lease as of the end of the lease. Global Financing
estimates the future fair value of residual values by using his- Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may
torical models, the current market for used equipment and constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning
forward-looking product information such as marketing of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
plans and technological innovations. In addition, Global These statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties
Financing also estimates the fair value by analyzing current and other factors that could cause actual results to be mate-
market conditions for leasing and sales of both new and used rially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this
equipment. These estimates are periodically reviewed and Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the SEC,
any other-than-temporary declines in estimated future resid- including the company’s 2003 Form 10-Kfiled on or about
ual values are recognized upon identification. Anticipated March 8, 2004.
73

===== PAGE 76 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions except per share amounts)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: NOTES 2003 2002 2001
Revenue:
Global Services $«42,635 $«36,360 $«34,956
Hardware 28,239 27,456 30,593
Software 14,311 13,074 12,939
Global Financing 2,826 3,232 3,426
Enterprise Investments/Other 1,120 1,064 1,153
Total Revenue 89,131 81,186 83,067
Cost:
Global Services 31,903 26,812 25,355
Hardware 20,401 20,020 21,231
Software 1,927 2,043 2,265
Global Financing K 1,248 1,416 1,693
Enterprise Investments/Other 634 611 634
Total Cost 56,113 50,902 51,178
Gross Profit 33,018 30,284 31,889
Expense and Other Income:
Selling, general and administrative Q 17,852 18,738 17,048
Research, development and engineering R 5,077 4,750 4,986
Intellectual property and custom development income (1,168) (1,100) (1,476)
Other (income) and expense 238 227 (353)
Interest expense K & L 145 145 234
Total Expense and Other Income 22,144 22,760 20,439
Income from Continuing Operations Before Income Taxes 10,874 7,524 11,450
Provision for income taxes P 3,261 2,190 3,304
Income from Continuing Operations 7,613 5,334 8,146
Discontinued Operations:
Loss from discontinued operations C 30 1,755 423
Net Income 7,583 3,579 7,723
Preferred stock dividends — — 10
Net Income Applicable to Common Stockholders $«««7,583 $«««3,579 $«««7,713
Earnings/(Loss) per Share of Common Stock:
Assuming Dilution:
Continuing operations T $«««««4.34 $«««««3.07 $«««««4.59
Discontinued operations T (0.02) (1.01) (0.24)
Total T $«««««4.32 $«««««2.06 $«««««4.35
Basic:
Continuing operations T $«««««4.42 $«««««3.13 $«««««4.69
Discontinued operations T (0.02) (1.03) (0.24)
Total T $«««««4.40 $«««««2.10 $«««««4.45
Weighted-Average Number of Common Shares Outstanding:
Assuming dilution 1,756,090,689 1,730,941,054 1,771,230,599
Basic 1,721,588,628 1,703,244,345 1,733,348,422
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
74

===== PAGE 77 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31: NOTES 2003 2002*
Assets
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents $«««««7,290 $«««5,382
Marketable securities D 357 593
Notes and accounts receivable—trade, net of allowances 10,026 9,915
Short-term financing receivables F 17,583 15,996
Other accounts receivable 1,314 1,447
Inventories E 2,942 3,148
Deferred taxes P 2,542 2,617
Intangible assets—net I 336 245
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 2,608 2,379
Total current assets 44,998 41,722
Plant, rental machines and other property G 37,122 36,083
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 22,433 21,643
Plant, rental machines and other property—net G 14,689 14,440
Long-term financing receivables F 10,741 11,440
Prepaid pension assets W 18,426 16,003
Investments and sundry assets H 8,108 8,272
Goodwill I 6,921 4,115
Intangible assets—net I 574 492
Total Assets $«104,457 $«96,484
Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity
Current liabilities:
Taxes P $«««««5,475 $«««5,476
Short-term debt K & L 6,646 6,031
Accounts payable 8,460 7,630
Compensation and benefits 3,671 3,724
Deferred income 6,492 4,946
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 7,156 6,413
Total current liabilities 37,900 34,220
Long-term debt K & L 16,986 19,986
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations W 14,251 13,215
Other liabilities M 7,456 6,281
Total Liabilities 76,593 73,702
Contingencies and commitments O
Stockholders’ equity: N
Common stock, par value $.20 per share 16,269 14,858
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2003—1,937,393,604; 2002—1,920,957,772)
Retained earnings 37,525 31,555
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2003—242,884,969; 2002—198,590,876) (24,034) (20,213)
Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings (1,896) (3,418)
Total Stockholders’ Equity 27,864 22,782
Total Liabilities and Stockholders’ Equity $«104,457 $«96,484
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
75

===== PAGE 78 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions)
ACCUMULATED
GAINS AND
(LOSSES) NOT
EMPLOYEE AFFECTING
PREFERRED COMMON RETAINED TREASURY BENEFITS RETAINED
STOCK STOCK EARNINGS STOCK TRUST EARNINGS TOTAL
2001*
Stockholders’ equity, January 1, 2001 $«247 $«12,400 $«23,784 $«(13,800) $«(1,712) $«(369) $«20,550
Net income plus gains and (losses) not
affecting retained earnings:
Net income 7,723 $«««7,723
Gains and (losses) not affecting retained
earnings (net of tax):
Cumulative effect of adoption of SFAS No. 133
on Jan. 1 (net of tax expense of $120) 219 219
Net unrealized gains on SFAS No. 133 cash flow
hedge derivatives during 2001
(net of tax expense of $44) 77 77
Foreign currency translation adjustments
(net of tax expense of $323) (539) (539)
Minimum pension liability adjustment
(net of tax benefit of $226) (308) (308)
Net unrealized gains on marketable securities
(net of tax expense of $58) 92 92
Total gains and (losses) not affecting
retained earnings (459)
Subtotal: Net income plus gains and (losses)
not affecting retained earnings $«««7,264
Cash dividends declared—common stock (956) (956)
Cash dividends declared—preferred stock (10) (10)
Preferred stock purchased and retired
(10,184,043 shares) (247) (7) (254)
Common stock issued under employee plans
(19,572,623 shares) 774 (1) 773
Purchases (314,433 shares) and sales (11,801,053 shares)
of treasury stock under employee plans—net 32 (391) 1,234 875
Other treasury shares purchased, not retired
(50,764,698 shares) (5,293) (5,293))
Dissolution of employee benefits trust
(20,000,000 shares) 546 (2,255) 1,712 3
Decrease in shares remaining to be issued
in acquisition (6) (6)
Tax effect—stock transactions 502 502
Stockholders’ equity, December 31, 2001 $«««— $«14,248 $«30,142 $«(20,114) $«««««««— $«(828) $«23,448
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
76

===== PAGE 79 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions)
ACCUMULATED
GAINS AND
(LOSSES) NOT
AFFECTING
COMMON RETAINED TREASURY RETAINED
STOCK EARNINGS STOCK EARNINGS TOTAL
2002*
Stockholders’ equity, January 1, 2002 $«14,248 $«30,142 $«(20,114) $««««(828) $«23,448
Net income plus gains and (losses) not
affecting retained earnings:
Net income 3,579 $«««3,579
Gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings (net of tax):
Net unrealized losses on SFAS No. 133 cash flow hedge
derivatives during 2002 (net of tax benefit of $372) (659) (659)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
(net of tax benefit of $197) 850 850
Minimum pension liability adjustment
(net of tax benefit of $1,574) (2,765) (2,765)
Net unrealized losses on marketable securities
(net of tax benefit of $8) (16) (16)
Total gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings (2,590)
Subtotal: Net income plus gains and (losses)
not affecting retained earnings $««««««989
Cash dividends declared—common stock (1,005) (1,005)
Common stock issued under employee plans (7,255,995 shares) 440 4 444
Purchases (189,797 shares) and sales (12,873,502 shares)
of treasury stock under employee plans—net (475) 1,311 836
Other treasury shares purchased, not retired (48,481,100 shares) (4,212) (4,212))
Treasury shares issued to fund the U.S.pension fund
(24,037,354 shares) (576) 2,447 1,871
Shares issued/to be issued in the PwCCacquisition
(3,677,213 shares issued) 43 (114) 355 284
Decrease in shares remaining to be issued in acquisition (9) (9)
Tax effect—stock transactions 136 136
Stockholders’ equity, December 31, 2002 $«14,858 $«31,555 $«(20,213) $«(3,418) $«22,782
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
77

===== PAGE 80 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions)
ACCUMULATED
GAINS AND
(LOSSES) NOT
AFFECTING
COMMON RETAINED TREASURY RETAINED
STOCK EARNINGS STOCK EARNINGS TOTAL
2003
Stockholders’ equity, January 1, 2003 $«14,858 $«31,555 $«(20,213) $«(3,418) $«22,782
Net income plus gains and (losses) not
affecting retained earnings:
Net income 7,583 $«««7,583
Gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings (net of tax):
Net unrealized losses on SFAS No. 133 cash flow hedge
derivatives during 2003 (net of tax benefit of $51) (91) (91)
Foreign currency translation adjustments
(net of tax benefit of $125) 1,768 1,768
Minimum pension liability adjustment
(net of tax benefit of $124) (162) (162)
Net unrealized gains on marketable securities
(net of tax expense of $3) 7 7
Total gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings 1,522
Subtotal: Net income plus gains and (losses)
not affecting retained earnings $«««9,105
Cash dividends declared—common stock (1,085) (1,085)
Common stock issued under employee plans (16,445,473 shares) 1,205 (282) 923
Purchases (291,921 shares) and sales (5,992,342 shares) of
treasury stock under employee plans—net (246) 582 336
Other treasury shares purchased, not retired (49,994,514 shares) (4,403) (4,403)
Shares to be issued in the PwCCacquisition 8 8
Decrease in shares remaining to be issued in acquisition (4) (4)
Tax effect—stock transactions 202 202
Stockholders’ equity, December 31, 2003 $«16,269 $«37,525 $«(24,034) $«(1,896) $«27,864
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
78

===== PAGE 81 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
Cash Flow from Operating Activities from Continuing Operations:
Income from continuing operations $««7,613 $««5,334 $««8,146
Adjustments to reconcile income from continuing operations
to cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation 3,961 3,691 3,881
Amortization of software 740 688 625
Deferred income taxes 1,126 (67) 664
Net gain on asset sales and other (275) (343) (340)
Other than temporary declines in securities and other investments 50 58 405
Noncash portion of special actions — 1,350 —
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures:
Receivables 2,024 4,125 2,837
Inventories 293 793 287
Pension assets (1,409) (4,227) (1,758)
Other assets (352) 70 1,244
Accounts payable 617 (55) (918)
Pension liabilities (286) 83 (69)
Other liabilities 467 2,288 (1,038)
Net Cash Provided by Operating Activities from Continuing Operations 14,569 13,788 13,966
Cash Flow from Investing Activities from Continuing Operations:
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property (4,393) (4,753) (5,400)
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines and other property 1,039 775 1,149
Investment in software (581) (597) (655)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (6,471) (1,582) (778)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 7,023 1,185 738
Divestiture of businesses 97 1,233 —
Acquisition of businesses (1,836) (3,158) (916)
Net Cash Used in Investing Activities from Continuing Operations (5,122) (6,897) (5,862)
Cash Flow from Financing Activities from Continuing Operations:
Proceeds from new debt 1,573 6,726 4,535
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 777 (4,087) 2,926
Payments to settle debt (5,831) (5,812) (7,898)
Preferred stock transactions—net — — (254)
Common stock transactions—net (3,232) (3,087) (3,652)
Cash dividends paid (1,085) (1,005) (966)
Net Cash Used in Financing Activities from Continuing Operations (7,798) (7,265) (5,309)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 421 148 (83)
Net cash (used in)/provided by discontinued operations (162) (722) 55
Net change in cash and cash equivalents 1,908 (948) 2,767
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 5,382 6,330 3,563
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31 $««7,290 $««5,382 $««6,330
Supplemental Data:
Cash paid during the year for the total company:
Income taxes $««1,707 $««1,841 $««2,279
Interest $«««««853 $«««««831 $««1,247
Noncash Investing and Financing Activities :
The noncash portion of the purchase price paid to PwCCis a significant noncash investing activity. This transaction is
described on pages 90 and 91.
The accompanying notes on pages 80 through 121 are an integral part of the financial statements.
79

===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
A arrangement, the product has been shipped or the services
significant accounting policies have been provided to the client, the sales price is fixed or
determinable, and collectibility is reasonably assured. The
BASIS OF PRESENTATION company reduces revenue for estimated client returns and
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its hard disk drive
other allowances. In addition to the aforementioned general
(HDD) business to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). See note C,
policy, the following are the specific revenue recognition poli-
“Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 89 to 92. The HDD
cies for multiple-element arrangements and for each major
business was part of the company’s Technology Group
category of revenue.
reporting segment. The HDDbusiness was accounted for as
a discontinued operation under generally accepted account- Multiple-Element Arrangements
ing principles (GAAP) and therefore, the HDD results of The company enters into transactions that represent multiple-
operations and cash flows have been removed from the element arrangements, which may include any combination
company’s results of continuing operations and cash flows of services, software, hardware and financing. Multiple-
for all periods presented in this document. The financial element arrangements are assessed to determine whether
results reported as discontinued operations include the they can be separated into more than one unit of accounting.
external original equipment manufacturer (OEM) HDD Amultiple-element arrangement is separated into more than
business and charges related to HDDs used in the company’s one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met.
eServer and Storage products that were reported in the
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-
Technology Group segment. The discontinued operations
alone basis.
results do not reflect HDD shipments to the company’s
• There is objective and reliable evidence of the fair value of
internal customers.
the undelivered item(s).
PRINCIPLES OF CONSOLIDATION • If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the
of International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) and undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substan-
its controlled subsidiary companies, which in general are tially in the control of the company.
majority owned. The accounts of variable interest entities
If these criteria are not met, then revenue is deferred until
(VIEs) as defined by the Financial Accounting Standards
such criteria are met or until the period(s) over which the
Board’s (FASB) Interpretation No. 46 (FIN46) and related
last undelivered element is delivered. If there is objective
interpretations (see note B, “Accounting Changes,” on page
and reliable evidence of fair value for all units of accounting
86), created after January 31, 2003, are included in the
in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allo-
Consolidated Financial Statements. Investments in business
cated to the separate units of accounting based on each unit’s
entities in which the company does not have control, but has
relative fair value. There may be cases, however, in which
the ability to exercise significant influence over operating
there is objective and reliable evidence of fair value of the
and financial policies (generally 20-50 percent ownership),
undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the delivered
are accounted for by the equity method. Other investments
item(s). In those cases, the residual method is used to allocate
are accounted for by the cost method. The accounting policy
the arrangement consideration. Under the residual method,
for other investments in securities is described on page 85
the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s)
within “Marketable Securities.”
equals the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate
fair value of the undelivered item(s). The revenue policies
USE OF ESTIMATES
The preparation of Consolidated Financial Statements in described below are then applied to each unit of accounting.
conformity with GAAP requires management to make For any non-software products that are in a multiple-
estimates and assumptions that affect the amounts that are element arrangement whereby the software products in the
reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and arrangement are not essential to the functionality of the
accompanying disclosures. Although these estimates are non-software items, the guidance for multiple-element
based on management’s best knowledge of current events arrangements described above apply to the non-software
and actions that the company may undertake in the future, items. If, however, the software products are essential to the
actual results may be different from the estimates. functionality of the non-software items, then the guidance
described in Software on page 81 should be applied for
REVENUE purposes of separating and allocating consideration to the
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realiz- software and non-software items.
ableand earned. The company considers revenue realized or
realizable and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an
80

===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Services basis over the period that the client is using the program.
The terms of services contracts generally range from less Revenue from maintenance, unspecified upgrades and tech-
than one year to ten years. Revenue from time and material nical support is recognized over the period such items are
services contracts is recognized as the services are provided. delivered. For multiple-element arrangement software con-
Revenue from data center or Business Transformation racts and multiple-element arrangement software contracts
Outsourcing (BTO) contracts in which IBMmanages a client’s that include non-software elements whereby the software is
data center or operates a client’s specific business process, essential to the functionality of the non-software elements
respectively, reflects the extent of actual services delivered in (collectively referred to as software multiple-element
the period, based upon objective measures of output in arrangements), the company applies the following rules:
accordance with the terms of the contract. A software multiple-element arrangement is separated
Revenue from Business Consulting Services (BCS) con- into more than one unit of accounting if all of the following
tractsthat require IBMto design, develop, manufacture or criteria are met:
modify complex information technology (IT) systems to a • The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not
buyer’s specifications, and to provide services related to the dependent on the undelivered element(s).
performance of such contracts, is recognized using the
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair
percentage of completion (POC) method of accounting. In
value of the undelivered element(s).
using the POC method, the company records revenue by
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmi-
reference to the costs incurred to date and the estimated
nation of the earnings process for those element(s).
costs remaining to fulfill the contracts.
Provisions for losses on services contracts are recognized If these criteria are not met, the revenue is deferred until
during the period in which the loss first becomes apparent. such criteria are met or until the period(s) over which the
Revenue from maintenance is recognized over the contrac- last undelivered element is delivered. If there is VSOEfor all
tual period or as the services are performed. units of accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement con-
In some of the company’s services contracts, the company sideration is allocated to the separate units of accounting
bills the client prior to performing the services. This situation based on each unit’s relative VSOE. There may be cases,
gives rise to deferred income of $3.3 billion and $2.6 billionat however, in which there is VSOEof the undelivered item(s)
December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively, and is reported as but no such evidence for the delivered item(s). In these cases,
Deferred income in the Consolidated Statement of Financial the residual method is used to allocate the arrangement
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs consideration. Under the residual method, the amount of
the services prior to billing the client. This situation gives rise consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the
to unbilled accounts receivable of $1.8 billion and $1.3 billion total arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOEof
at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively, and is recorded the undelivered elements.
as Notes and accounts receivable-trade in the Consolidated
Financing
Statement of Financial Position. In these circumstances,
Finance income attributable to sales-type leases, direct
billings usually occur shortly after thecompany performs the
financing leases and loans is recognized at level rates of
services and can range up to six months later. Unbilled receiv-
return over the term of the leases or loans. Operating lease
ables are expected to be billed and collected generally within
income is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of
four months, rarely exceeding nine months. The largest
the lease.
driver of the increase in unbilled accounts receivable is the
favorable impacts from currency translation.
EXPENSE AND OTHER INCOME
Selling, General and Administrative
Hardware
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is
Revenue from hardware sales or sales-type leases is recognized
charged to income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and
when the product is shipped to the client and when there are
selling products and services are classified as selling expense
no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final
and include such items as advertising, sales commissions and
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of these obligations
travel. General and administrative expense includes such
is accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
items as officers’ salaries, office supplies, non-income taxes,
Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a
insurance and office rental. In addition, general and adminis-
straight-line basis over the term of the rental or lease.
trative expense includes other operating items such as a
Software provision for doubtful accounts, workforce accruals for
Revenue from one-time charge licensed software is recognized contractually obligated payments to employees terminated
at the inception of the license term. Revenue from monthly in the ongoing course of business, amortization of intangible
license charge arrangements is recognized on a subscription assets and environmental remediation costs. Certain special
81

===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
actions discussed in note S, “2002 Actions,” on pages 105 asset is increased by the same amount. These incremental
through 107 are also included in SG&A. The cost of internal carrying amounts are depreciated over the useful life of the
environmental protection programs that are preventive in related assets.
nature are expensed as incurred. The company accrues for all The estimated useful lives of depreciable properties gen-
known environmental liabilities when it becomes probable erally are as follows: buildings, 50 years; building equipment,
that the company will incur cleanup costs and those costs 20 years; land improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and
can be reasonably estimated. In addition, estimated envi- office equipment, 2 to 15 years; and computer equipment, 1.5
ronmental costs that are associated with asset retirement to 5 years.
obligations (for example, the required removal and restoration Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after tech-
of chemical storage facilities and monitoring) are also accrued nological feasibility are amortized over periods up to 3 years.
when it is probable that the costs will be incurred and the Capitalized costs for internal-use software are amortized on
costs are reasonably estimable. The accounting for asset a straight-line basis over 2 years. See “Software Costs” on
retirement obligations (AROs) is further discussed below in page 85 for additional information. Other intangible assets
“Depreciation and Amortization.” are amortized for periods up to 7 years. See “Standards Imple-
mented” on page 88 for additional information on goodwill.
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
expensed as incurred. See note W, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 110
to 117 for the company’s accounting policy for retirement-
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
related benefits.
As part of the company’s ongoing business model and as a
result of the company’s ongoing investment in research and STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
development (R&D), the company licenses and sells the rights The company applies Accounting Principles Board (APB)
to certain of its intellectual property (IP) including internally Opinion No. 25, “Accounting for Stock Issued to Employees,”
developed patents, trade secrets and technological know- and related Interpretations in accounting for its stock-based
how. Certain transfers of IP to third parties are licensing/ compensation plans. Accordingly, the company records
royalty-based fees and other transfers are transaction-based expense for employee stock-based compensation plans equal
sales and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees to the excess of the market price of the underlying IBM
involve transfers in which the company earns the income shares at the date of grant over the exercise price of the
over time, or the amount of income is not fixed and deter- stock-related award, if any (known as the intrinsic value).
minable until the licensee sells future related products (i.e., Generally, all employee stock options are issued with the
variable royalty, based upon licensee’s revenue). Sales and exercise price equal to the market price of the underlying
other transfers typically include transfers of IPwhereby the IBMshares at the grant date and therefore, no compensation
company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee received is expense is recorded. In addition, no compensation expense
fixed and determinable. The company also earns income from is recorded for purchases under the Employees Stock
certain custom development projects for specific clients. Purchase Plan (ESPP) in accordance with APB Opinion
The company records the income from these projects when No. 25. This plan is described on page 110. The intrinsic value
the fee is earned, is not refundable, and is not dependent of restricted stock units and certain other stock-based
upon the success of the project. compensation issued to employees as of the date of grant is
amortized to compensation expense over the vesting period.
Other (Income) and Expense
To the extent there are performance criteria that could result
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other
in an employee receiving more or less (including zero) shares
than from the company’s Global Financing business transac-
than the number of units granted, the unamortized liability
tions), gains and losses from securities and other investments,
is marked to market during the performance period based
realized gains and losses from certain real estate activity, and
upon the intrinsic value at the end of each quarter.
foreign currency transaction gains and losses.
The following table summarizes the pro forma operating
DEPRECIATION AND AMORTIZATION results of the company had compensation cost for stock
Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost options granted and for employee stock purchases under the
and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using the ESPP (see note V, “Stock-Based Compensation Plans,” on
straight-line method. AROliabilities are the estimated costs pages 109 and 110) been determined in accordance with the
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets for which fair value-based method prescribed by Statement of Financial
a legal or contractual obligation exists. These liabilities are Accounting Standards (SFAS) No. 123, “Accounting for Stock-
recorded at fair value and the carrying amount of the related Based Compensation.”
82

===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions except per share amounts)
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
Net income applicable to common stockholders, as reported $«7,583 $«3,579 $«7,713
Add: Stock-based employee compensation expense included in
reported net income, net of related tax effects 76 112 104
Deduct: Total stock-based employee compensation expense determined
under fair value method for all awards, net of related tax effects 1,101 1,315 1,343
Pro forma net income applicable to common stockholders $«6,558 $«2,376 $«6,474
Earnings per share of common stock:
Basic—as reported $«««4.40 $«««2.10 $«««4.45
Basic—pro forma $«««3.81 $«««1.40 $«««3.74
Assuming dilution—as reported $«««4.32 $«««2.06 $«««4.35
Assuming dilution—pro forma $«««3.74 $«««1.39 $«««3.69
The pro forma amounts that are disclosed in accordance with SFAS No. 123 reflect the portion of the estimated fair value of
awards that was earned for the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001.
The fair value of stock option grants is estimated using Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings
the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with the following within Stockholders’ equity.
assumptions: Inventories, Plant, rental machines and other property-
net, and other non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dollars, or
Option term (years)* 5 5 4/5
whose economic environment is highly inflationary, are
Volatility** 39.9% 40.4% 37.7%
translated at approximate exchange rates prevailing when
Risk-free interest rate
the company acquired the assets or liabilities. All other assets
(zero coupon
and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Cost
U.S.treasury note) 2.9% 2.8% 4.4%
of sales and depreciation are translated at historical
Dividend yield 0.7% 0.7% 0.5%
exchange rates. All other income and expense items are
Weighted-average fair value
per option $«««30 $«««28 $«««42 translated at the weighted-average rates of exchange pre-
vailing during the year. Gains and losses that result from
* The Option term is the number of years that the company estimates, based upon history,
translation are included in net income.
that options will be outstanding prior to exercise or forfeiture. The Option term is 5
years for non-tax incentive options granted in 2001 through 2003. The Option term is
4 years for tax incentive options granted in 2001. There were no tax incentive options DERIVATIVES
granted in 2003 or 2002.
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement
**To determine volatility, the company measured the daily price changes of the stock
over the respective term for tax incentive options and non-tax incentive options. of Financial Position at fair value and are reported in Prepaid
expenses and other current assets, Investments and sundry
INCOME TAXES
assets, Other accrued expenses and liabilities or Other lia-
Income tax expense is based on reported income before
bilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the effect of
Classification of each derivative as current or non-current is
temporary differences between asset and liability amounts
based upon whether the maturity of each instrument is less
that are recognized for financial reporting purposes and the
than or greater than 12 months. To qualify for hedge account-
amounts that are recognized for income tax purposes. These
ing in accordance with SFAS No. 133, “Accounting for
deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted
Derivative Instruments and Hedging Activities,” as amended
tax laws. Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce the
by SFAS No. 138, “Accounting for Certain Derivative Instru-
deferred tax assets to the amount that is more likely than not
ments and Certain Hedging Activities,” and SFAS No. 149,
to be realized. In assessing the likelihood of realization,
“Amendment of Statement 133 on Derivative Instruments
management considers estimates of future taxable income.
and Hedging Activities,” (SFAS No. 133), the company requires
TRANSLATION OF NON-U.S. CURRENCY AMOUNTS that the instruments are effective in reducing the risk
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S.subsidiaries that operate in exposure that they are designated to hedge. For instruments
a local currency environment are translated to U.S.dollars at that are associated with the hedge of cash flows, hedge effec-
year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are tiveness criteria also require that it be probable that the
translated at weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing underlying transaction will occur. Instruments that meet
during the year. Translation adjustments are recorded in established accounting criteria are formally designated as
83

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
hedges at the inception of the contract. These criteria the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging
demonstrate that the derivative is expected to be highly derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment are
effective at offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows of recorded in Interest expense.
the underlying exposure both at inception of the hedging When the underlying hedged item ceases to exist, all
relationship and on an ongoing basis. The assessment for changes in the fair value of the derivative are included in net
effectiveness is formally documented at hedge inception income each period until the instrument matures. When the
and reviewed at least quarterly throughout the designated derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or lia-
hedge period. bility is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except
The company applies hedge accounting in accordance as required under other relevant accounting standards.
with SFAS No. 133, whereby the company designates each Derivatives that are not designated as hedges, as well as
derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a recognized asset changes in the value of derivatives that do not offset the
or liability or of an unrecognized firm commitment (“fair underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge
value” hedge); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of period (collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net
a forecasted transaction or the cash flows to be received or income each period and generally are reported in Other
paid related to a recognized asset or liability (“cash flow” (income) and expense.
hedge); or (3) a hedge of a long-term investment (“net invest- The company generally reports cash flows resulting from
ment” hedge) in a foreign operation. From time to time, the company’s derivative financial instruments consistent
however, the company may enter into derivatives that eco- with the classification of cash flows from the underlying
nomically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge hedged items that the derivatives are hedging. Accordingly,
accounting does not apply under SFAS No. 133 or is not the majority of cash flows associated with the company’s
applied by the company. In these cases, there generally exists derivative programs are classified in Cash flows from operat-
a natural hedging relationship in which changes in fair value ing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
of the derivative, which are recognized currently in net For currency swaps designated as hedges of foreign currency
income, act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value denominated debt (included in the company’s debt risk man-
of the underlying hedged item(s). agement program as addressed in note L, “Derivatives and
Changes in the value of a derivative that is designated as Hedging Transactions,” on pages 96 to 99), cash flows directly
a fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair associated with the settlement of the principal element of
value of the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in these swaps are reported in the Payment to settle debt line in
earnings each period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair the Cash flow from financing activities section of the
value adjustments are recorded as adjustments to Interest Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
expense and Cost of Global Financing in the Consolidated See note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on
Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency risk associ- pages 96 to 99 for a description of the major risk manage-
ated with recorded assets or liabilities, derivative fair value ment programs and classes of financial instruments used by
adjustments generally are recognized in Other (income) and the company.
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Changes in the value of a derivative that is designated as a
In determining fair value of its financial instruments, the
cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in the
company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are
Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained earn-
based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance
ings, a component of Stockholders’ equity. When net income
sheet date. For the majority of financial instruments including
is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the
most derivatives, long-term investments and long-term
applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the
debt, standard market conventions and techniques such as
derivative that is deferred in Stockholders’ equity is released
discounted cash flow analysis, option pricing models,
to net income and reported in Interest expense, Cost, SG&A
replacement cost and termination cost are used to determine
expense or Other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
fair value. Dealer quotes are used for the remaining financial
Statement of Earnings based on the nature of the underlying
instruments. All methods of assessing fair value result in a
cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net investment hedging
general approximation of value, and such value may never
derivatives is measured on a spot to spot basis. The effective
actually be realized.
portion of changes in the fair value of net investment hedg-
ing derivatives and other non-derivative risk management CASH EQUIVALENTS
instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded All highly liquid investments with maturities of three
as foreign currency translation adjustments, net of applica- months or less at the date of purchase are carried at fair value
ble taxes, in the Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting and considered to be cash equivalents.
retained earnings section of Stockholders’ equity. Changes in
84

===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
MARKETABLE SECURITIES Unallocated – The company records an unallocated reserve
Marketable securities included in Current assets represent that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different
securities with a maturity of less than one year. The company portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically
also has Marketable securities, including non-equity method reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, proba-
alliance investments, with a maturity of more than one year. bilityof default, term, asset characteristics, and loss history.
These non-current investments are included in Investments Receivable losses are charged against the allowance when
and sundry assets. The company’s Marketable securities, management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable
including certain non-equity method alliance investments, are is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to
considered available for sale and are reported at fair value with the allowance.
changes in unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, Certain receivables for which the company recorded
recorded in Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting specific reserves may also be placed on nonaccrual status.
retained earnings within Stockholders’ equity. Realized gains Nonaccrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or
and losses are calculated based on the specific identification nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other
method. Other-than-temporary declines in market value from accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable
original cost are charged to Other (income) and expense in the to collect all amounts due according to original terms of the
period in which the loss occurs. In determining whether an lease or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued
other-than-temporary decline in the market value has on these receivables. Receivables may be removed from
occurred, the company considers the duration that, and nonaccrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in
extent to which, market value is below original cost. Realized client circumstances.
gains and losses and other than temporary declines in market
value from original cost are included in Other (income) and ESTIMATED RESIDUAL VALUES OF LEASE ASSETS
The recorded residual values of the company’s lease assets
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. All
are estimated at the inception of the lease to be the expected
other investment securities not described above or in
fair market value of the assets at the end of the lease term.
“Principles of Consolidation” on page 80, primarily non-
The company reassesses the realizable value of its lease
publicly traded equity securities, are accounted for using the
residual values. Any anticipated increases in specific future
cost method.
residual values are not recognized before realization through
INVENTORIES remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific future
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated residual values that are considered to be other than temporary
at the lower of average cost or net realizable value. are recognized immediately upon identification and are
recorded as an adjustment to the residual value estimate. For
ALLOWANCE FOR UNCOLLECTIBLE RECEIVABLES
sale type and direct financing leases, this reduction lowers
Trade
the recorded net investment and is recognized as a loss
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is recorded
charged to finance income in the period in which the estimate
based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis,
is changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned income to
and any specific known troubled accounts.
reduce future period finance income.
Financing
SOFTWARE COSTS
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and
leases, and loans. Below are the methodologies the company
design of licensed programs are expensed as R&D. Also for
uses to calculate both its specific and its unallocated reserves,
licensed programs, the company capitalizes costs that are
which are applied consistently to its different portfolios.
incurred to produce the finished product after technological
Specific – The company reviews all accounts receivable consid- feasibility is established. The annual amortization of the
ered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily consists capitalized amounts is performed using the straight-line
of an analysis based upon current information available about method, and is applied over periods ranging up to three
the client, such as financial statements, news reports and years. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that
published credit ratings, as well as the current economic unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future
environment, collateral net of repossession cost and prior revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are
history. For loans that are collateral dependent, impairment expensed as the costs are incurred.
is measured using the fair value of the collateral when fore- The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred
closure is probable. Using this information, the company to purchase or to create and implement internal-use com-
determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and puter software, which includes software coding, installation,
calculates a recommended estimate of the potential loss and testing and data conversion. Capitalized costs are amortized
the probability of loss. For those accounts where the loss is on a straight-line basis over 2 years.
probable, the company records a specific reserve.
85

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
PRODUCT WARRANTIES finance its activities without additional subordinated financial
The company estimates its warranty costs based on historical support, or (2) have equity investors that lack an essential
warranty claim experience and applies this estimate to the characteristic of a controlling financial interest.
revenue stream for products under warranty. Included in the Throughout 2003, the FASBreleased numerous proposed
company’s warranty accrual are costs for limited warranties and final FASB Staff Positions (FSPs) regarding FIN 46,
and extended warranty coverage. Future costs for warranties which both clarified and modified FIN 46’s provisions. In
applicable to revenue recognized in the current period are December 2003, the FASB issued Interpretation No. 46
charged to cost of revenue. The warranty accrual is reviewed (FIN 46-R), which will replace FIN 46 upon its effective
quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining date. FIN46-Rretains many of the basic concepts introduced
obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the in FIN46; however, it also introduces a new scope exception
balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when for certain types of entities that qualify as a “business” as
actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. defined in FIN 46-R, revises the method of calculating
expected losses and residual returns for determination of the
COMMON STOCK
primary beneficiary, includes new guidance for assessing
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value capital stock as
variable interests, and codifies certain FSPs on FIN46.
designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation.
Pursuant to the transition requirements of FSPFIN46-6,
Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method.
the company previously disclosed in the third quarter 2003
When treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and
Form 10-Qthe planned adoption of the consolidation guid-
recorded using a weighted-average basis.
ance applicable to existing VIEs as of December 31, 2003. In
EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK accordance with the transition requirements of FIN46-R,
Earnings per share of common stock-basic is computed by the company has applied the provisions of FIN 46 as of
dividing Net income applicable to common stockholders by December 31, 2003, to all special-purpose entities (SPEs) as
the weighted-average number of common shares outstanding defined within FIN46-Rto which it is associated and all non-
for the period. Earnings per share of common stock-assuming SPEs created after January 31, 2003. It will defer adoption of
dilution reflects the maximum potential dilution that could FIN46-Rfor all other non-SPEs until March 31, 2004.
occur if securities or other contracts to issue common stock The application of FIN46 to VIEs created after January
were exercised or converted into common stock and would 31, 2003, did not result in any entities requiring consolida-
then share in the net income of the company. See note T, tion that would not already have required consolidation
“Earnings Per Share of Common Stock,” on page 108 for under the voting equity interest model. Additionally, no new
additional information. consolidation was required as a result of applying FIN46 to
the company’s SPEs. The company’s program to sell state and
local government receivables, as described in note J, “Sale
B
and Securitization of Receivables,” on page 95, involves
accounting changes
qualifying SPEs, and therefore is not subject to FIN46. The
STANDARDS IMPLEMENTED company is continuing to evaluate the impact of FIN46-R
In December 2003, the FASB revised SFAS No. 132, and its related guidance for its adoption as of March 31,
“Employers’ Disclosures about Pensions and other Post- 2004. However, it is not expected to have a material impact
retirement Benefits, an amendment of FASB Statements on the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
No. 87, 88 and 106.” This new SFAS No. 132 retains all of the In 2003, the Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) reached
disclosure requirements of SFAS No. 132; however, it also a consensus on two issues relating to the accounting for
requires additional annual disclosures describing types of multiple-element arrangements: Issue No. 00-21, “Accounting
plan assets, investment strategy, measurement date(s), for Revenue Arrangements with Multiple Deliverables,” and
expected employer contributions, plan obligations, and Issue No. 03-05, “Applicability of AICPASOP97-2 to Non-
expected benefit payments of defined benefit pension plans Software Deliverables in an Arrangement Containing More
and other defined benefit postretirement plans. In accor- Than Incidental Software.” The consensus opinion in EITF
dance with the transition provisions of SFAS No. 132 (revised No. 03-05 clarifies the scope of both EITF00-21 and State-
2003), note W, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 110 ment of Financial Position (SOP) 97-2, “Software Revenue
through 117 has been expanded to include the new disclo- Recognition,” and was reached on July 31, 2003. The transi-
sures required as of December 31, 2003. tion provisions allow either prospective application or a
In January 2003, the FASBissued FIN46, “Consolidation cumulative effect adjustment upon adoption. IBMadopted
of Variable Interest Entities,” which addresses consolidation the Issue prospectively as of July 1, 2003. EITFNos. 00-21 and
by business enterprises of VIEs that either: (1) do not have 03-05 did not have a material impact on the Consolidated
sufficient equity investment at risk to permit the entity to Financial Statements.
86

===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
In April 2003, the FASBissued SFAS No. 149, “Amendment In July 2002, the FASBissued SFAS No. 146, “Accounting
of Statement 133 on Derivative Instruments and Hedging for Costs Associated with Exit or Disposal Activities.” SFAS
Activities.” SFAS No. 149 clarifies under what circumstances No. 146 supersedes EITF No. 94-3, “Liability Recognition
a contract with an initial net investment meets the character- for Certain Employee Termination Benefits and Other Costs
istics of a derivative as discussed in SFAS No. 133. It also to Exit an Activity (Including Certain Costs Incurred in a
specifies when a derivative contains a financing component Restructuring),” and requires that a liability for a cost associ-
that requires special reporting in the Consolidated Statement ated with an exit or disposal activity be recognized when the
of Cash Flows. SFAS No. 149 amends certain other existing liability is incurred. Such liabilities should be recorded at fair
pronouncements in order to improve consistency in report- value and updated for any changes in the fair value each
ing these types of transactions. The new guidance is effective period. The company adopted this statement effective
for contracts entered into or modified after June 30, 2003, January 1, 2003, and its adoption did not have a material effect
and for hedging relationships designated after June 30, 2003. on the Consolidated Financial Statements. Going forward,
SFAS No. 149 did not have a material effect on the Consoli- the impact of SFAS No. 146 on the company’s Consolidated
dated Financial Statements. Financial Statements will depend upon the timing of and
In May 2003, the FASBissued SFAS No. 150, “Accounting facts underlying any future exit or disposal activity.
for Certain Financial Instruments with Characteristics of both On January 1, 2003, the company adopted SFAS No. 143,
Liabilities and Equity.” It establishes classification and meas- “Accounting for Asset Retirement Obligations.” SFAS No. 143
urement standards for three types of freestanding financial provides accounting and reporting guidance for legal obliga-
instruments that have characteristics of both liabilities and tions associated with the retirement of long-lived assets that
equity. Instruments within the scope of SFAS No. 150 must result from the acquisition, construction or normal operation
be classified as liabilities within the company’s Consolidated of a long-lived asset. SFAS No. 143 requires the recording of
Financial Statements and be reported at settlement date an asset and a liability equal to the present value of the esti-
value. The provisions of SFAS No. 150 are effective for (1) mated costs associated with the retirement of long-lived
instruments entered into or modified after May 31, 2003, and assets for which a legal or contractual obligation exists. The
(2) pre-existing instruments as of July 1, 2003. In November asset is required to be depreciated over the life of the related
2003, through the issuance of FSP 150-3, the FASB equipment or facility, and the liability is required to be
indefinitely deferred the effective date of certain provisions accreted each year based on a present value interest rate. The
of SFAS No. 150, including mandatorily redeemable instru- adoption of the standard did not have a material effect on
ments as they relate to minority interests in consolidated the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
finite-lived entities. The adoption of SFAS No. 150, as In April 2002, the FASBissued SFAS No. 145, “Rescission
modified by FSP150-3, did not have a material effect on the of FASBStatements No. 4, 44 and 64, Amendment of FASB
Consolidated Financial Statements. Statement No. 13, and Technical Corrections,” effective
In November 2002, the FASBissued Interpretation No. May 15, 2002. SFAS No. 145 eliminates the requirement that
45 (FIN 45), “Guarantor’s Accounting and Disclosure gains and losses from the extinguishment of debt be aggre-
Requirements for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees gated and classified as an extraordinary item, net of tax, and
of Indebtedness of Others,” which addresses the disclosures makes certain other technical corrections. SFAS No. 145 did
to be made by a guarantor in its interim and annual financial not have a material effect on the company’s Consolidated
statements about its obligations under guarantees. FIN 45 Financial Statements.
also requires the recognition of a liability by a guarantor at Effective January 1, 2002, the company adopted SOP01-6,
the inception of certain guarantees that are entered into or “Accounting by Certain Entities (including entities with
modified after December 31, 2002. The company has adopted Trade Receivables) That Lend to or Finance the Activities of
the disclosure requirements of FIN45 (see note A, “Significant Others.” With limited exception, SOP 01-6 applies to any
Accounting Policies,” on page 86 under “Product Warranties,” entity that lends to, or finances the activities of, others and
in note O, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 101 provides specialized guidance for certain transactions specific
to 103) and applied the recognition and measurement provi- to financial institutions. This SOPreconciles and conforms,
sions for all material guarantees entered into or modified in as appropriate, the accounting and financial reporting guid-
periods beginning January 1, 2003. The initial adoption of ance established by the American Institute of Certified
the recognition and measurement provisions of FIN45 did Public Accountants. The adoption did not have a material
not have a material impact on the Consolidated Financial effect on the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Statements. The impact of FIN45on the company’s future In October 2001, the FASB issued SFAS No. 144,
Consolidated Financial Statements will depend upon “Accounting for the Impairment or Disposal of Long-Lived
whether the company enters into or modifies any material Assets.” SFAS No. 144 addresses significant issues relating to
guarantee arrangements. the implementation of SFAS No. 121, “Accounting for the
87

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets and for Long-Lived Assets initial test and the company’s first annual goodwill impairment
to Be Disposed Of,” and develops a single accounting model, test, performed as of October 1, 2002, resulted in no goodwill
based on the framework established in SFAS No. 121 for impairment charges. See note I, “Intangible Assets Including
long-lived assets to be disposed of by sale, whether such Goodwill,” on page 94 for current year changes in the
assets are or are not deemed to be a business. SFAS No. 144 amount of recorded goodwill.
also modifies the accounting and disclosure rules for discon- The following table presents Reported income from
tinued operations. The standard was adopted on January 1, continuing operations and net income adjusted to exclude
2002, and did not have a material impact on the company’s goodwill amortization, which is no longer recorded under
Consolidated Financial Statements. The discontinued HDD SFAS No. 142 effective January 1, 2002.
operations are presented in the Consolidated Financial
(dollars in millions except per share amounts)
Statements in accordance with SFAS No. 144.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
In November 2001, the FASBissued EITFIssue No. 01-14,
Reported income from
“Income Statement Characterization of Reimbursements continuing operations $«7,613 $«5,334 $«8,146
Received for ‘Out of Pocket’ Expenses Incurred.” This
Add: Goodwill amortization,
guidance requires companies to recognize the recovery of net of tax effects — — 262
reimbursable expenses such as travel costs on services con-
Adjusted income from
tracts as revenue. These costs are not to be netted as a continuing operations $«7,613 $«5,334 $«8,408
reduction of cost. This guidance was effective January 1,
Basic earnings per share from
2002. This guidance did not have a material effect on the continuing operations:
company’s Consolidated Financial Statements due to the Reported income from
company’s billing practices. For instance, outside the U.S., continuing operations $«««4.42 $«««3.13 $«««4.69
almost all of the company’s contracts involve fixed billings Goodwill amortization — — 0.15
that are designed to recover all costs, including out-of- Adjusted basic earnings
pocket costs. Therefore, the “reimbursement” of these costs per share from
is already recorded in revenue. continuing operations $«««4.42 $«««3.13 $«««4.85*
In July 2001, the FASBissued SFAS No. 141, “Business Diluted earnings per share
Combinations,” and SFAS No. 142, “Goodwill and Other from continuing operations:
Intangible Assets.” SFAS No. 141 requires the use of the pur- Reported income from
continuing operations $«««4.34 $«««3.07 $«««4.59
chase method of accounting for business combinations and
Goodwill amortization — — 0.15
prohibits the use of the pooling of interests method. Under
the previous rules, the company used the purchase method Adjusted diluted earnings
per share from
of accounting. SFAS No. 141 also refines the definition of
continuing operations $«««4.34 $«««3.07 $«««4.74
intangible assets acquired in a purchase business combina-
Reported net income $«7,583 $«3,579 $«7,723
tion. As a result, the purchase price allocation of current
Add: Goodwill amortization,
business combinations may be different than the allocation
net of tax effects — — 262
that would have resulted under the old rules. Business combi-
Adjusted net income $«7,583 $«3,579 $«7,985
nations must be accounted for using SFAS No. 141 effective
July 1, 2001. Basic earnings per share:
SFAS No. 142 eliminates the amortization of goodwill,
Reported net income $«««4.40 $«««2.10 $«««4.45
requires annual impairment testing of goodwill and intro- Goodwill amortization — — 0.15
duces the concept of indefinite life intangible assets. The Adjusted basic earnings
company adopted SFAS No. 142 on January 1, 2002. The new per share $«««4.40 $«««2.10 $«««4.60
rules also prohibit the amortization of goodwill associated Diluted earnings per share:
with business combinations that closed after June 30, 2001. Reported net income $«««4.32 $«««2.06 $«««4.35
In accordance with SFAS No. 141, the unamortized bal- Goodwill amortization — — 0.15
ance for acquired assembled workforce of $33 million, which Adjusted diluted earnings
had been recognized as an intangible asset separate from per share $«««4.32 $«««2.06 $«««4.50
goodwill, has been reclassified to goodwill effective January 1,
*Does not total due to rounding.
2002. In addition, an initial goodwill impairment test was
required to be performed in 2002 as of January 1, 2002. This
88

===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
On January 1, 2001, the company adopted SFAS No. 133, Effective January 1, 2001, the company adopted SFAS No.
as amended. SFAS No. 133 establishes accounting and report- 140, “Accounting for Transfers and Servicing of Financial
ing standards for derivative instruments. As of January 1, Assets and Extinguishments of Liabilities—a replacement
2001, the adoption of the new standard resulted in a cumulative of SFAS No. 125.” This statement provides accounting and
effect, net-of-tax increase of $219 million to Accumulated reporting standards for transfers and servicing of financial
gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings in the assets and extinguishments of liabilities. It also revises the
Stockholders’ equity section of the Consolidated Statement accounting standards for securitizations and transfers of
of Financial Position and a cumulative effect net-of-tax financial assets and collateral. The adoption did not have a
charge of $6 million included in Other (income) and expense material effect on the company’s Consolidated Financial
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Statements. The standard also requires new disclosures that
are not applicable to the company.
C
acquisitions/divestitures
ACQUISITIONS
2003
In 2003, the company completed nine acquisitions at an aggregate cost of $2,536 million.
(dollars in millions)
RATIONAL
ORIGINAL
AMOUNT
DISCLOSED IN
AMORTIZATION FIRST QUARTER PURCHASE TOTAL OTHER
LIFE (IN YEARS) 2003 ADJUSTMENTS* ALLOCATION ACQUISITIONS
Current assets $«1,179 $««51 $«1,230 $«««19
Fixed assets/non-current 83 28 111 2
Intangible assets:
Goodwill NA 1,365 40 1,405 335
Completed technology 3 229 — 229 12
Client relationships 7 180 — 180 1
Other identifiable intangible assets 2–5 32 — 32 21
In-process R&D 9 — 9 —
Total assets acquired 3,077 119 3,196 390
Current liabilities (347) (81) (428) (28)
Non-current liabilities (638) 33 (605) 11
Total liabilities assumed (985) (48) (1,033) (17)
Total purchase price $«2,092 $««71 $«2,163 $«373
*Adjustments primarily relate to acquisition costs, deferred taxes and other accruals.
Rational Software Corporation (Rational)– The largest acquisi- The acquisition was accounted for as a purchase transac-
tion in 2003 was that of Rational. The company purchased tion, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the acquired
the outstanding stock of Rational for $2,095 million in entity were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date
cash. In addition, the company issued replacement stock of the acquisition. The primary items that generated the
options with an estimated fair value of $68 million to Rational goodwill are the value of the synergies between Rational and
employees. Rational provides open, industry standard tools, IBM and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of
and best practices and services for developing business which qualify as an amortizable intangible asset. None of
applicationsand building software products and systems. The the goodwill is deductible for tax purposes. The overall
Rational acquisition provides the company with the ability to weighted-average life of the identified intangible assets
offer a complete development environment for clients. The acquired in the purchase of Rational that are subject to
transaction was completed on February 21, 2003, from which amortization is 4.7 years. With the exception of goodwill, these
time the results of this acquisition were included in the identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-
company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. The company line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,405 million
merged Rational’s business operations and employees into has been assigned to the Software segment. The company
the company’s Software segment as a new division and brand. recorded a pre-tax charge of $9 million for in-process R&D.
89

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
This amount, which reflects the relative value and contribu- to Strategic Outsourcing and Business Consulting Services
tion of the acquired R&Dto the company’s existing research companies and one was a hardware business. The primary
or product lines, was charged to RD&Eexpense on the com- items that generated goodwill are the synergies between the
pany’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The acquired acquired businesses and the company, and the premium
R&Dhad not reached technical feasibility, nor did it have an paid by the company for the right to control the businesses
alternative future use, at date of acquisition. acquired. The company assigned approximately $74 million
As indicated above, $2,095 million of the gross purchase of the goodwill to the Software segment: $203 million of
price was paid in cash. However, as part of the transaction, goodwill to the Global Services segment; and $58 million of
IBMassumed cash and cash equivalents held in Rational of goodwill to the Hardware segment. These assignments were
$1,053 million, resulting in a net cash payment of $1,042
based upon an analysis of the segments that are expected to
million. In addition, the company assumed $500 million in
benefit from the acquisitions. Substantially all of the goodwill
outstanding convertible debt. The convertible debt was sub-
is not deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-
sequently called on March 26, 2003.
averagelife of the intangible assets purchased is 4.3 years.
Other Acquisitions– The company paid substantially all cash The results of operations of the acquired businesses were
for the other acquisitions in the table on page 89. Five of included in the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements
the acquisitions were for software companies, two related from the respective dates of acquisition.
2002
In 2002, the company completed 12 acquisitions at an aggregate cost of $3,958 million. In addition, the company paid an addi-
tional $414 million in 2003 resulting from purchase price adjustments.
(dollars in millions)
PwCC
ORIGINAL
AMOUNT
DISCLOSED IN
AMORTIZATION 2002 ANNUAL PURCHASE TOTAL OTHER
LIFE (IN YEARS) REPORT ADJUSTMENTS* ALLOCATION ACQUISITIONS
Current assets $«1,197 $«(228) $««««969 $«264
Fixed assets/non-current 199 (35) 164 102
Intangible assets:
Goodwill N/A 2,461 694 3,155 364
Completed technology 3 — — — 66
Strategic alliances 5 103 — 103 —
Non-contractual client relationships 4–7 131 — 131 —
Client contracts/backlog 3–5 82 — 82 6
Other identifiable intangible assets 3–5 95 — 95 10
In-process R&D — — — 4
Total assets acquired 4,268 431 4,699 816
Current liabilities (560) (26) (586) (208)
Non-current liabilities (234) 9 (225) (124)
Total liabilities assumed (794) (17) (811) (332)
Total purchase price $«3,474 $««414 $«3,888 $«484
*Adjustments relate to the amount paid by the company to PricewaterhouseCoopers as a result of the review discussed below as well as other purchase accounting adjustments primarily
related to accounts receivable, prepaid assets and other accruals.
PricewaterhouseCoopers’ Global Business Consulting and Technology disclosed in the company’s 2002 Annual Report, which was
Services Unit (PwCC) Acquisition – On October 1, 2002, the based on the initial $3,474 million paid, included an estimated
company purchased PwCCfor $3,888 million. The acquisition amount of net tangible assets to be transferred of approxi-
of PwCCprovides the company with new expertise in busi- mately $422 million. The recorded amount of net tangible
ness strategy, industry-based consulting, process integration assets transferred to IBMfrom PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC)
and application management. The company paid $3,474 mil- on October 1, 2002, was approximately $454 million higher
lion of the cost related to the acquisition of PwCCin 2002. than the estimate. The amount of recorded net tangible
The balance was paid in 2003. The purchase price allocation assets transferred was subject to a review process between
90

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
both parties under the terms of the agreement. As a result Other Acquisitions – The company paid cash for the other
of the review process and other adjustments, the company acquisitions. Six of the acquisitions were for software com-
paid an additional amount to PwC of $397 million in July panies, including Crossworlds Software, Inc., and Access360.
2003. Substantially all of the payment was accounted for as The other five acquisitions were Strategic Outsourcing and
incremental goodwill due to the fact that the net tangible Business Consulting Services companies. The primary items
assets recorded by IBMas of October 1, 2002, included the that generated goodwill are the synergies between the
incremental amount. The difference between the $397 mil- acquired businesses and the company, and the premium
lion payment in July and the total purchase price adjustment paid by the company for the right to control the businesses
in the table on page 90 is due to transaction costs incurred acquired. Approximately $300 million of the goodwill has
by the company. been assigned to the Software segment and the balance to the
The company paid $3,266 million of the purchase price in Global Services segment. The goodwill is not deductible for
cash, $294 million primarily in the form of restricted shares tax purposes. The overall weighted-average life of the intangi-
of IBMcommon stock and $328 million in notes convertible ble assets purchased is 3.4 years. The results of operations of
into restricted shares of IBMcommon stock. the acquired businesses were included in the company’s
In connection with the acquisition, the company Consolidated Financial Statements from the respective dates
incurred approximately $196 million of pre-tax, one-time of acquisition.
compensation costs for certain PwCCpartners and employ-
ees. This amount relates to restricted stock awards and the 2001
In 2001, the company completed two acquisitions at a cost
compensation element of the convertible notes issued as
of approximately $1,082 million.
part of the purchase consideration and was recorded in the
fourth quarter of 2002. The portion of this amount recorded (dollars in millions)
as part of SG&Ain the Consolidated Statement of Earnings AMORTIZATION OTHER
as compensation expense for the convertible notes equals LIFE (IN YEARS) INFORMIX ACQUISITION
the difference between the fair value and the face value of Current assets $««««156 $««57
the notes. Fixed/non-current assets 41 21
As a result of its acquisition of PwCC, the company Intangible assets:
recorded a liability of approximately $601 million in the fourth Goodwill 591 25
quarter of 2002 to rebalance its workforce and to vacate Client lists 5 220 —
excess leased space. All employees affected by this action Completed technology 3 140 —
were notified as of December 31, 2002. The portion of the Trademarks 2 10 —
liability relating to IBMpeople and space was approximately Total assets acquired 1,158 103
$318 million, substantially all of which was recorded as part Deferred revenue (101) (2)
of SG&A in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The Payables/accrued expenses (55) (21)
portion of the liability relating to acquired PwCCworkforce
Total liabilities assumed (156) (23)
and leased space was approximately $283 million and was
Total purchase price $«1,002 $««80
included as part of the liabilities assumed for purchase
accounting and are included in the table on page 90. Also see
page 107 for additional information on these initiatives. Informix Corporation (Informix)– The larger acquisition was
Almost half of the goodwill was estimated to be generated Informix database software business. The company purchased
by the value of the acquired assembled workforce. The Informix in the third quarter of 2001. The company paid
acquired assembled workforce is treated as goodwill under approximately $1 billion in cash for the net assets of the
SFAS No. 141. The remaining items that generated goodwill business. Under the terms of the acquisition, the company
are synergies between PwCC and the company created by paid $889 million of the purchase price in 2001. The balance
the combination, and the premium paid by the company for was paid in January 2003. The Informix acquisition provided
the right to control PwCC. The goodwill has been assigned the company with a database software system for data ware-
to the Global Services segment. The company estimates that housing, business intelligence and transaction-handling
approximately two-thirds of the goodwill is deductible for systems that are used by more than 100,000 clients. In addi-
tax purposes. The overall weighted-average life of amortizable tion, the acquisition significantly increased the size of the
intangible assets purchased from PwCis 4.8 years. The results company’s UNIXdatabase business.
of operations of PwCC were included in the company’s
Consolidated Financial Statements as of October 1, 2002.
91

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The primary items that generated goodwill are the value received approximately $156 million from Hitachi on
of the acquired assembled workforce and the synergies December 31, 2003 for the payment due one year after closing
between Informix and the company created by the combina- and paid approximately $59 million to Hitachi for certain
tion. Goodwill of $591 million has been assigned to the contractual items resulting in a net cash inflow in 2003 of
Software segment. Almost all of the goodwill is deductible $97 million.
for tax purposes. This transaction occurred after June 30, IBM has entered into an arms-length five-year supply
2001, and therefore, the acquired goodwill is not subject to agreement with Hitachi, effective January 1, 2003, designed to
amortization. The overall weighted-average life of intangible provide the company with a majority of its ongoing internal
assets purchased from Informix is 4.2 years. The results of disk drive requirements for the company’s Server, Storage
operations of Informix were included in the company’s and Personal Systems products.
Consolidated Financial Statements as of July 2, 2001. The loss on disposal recorded in 2002 was approximately
$382 million, net of tax, and was recorded in Loss from discon-
Other Acquisition– The primary items that generated good-
tinued operations in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
will are the synergies between the acquired business and the
See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 80
company and the premium paid by the company for the
for the “Basis of Presentation” for the discontinued operations.
right to control the business acquired. Goodwill of $25 mil-
In the second and fourth quarters of 2002, the company
lion has been assigned to the Global Services segment. The
announced certain asset and workforce reduction actions,
goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes. The results of
and excess leased space charges related to its discontinued
operations of the acquired business were included in the
HDDbusiness. The company recorded a charge of approxi-
company’s Consolidated Financial Statements from the
mately $508 million, net of tax, in discontinued operations
date of acquisition.
associated with these announced actions.
Overall Summarized selected financial information for the dis-
The company’s acquisitions were accounted for as purchase continued operations is as follows:
transactions, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the (dollars in millions)
acquired entities were recorded at their estimated fair values FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* 2001
at the date of acquisition. Revenue $«— $«1,946 $«2,799
The acquired tangible net assets comprise primarily cash,
Loss before
accounts receivable, land, buildings and leasehold improve- income taxes $«29 $«2,037 $««««497
ments. The acquired identifiable intangible assets comprise Income tax expense/(benefit) 1 (282) (74))
primarily completed technology, trademarks, client lists,
Loss from
employee agreements and leasehold interests. The identifiable discontinued operations $«30 $«1,755 $««««423
intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis,
*At closing, the company incurred a significant U.S. tax charge of approximately
generally not to exceed seven years. Goodwill from acqui-
$248 million related to the repatriation of divestiture proceeds from certain countries
sitions that were consummated prior to July 1, 2001, was with low tax rates. This amount was included in the Income tax expense/(benefit) line
item of discontinued operations.
amortized over five years. The company adopted SFAS No. 142
on January 1, 2002, and ceased amortizing goodwill as of that
date. The results of operations of all acquired businesses D
were included in the company’s Consolidated Financial financial instruments
Statements from the respective dates of acquisition. (excluding derivatives)
DIVESTITURES FAIR VALUE OF FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
2002
Cash and cash equivalents, marketable securities, notes and
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its HDDbusiness
other accounts receivable and other investments are financial
to Hitachi. The total gross proceeds of the sale were $2 billion
assets with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(excluding purchase price adjustments), of which $1,414 mil-
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and liabilities,
lion was received by IBMat closing. According to the terms
and short-term and long-term debt are financial liabilities
of the agreement, the remaining proceeds will be received
with carrying values that approximate fair value.
one and three years after closing. The remaining proceeds
are fixed and are not dependent or variable based upon the MARKETABLE SECURITIES*
sold business’ earnings or performance. The company trans- The following table summarizes the company’s marketable
ferred approximately $244 million of cash as part of the securities, all of which are considered available for sale, and
HDDbusiness, resulting in a net cash inflow in 2002 related alliance investments.
to the HDD transaction of $1,170 million. The company
92

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions) Net investment in sales-type leases is for leases that relate
FAIR VALUE principally to IBM equipment and are generally for terms
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 ranging from two to five years. Net investment in sales-type
leases includes unguaranteed residual values of $845 million
Marketable securities—current:
and $821 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively,
Time deposits and other obligations $«357 $«593
and is reflected net of unearned income of $1,227 million and
Marketable securities—non-current:**
$1,330 million and of allowance for uncollectible accounts of
Time deposits and other obligations $«««36 $«172
$337 million and $361 million at those dates, respectively.
Non-U.S.government securities and
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstand-
other fixed-term obligations 23 20
ing at December 31, 2003, expressed as a percentage of the
Total $«««59 $«192
total, are approximately as follows: 2004, 53 percent; 2005,
Non-equity method alliance
29 percent; 2006, 13 percent; 2007, 4 percent; and 2008 and
investments** $«234 $«249
beyond, 1 percent.
* Gross unrealized gains (before taxes) on marketable securities and alliance investments Customer loans receivable are provided by Global
were $11 million and $9 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Gross
unrealized losses (before taxes) on marketable securities and alliance investments were Financing to the company’s clients to finance the purchase
$2 million and $10 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. See note N, of the company’s software and services. Global Financing
“Stockholders’ Equity Activity,” on pages 100 and 101 for net change in unrealized
gains and losses on marketable securities and certain other information regarding is one of many sources of funding from which clients can
unrealized losses. choose. Separate contractual relationships on these financing
**Included within Investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of
arrangements are generally for terms ranging from one to
Financial Position. See note H, “Investments and Sundry Assets,” on page 94.
three years requiring straight-line payments over the term.
Each financing contract is priced independently at competi-
E
tive market rates. The company has a history of enforcing
inventories
the terms of these separate financing agreements.
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 G
plant, rentalmachines and other property
Finished goods $««««992 $««««960
Work in process and raw materials 1,950 2,188
(dollars in millions)
Total $«2,942 $«3,148
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
Land and land improvements $««««««865 $««««««837
Buildings and building
F
improvements 9,261 8,978
financing receivables
Plant, laboratory and
office equipment 22,317 21,416
(dollars in millions)
32,443 31,231
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
Less: Accumulated depreciation 19,190 18,525
Short-term:
Net investment in sales-type leases $«««5,940 $«««5,779 13,253 12,706
Commercial financing receivables 5,653 4,972 Rental machines 4,679 4,852
Customer loans receivable 5,235 4,462 Less: Accumulated depreciation 3,243 3,118
Installment payment receivables 657 698 1,436 1,734
Other non-Global Financing related 98 85
Total $«14,689 $«14,440
Total $«17,583 $«15,996
Long-term:
Net investment in sales-type leases $«««6,010 $«««6,505
Commercial financing receivables 197 462
Customer loans receivable 4,300 4,179
Installment payment receivables 217 273
Other non-Global Financing related 17 21
Total $«10,741 $«11,440
93

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
H
investments and sundry assets
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31, 2002
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* GROSS NET
CARRYING ACCUMULATED CARRYING
Deferred taxes $«4,288 $«4,314 INTANGIBLE ASSET CLASS AMOUNT AMORTIZATION AMOUNT
Alliance investments: Client-related $««««517 $«(124) $«393
Equity method 560 562 Completed technology 229 (108) 121
Other 234 249 Strategic alliances 118 (15) 103
Software 814 834 Patents/trademarks 109 (80) 29
Derivatives—non-current** 695 689 Other* 98 (7) 91
Receivable from Hitachi+ 358 356 Total $«1,071 $«(334) $«737**
Marketable securities—non-current 59 192
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
Other assets 1,100 1,076
processes, methodologies and systems.
Total $«8,108 $«8,272 **The $910 million at December 31, 2003, comprises $336 million recorded as current
assets and $574 million recorded as non-current assets. The $737 million at December 31,
* Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation. 2002, comprises $245 million recorded as current assets and $492 million recorded as
non-current assets.
**See note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 96 to 99 for the fair
value of all derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
+ See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 89 to 92 for additional information. The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased by
$173 million for the year ended December 31, 2003, primarily
due to the acquisition of Rational, offset by the amortization
I
intangible assets including goodwill of existing intangible asset balances.
The aggregate amortization expense was $349 million
The following schedule details the company’s intangible asset and $181 million for the years ended December 31, 2003 and
balances by major asset class. 2002, respectively.
The future amortization expense for each of the five suc-
(dollars in millions)
ceeding years relating to intangible assets currently recorded in
AT DECEMBER 31, 2003
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is estimated
GROSS NET
CARRYING ACCUMULATED CARRYING to be the following at December 31, 2003:
INTANGIBLE ASSET CLASS AMOUNT AMORTIZATION AMOUNT
Client-related $««««704 $«(254) $«450 (dollars in millions)
Completed technology 448 (228) 220 2004 $«336
Strategic alliances 118 (38) 80 2005 261
Patents/trademarks 98 (66) 32 2006 141
Other* 165 (37) 128 2007 84
Total $«1,533 $«(623) $«910** 2008 51
GOODWILL
The changes in the carrying amount of goodwill, by reporting segment, for the year ended December 31, 2003, are as follows:
(dollars in millions)
FOREIGN
BALANCE PURCHASE CURRENCY BALANCE
JAN. 1, GOODWILL PRICE TRANSLATION DEC. 31,
SEGMENT 2003 ADDITIONS ADJUSTMENTS DIVESTITURES ADJUSTMENTS 2003
Global Services $«2,926 $««««203* $«694 $«(6) $«367 $«4,184
Systems Group 137 — — — — 137
Personal Systems Group 13 58 — — — 71
Technology Group 24 — — — — 24
Software 1,015 1,439 40 — 11 2,505
Global Financing — — — — — —
Enterprise Investments — — — — — —
Total $«4,115 $«1,700 $«734 $«(6) $«378 $«6,921
*Relates to the purchase of the minority interest in a consolidated subsidiary.
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during the period.
94

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
J
sale and securitization of receivables
LONG-TERM DEBT
Pre-Swap Activity
The company periodically sells receivables through the securi-
tization of loans, leases and trade receivables. The company (dollars in millions)
retains servicing rights in the securitized receivables for AT DECEMBER 31: MATURITIES 2003 2002
which it receives a servicing fee. Any gain or loss incurred as U.S.Dollars:
a result of such sales is recognized in the period in which the Debentures:
sale occurs. 5.875% 2032 ««$«««««600 «$«««««««—
During 2001, the company entered into an uncommitted 6.22% 2027 ««««««500 ««««««500
trade receivables securitization facility that allows for the 6.5% 2028 319 700
ongoing sale of up to $500 million of trade receivables. This 7.0% 2025 600 600
facility was put in place primarily to provide backup liquidity 7.0% 2045 150 150
and can be accessed on three days notice. The company sold 7.125% 2096 850 850
$179 million of trade receivables through this facility in 7.5% 2013 550 550
2001. The company has not had any amounts outstanding 8.375% 2019 750 750
under the trade receivables securitization facility since 2001. 3.43% convertible notes* 2007 309 328
In addition, the company has a program to sell loans receivable Notes: 5.9% average 2004–2013 3,034 2,130
from state and local government clients. This program was Medium-term note
program: 3.7% average 2004–2018 4,690 7,113
established in 1990 and has been used from time to time
Other: 4.0% average 2004–2009 508 610
since then. The company sold $278 million of loans receivable
due from state and local government clients in 2001. No 12,860 14,281
Other currencies
receivables were sold under either of these programs in 2003
(average interest rate
or 2002.
at December 31, 2003,
At December 31, 2003 and 2002, the total balance of the in parentheses):
state and local receivables securitized and under the company’s Euros (5.3%) 2004–2009 1,174 2,111
management was $21 million and $101 million, respectively. Japanese yen (1.1%) 2004–2015 4,363 4,976
Servicing assets net of servicing liabilities were insignificant. Canadian dollars (5.8%) 2004–2011 201 445
The investors in the state and local loans receivable Swiss francs (4.0%) 2003 — 180
securitizations have recourse to the company via a limited Other (6.0%) 2004–2014 770 730
guarantee of $14 million at December 31, 2003. At year-end
19,368 22,723
2003, delinquent amounts from the receivables sold and net
Less: Net unamortized
credit losses were insignificant. discount/(premium) 15 (1)
Add: SFAS No. 133 fair
value adjustment** 806 978
K
borrowings 20,159 23,702
Less: Current maturities 3,173 3,716
SHORT-TERM DEBT Total $«16,986 $«19,986
(dollars in millions)
* On October 1, 2002, as part of the purchase price consideration for the PwCC acqui-
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 sition, as addressed in note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 89 to 92, the
Commercial paper $«2,349 $«1,302 companyissued convertible notes bearing interest at a stated rate of 3.43 percent with
a face value of approximately $328 million to certain of the acquired PwCC partners.
Short-term loans 1,124 1,013 The notes are convertible into 4,764,543 shares of IBM common stock at the option of
Long-term debt—current maturities 3,173 3,716 the holders at any time after the first anniversary of their issuance based on a fixed
conversion price of $68.81 per share of the company’s common stock. As of December
Total $«6,646 $«6,031 31, 2003, a total of 274,347 shares had been issued under this provision.
**In accordance with the requirements of SFAS No. 133, the portion of the company’s
fixed rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of
The weighted-average interest rates for commercial paper at Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the debt’s carrying value plus a
December 31, 2003 and 2002, were 1.0 percent and 1.7 percent, SFAS No. 133 fair value adjustment representing changes recorded in the fair value of
the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in market interest rates and
respectively. The weighted-average interest rate for short-term applicable foreign currency exchange rates.
loans was 2.5 percent at both December 31, 2003 and 2002.
95

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Annual contractual maturities on long-term debt out- (dollars in millions)
standing, including capital lease obligations, at December 31, AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
2003, are as follows: Unused lines:
(dollars in millions) From the committed
global credit facility $«««9,907 $«11,945
2004 $«4,072
From other committed and
2005 3,113
uncommitted lines 5,976 4,989
2006 2,760
Total unused lines of credit $«15,883 $«16,934
2007 1,289
2008 225
2009 and beyond 7,942
L
derivatives and hedging transactions
INTEREST ON DEBT
(dollars in millions) The company operates in approximately 35 functional cur-
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 rencies and is a significant lender and borrower in the global
Cost of Global Financing $«503 $«633 $««««964 markets. In the normal course of business, the company is
Interest expense 145 145 234 exposed to the impact of interest rate changes and foreign
Interest expense— currency fluctuations, and to a lesser extent equity price
discontinued operations — 2 4 changes and client credit risk. The company limits these risks
Interest capitalized 15 35 33 by following established risk management policies and
Total interest paid and accrued $«663 $«815 $«1,235 procedures including the use of derivatives and, where cost-
effective, financing with debt in the currencies in which assets
Refer to the related discussion on page 119 in note X, are denominated. For interest rate exposures, derivatives are
“Segment Information,” for the total interest expense of the used to align rate movements between the interest rates asso-
Global Financing segment. See note L, “Derivatives and ciated with the company’s lease and other financial assets and
Hedging Transactions,” on pages 96 to 99 for a discussion of the interest rates associated with its financing debt. Derivatives
the use of currency and interest rate swaps in the company’s are also used to manage the related cost of debt. For foreign
debt risk management program. currency exposures, derivatives are used to limit the effects
of foreign exchange rate fluctuations on financial results.
LINES OF CREDIT
The company does not use derivatives for trading or
Based on the company’s forward-looking liquidity require-
speculative purposes, nor is it a party to leveraged derivatives.
ments, management decided to renew the 364-day facility,
Further, the company has a policy of only entering into
upon its expiration on May 30, 2003, in the amount of $2 bil-
contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions
lion, thereby reducing the total global lines of credit to $10
based upon their credit ratings and other factors, and main-
billion. As of December 31, 2003, the company maintains
tains strict dollar and term limits that correspond to the
two global credit facilities totaling $10.0 billion in committed
institution’s credit rating.
credit lines, including an $8.0 billion multiyear facility that
In its hedging programs, the company employs the use
expires on May 31, 2006, and a $2.0 billion, 364-day facility
of forward contracts, futures contracts, interest rate and
that expires on May 27, 2004. The total expense recorded by
currency swaps, options, caps, floors or a combination thereof
the company related to the facility was $7.8 million, $9.1 mil-
depending upon the underlying exposure.
lion and $7.9 million for the years ended December 31, 2003,
Abrief description of the major hedging programs follows.
2002 and 2001, respectively. The facility is irrevocable unless
IBMis in breach of covenants, including interest coverage DEBT RISK MANAGEMENT
ratios, or if it commits an event of default, such as failing to The company issues debt in the global capital markets, princi-
pay any amount due under this agreement. The company pally to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to
believes that circumstances that might give rise to a breach cost-effective financing can result in interest rate and/or
of these covenants or an event of default, as specified in these currency mismatches with the underlying assets. To manage
agreements, are remote. The company’s other lines of credit, these mismatches and to reduce overall interest cost, the
most of which are uncommitted, totaled $8,202 million and company primarily uses interest-rate and currency instru-
$7,190 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. ments, principally swaps, to convert specific fixed-rate debt
Interest rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., fair value hedges) and
of credit vary from country to country, depending on local to convert specific variable-rate debt and anticipated com-
market conditions. mercial paper issuances to fixed rate (i.e., cash flow hedges).
96

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The resulting cost of funds is lower than that which would are generally less than one year. The changes in fair value from
have been available if debt with matching characteristics was these contracts and from the underlying hedged exposures
issued directly. The weighted-average remaining maturity of are generally offsetting and are recorded in Other (income)
all swaps in the debt risk management program is approxi- and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
mately four years.
EQUITY RISK MANAGEMENT
LONG-TERM INVESTMENTS IN FOREIGN SUBSIDIARIES The company is exposed to certain equity price changes
(NET INVESTMENT) related to certain obligations to employees. These equity
A significant portion of the company’s foreign currency exposuresare primarily related to market value movements in
denominated debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net certain broad equity market indices and in the company’s own
investment to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity stock. Changes in the overall value of this employee com-
caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the
pensation obligation are recorded in SG&Aexpense in the
functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not designated
respect to the U.S.dollar. The company also uses currency
as accounting hedges, the company utilizes equity derivatives,
swaps and foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk
including equity swaps and futures to economically hedge the
management purpose. The currency effects of these hedges
equity exposures relating to this employee compensation
(approximately $200 million for the current period, net of
obligation. To match the exposures relating to this employee
tax) are reflected as a loss in the Accumulated gains and
compensation obligation, these derivatives are linked to the
(losses) not affecting retained earnings section of the
total return of certain broad equity market indices and/or the
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity, thereby
total return of the company’s common stock. These derivatives
offsetting a portion of the translation of the applicable foreign
are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in
subsidiaries’ net assets.
SG&Aexpense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
ANTICIPATED ROYALTIES AND COST TRANSACTIONS
OTHER DERIVATIVES
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional
The company holds warrants in connection with certain
currency, third party vendor payments and intercompany
investments that, although not designated as hedging instru-
payments for royalties, and goods and services among the
ments, are deemed derivatives since they contain net share
company’s non-U.S.subsidiaries and with the parent company.
settlement clauses. During the year, the company recorded
In anticipation of these foreign currency cash flows and in
the change in the fair value of these warrants in net income.
view of the volatility of the currency markets, the company
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails
selectively employs foreign exchange forward and option
to pay amounts due the company under contractual terms
contracts to manage its currency risk. These contracts may
(“credit risk”). The company has established policies and pro-
have extended maturities beyond one year and from time to
cedures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions,
time that extend to three years. As of December 31, 2003,
including reviewing and establishing limits for credit expo-
the maximum remaining maturity of these derivative instru-
sure, maintaining collateral, and continually assessing the
ments was approximately 18 months, commensurate with
creditworthiness of counterparties. In 2003, the company
the underlying hedged anticipated cash flows.
began utilizing credit default swaps to economically hedge
certain credit exposures. These derivatives have terms of two
SUBSIDIARY CASH AND FOREIGN CURRENCY
ASSET/LIABILITY MANAGEMENT years. The swaps are not designated as accounting hedges and
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the are recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency SG&Ain the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In The tables on page 98 summarize the net fair value of the
addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts company’s derivative and other risk management instruments
to hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a at December 31, 2003 and 2002 (included in the Consolidated
portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and Statement of Financial Position).
liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap contracts
97

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
(dollars in millions)
HEDGE DESIGNATION
NET NON-HEDGE/
AT DECEMBER 31, 2003 FAIR VALUE CASH FLOW INVESTMENT OTHER
Derivatives—net asset/(liability):
Debt risk management $«297 $«««(23) $«««««««— $«(10)
Long-term investments in foreign subsidiaries (net investments) — — (27) —
Anticipated royalties and cost transactions — (643) — —
Subsidiary cash and foreign currency asset/liability management — — — (31)
Equity risk management — — — 39
Other derivatives — — — 8
Total derivatives 297(b) (666)(c) (27)(d) 6(e)
Debt:
Long-term investments in foreign subsidiaries (net investments) — — (2,470)(a) —
Total $«297 $«(666) $«(2,497) $««««6
(a)Represents fair value of foreign denominated debt issuances formally designated as a hedge of net investment.
(b)Comprises assets of $1,083 million and liabilities of $786 million.
(c)Comprises liabilities of $666 million.
(d)Comprises liabilities of $27 million.
(e)Comprises assets of $73 million and liabilities of $67 million.
(dollars in millions)
HEDGE DESIGNATION
NET NON-HEDGE/
AT DECEMBER 31, 2002 FAIR VALUE CASH FLOW INVESTMENT OTHER
Derivatives—net asset/(liability):
Debt risk management $«643 $«««««(7) $«««««««— $«««««3
Long-term investments in foreign subsidiaries (net investments) — — 2 —
Anticipated royalties and cost transactions — (469) — —
Subsidiary cash and foreign currency asset/liability management — — — (109)
Equity risk management — — — 6
Other derivatives — — — 10
Total derivatives 643(b) (476)(c) 2(d) (90)(e)
Debt:
Long-term investments in foreign subsidiaries (net investments) — — (2,474)(a) —
Total $«643 $«(476) $«(2,472) $««(90)
(a)Represents fair value of foreign denominated debt issuances formally designated as a hedge of net investment.
(b)Comprises assets of $754 million and liabilities of $111 million.
(c)Comprises assets of $2 million and liabilities of $478 million.
(d)Comprises assets of $2 million.
(e)Comprises assets of $26 million and liabilities of $116 million.
ACCUMULATED DERIVATIVE GAINS OR LOSSES year, providing an offsetting economic impact against the
As illustrated above, the company makes extensive use of cash underlying anticipated cash flows hedged.
flow hedges, principally in the Anticipated royalties and cost The table on page 99 summarizes activity in the Accu-
transactions risk management program. In connection with mulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings
the company’s cash flow hedges, it has recorded approxi- section of the Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’
mately $454 million of net losses in Accumulated gains and Equity related to all derivatives classified as cash flow hedges
(losses) not affecting retained earnings as of December 31, held by the company during the periods January 1, 2001 (the
2003, net of tax, of which approximately $405 million is date of the company’s adoption of SFAS No. 133) through
expected to be reclassified to net income within the next December 31, 2003:
98

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(dollars in millions, net of tax) DEBIT/(CREDIT) (dollars in millions)
Cumulative effect of adoption of BALANCE AT OTHER BALANCE AT
JAN. 1, ADJUST- DEC. 31,
SFAS No. 133 as of January 1, 2001 $«(219) 2003 PAYMENTS MENTS* 2003
Net gains reclassified into earnings
Current:
from equity during 2001 379
Workforce $««««647 $«537 $««112 $«222
Changes in fair value of derivatives in 2001 (456)
Space 181 229 177 129
December 31, 2001 (296)
Other 115 90 14 39
Net losses reclassified into earnings from Total $««««943 $«856 $««303 $«390
equity during 2002 (5)
Non-current:
Changes in fair value of derivatives in 2002 664
Workforce $««««574 $«««— $««««13 $«587
December 31, 2002 363
Space 419 — (137) 282
Net losses reclassified into earnings Other 31 — (29) 2
from equity during 2003 (713)
Total $«1,024 $«««— $«(153) $«871
Changes in fair value of derivatives in 2003 804
December 31, 2003 $««454 *The other adjustments column in the table above includes the reclassification of non-
current to current and foreign currency translation adjustments. In addition, net adjust-
ments of approximately $106 million were made during the year ended December 31,
At December 31, 2003, there were no significant gains or 2003 to reduce previously recorded liabilities. These adjustments were for differences
between the estimated and actual proceeds on the disposition of certain assets and
losses on derivative transactions or portions thereof that were changes in the estimated cost of employee terminations and vacant space for the 2002
either ineffective as hedges, excluded from the assessment actions ($28 million), net adjustments for fourth quarter 2002 actions recorded in pur-
chase accounting ($36 million), HDD-related restructuring in 2002 ($20 million) and
of hedge effectiveness, or associated with an underlying actions prior to 1999 ($22 million). Of the $106 million of net adjustments, $36 million
exposure that did not occur; nor are there any anticipated in was recorded as adjustments to Goodwill, $20 million was included in Discontinued
Operations (for the HDD related restructuring actions), with the remainder predomi-
the normal course of business. nantly included in SG&Ain the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to the company’s
M Global Services business. The non-current portion of the
other liabilities liability relates to terminated employees who are no longer
working for the company, but who were granted annual pay-
(dollars in millions)
ments to supplement their incomes in certain countries.
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002*
Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements,
Deferred taxes $«1,834 $«1,450 these required payments will continue until the former
Deferred income 1,842 1,409 employee begins receiving pension benefits or dies. Included
Executive compensation accruals 1,036 851 in the December 31, 2003 workforce accruals above is $133 mil-
Restructuring actions 871 1,024 lionassociated with the HDDrelated restructuring discussed
Postemployment/preretirement liability 579 572 in note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 89 to 92.
Disability benefits 349 304 The space accruals are for ongoing obligations to pay rent
Environmental accruals 214 208 for vacant space that could not be sublet or space that was
Other 731 463 sublet at rates lower than the committed lease arrangement.
Total $«7,456 $«6,281 The length of these obligations varies by lease with the
longest extending through 2016.
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
Other accruals are primarily the remaining liabilities
Each year the company takes certain workforce rebalancing (other than workforce or space) associated with the 2002
actions to improve productivity and competitive position. The second quarter actions described in note S, “2002 Actions,”
non-current contractually obligated future payments associ- on pages 105 through 107. In addition, there are $7 million of
ated with these ongoing activities are reflected in the Post- remaining liabilities at December 31, 2003 associated with
employment/preretirement liability caption in the table above. the HDD-related restructuring discussed in note C,
In addition, the company executed certain actions prior “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 89 to 92.
to 1994, and in 1999 and 2002. The non-current liabilities The company employs extensive internal environmental
associated with these actions are reflected in restructuring protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature.
actions in the following table. The reconciliation of the The company also participates in environmental assessments
December 31, 2002 to 2003 balances of the current and non- and cleanups at a number of locations, including operating
current liabilities for restructuring actions are presented in the facilities, previously owned facilities and Superfund sites.
tables on pages 105 and 107. The current liabilities presented in The total amounts accrued for environmental liabilities,
the table are included in Other accrued expenses and liabilities including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect actual
99

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $243 million and In 1995, the Board of Directors authorized the company
$247 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. to repurchase all of its outstanding Series A7-1/2 percent
Estimated environmental costs are not expected to materi- callable preferred stock. On May 18, 2001, the company
ally affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated announced it would redeem all outstanding shares of its
results of the company’s operations in future periods. Series A7-1/2 percent callable preferred stock, represented
However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due by the outstanding depositary shares (10,184,043 shares).
to protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental The depositary shares represent ownership of one-fourth of
remediation regulations. a share of preferred stock. Depositary shares were redeemed
as of July 3, 2001, the redemption date, for cash at a redemp-
tion price of $25 plus accrued and unpaid dividends to the
N
stockholders’ equity activity redemption date for each depositary share. Accordingly,
these shares are no longer outstanding. Dividends on pre-
In the fourth quarter of 2002, in connection with the PwCC ferred stock, represented by the depositary shares, ceased to
acquisition, IBM issued 3,677,213 shares of restricted stock accrue on the redemption date.
valued at approximately $254 million and recorded an addi-
tional $30 million for stock to be issued in future periods as EMPLOYEE BENEFITS TRUST
In 1997, the company created an employee benefits trust to
part of the purchase price consideration paid to the PwCC
which the company contributed 10 million shares of treasury
partners. See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages
stock. The company was authorized to instruct the trustee
89 to 92, for further information regarding this acquisition
to sell such shares from time to time and to use the proceeds
and related payments made by the company. Additionally, in
from such sales, and any dividends paid or earnings received
the fourth quarter of 2002, in conjunction with the funding
on such stock, toward the partial payment of the company’s
of the company’s U.S.pension plan, the company issued an
obligations under certain of its compensation and benefit
additional 24,037,354 shares of common stock from treasury
plans. The shares held in trust were not considered out-
shares valued at $1,871 million.
standing for earnings per share purposes until they were
STOCK REPURCHASES committed to be released. The company did not commit any
From time to time, the Board of Directors authorizes the shares for release from the trust during its existence nor
company to repurchase IBMcommon stock. The company were any shares sold from the trust. The trust would have
repurchased 49,994,514 common shares at a cost of $4,403 expired in 2007. Due to the fact that the company had not
million and 48,481,100 common shares at a cost of $4,212 used the trust, nor was it expected to need the trust prior to
million in 2003 and 2002, respectively. In 2003 and 2002, the its expiration, the company dissolved the trust, effective
company issued 2,120,293 and 979,246 treasury shares, May 31, 2001, and all of the shares (20 million on a split-
respectively, as a result of exercises of stock options by adjusted basis) were returned to the company as treasury
employees of certain recently acquired businesses and by shares. Dissolution of the trust did not affect the company’s
non-U.S.employees. At December 31, 2003, $2,961 million of obligations related to any of its compensation and employee
Board-authorized repurchases remained. The company plans benefit plans or its ability to settle the obligations. In addi-
to purchase shares on the open market from time to time, tion, the dissolution is not expected to have any impact on
depending on market conditions. The company also repur- net income. At this time, the company plans to fully meet its
chased 291,921 common shares at a cost of $24 million and obligations for the compensation and benefit plans in the
189,797 common shares at a cost of $18 million in 2003 and same manner as it does today, using cash from operations.
2002, respectively, as part of other stock compensation plans.
ACCUMULATED GAINS AND (LOSSES) NOT AFFECTING RETAINED EARNINGS*
(dollars in millions)
NET NET ACCUMULATED
UNREALIZED FOREIGN MINIMUM UNREALIZED GAINS/(LOSSES)
GAINS/(LOSSES) CURRENCY PENSION GAINS/(LOSSES) NOT AFFECTING
ON CASH FLOW TRANSLATION LIABILITY ON MARKETABLE RETAINED
HEDGE DERIVATIVES ADJUSTMENTS ADJUSTMENT SECURITIES EARNINGS
December 31, 2001 $««296 $«««(612) $««««(526) $«14 $««««(828)
Change for period (659) 850 (2,765) (16) (2,590)
December 31, 2002 (363) 238 (3,291) (2) (3,418)
Change for period (91) 1,768 (162) 7 1,522
December 31, 2003 $«(454) $«2,006 $«(3,453) $«««5 $«(1,896)
*net of tax
100

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
NET CHANGE IN UNREALIZED GAINS/(LOSSES) ON MARKETABLE SECURITIES (NET OF TAX)
(dollars in millions)
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
Net unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $«4 $«(13)
Less: Net (losses)/gains included in net income for the period (3)* 3*
Net change in unrealized gains/(losses) on marketable securities $«7 $«(16)
*Includes writedowns of $7 million and $36 million in 2003 and 2002, respectively.
The following table shows the company’s investments’ gross unrealized losses and fair value, aggregated by investment cate-
gory and length of time that individual securities have been in a continuous unrealized loss position, at December 31, 2003.
(dollars in millions)
LESS THAN 12 MONTHS 12 MONTHS OR MORE TOTAL
UNREALIZED UNREALIZED UNREALIZED
DESCRIPTION OF SECURITIES FAIR VALUE LOSSES FAIR VALUE LOSSES FAIR VALUE LOSSES
U.S.Treasury obligations and direct obligations
of U.S.government agencies $«— $«— $«— $«— $«— $«—
Foreign government bonds — — 23 2 23 2
Corporate bonds — — — — — —
Subtotal, debt securities — — 23 2 23 2
Common Stock — — — — — —
Total temporarily impaired securities $«— $«— $«23 $«««2 $«23 $«««2
O
contingencies and commitments
The company is a defendant and/or third-party defendant
in a number of cases in which claims have been brought by
CONTINGENCIES current and former employees, independent contractors,
The company is involved in a variety of claims, suits, investi- estate representatives, offspring and relatives of employees
gations and proceedings that arise from time to time in the seeking damages for wrongful death and personal injuries
ordinary course of its business, including actions with respect allegedly caused by exposure to chemicals in various of the
to contracts, IP, product liability, employment, securities and company’s facilities from 1964 to the present. As of year end,
environmental matters. The following is a discussion of some the cases of two former employee plaintiffs were being tried
of the more significant legal matters involving the company. in state court in Santa Clara County, California. The company
On July 31, 2003, the U.S.District Court for the Southern expects another trial, in state court in Westchester County,
District of Illinois, in Cooper et al. vs. The IBM Personal New York, in 2004.
Pension Plan and IBMCorporation, held that IBM’s pension The company is a defendant in an action brought by
plan violated the age discrimination provisions of the Compuware in the District Court for the Eastern District of
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). Michigan in 2002, asserting causes of action for copyright
The plaintiffs filed a claim for remedial relief. IBMfiled its infringement, trade secret misappropriation, Sherman Act
own brief on remedies, arguing that the remedies requested and Lanham Act violations, breach of contract, tortious
by the plaintiffs were unsupportable factually and as a matter interference and unfair competition under various state
of law and estimating that remedies under plaintiffs’ theories statutes. IBM has asserted counterclaims for copyright
could amount to at least $6.5 billion, as of the date of the trial infringement, unfair competition, and patent infringement.
District Court’s decision on liability. The company intends In March 2003, Compuware moved for Preliminary
to appeal the District Court’s rulings when the remedies Injunction on all but its antitrust claims and in December
phase concludes. The company believes it is likely to be 2003, the Court denied that motion. Trial is scheduled for
successful on appeal with respect to the claims that have September 2004.
been decided by the District Court. Given IBM’s belief in The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6,
the merit of its defenses and the wide range of possible 2003 in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO
remedies, no provision has been recorded under SFAS No. 5, Group. The company removed the case to Federal Court in
“Accounting for Contingencies” at this time.The company Utah. Plaintiff is successor in interest to some of AT&T’s
will review whether a provision is appropriate under SFAS UNIX IP rights, and alleges misappropriation of trade
No. 5 upon conclusion of the remedies phase. secrets, unfair competition, interference with contract and
101

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
breach of contract with regard to the company’s contribution reflect the impact and status of settlements, rulings, advice
of unspecified code to Linux. The company has asserted of counsel and other information pertinent to a particular
counterclaims, including breach of contract, violation of the matter. Any recorded liabilities for the above items, including
Lanham Act, unfair competition, intentional torts, unfair any changes to such liabilities during each of the three years
and deceptive trade practices, breach of the General Public in the period ended December 31, 2003, were not material to
License that governs open source distributions, patent the Consolidated Financial Statements. Based on its experi-
infringement, promissory estoppel and copyright infringe- ence, the company believes that the damage amounts
ment. Trial is scheduled for April 2005. claimed in the matters referred to above are not a meaningful
On June 2, 2003 the company announced that it received indicator of the company’s potential liability.
notice of a formal, nonpublic investigation by the Securities Litigation is inherently uncertain and it is not possible to
and Exchange Commission (SEC). The SECis seeking infor- predict the ultimate outcome of the matters discussed
mation relating to revenue recognition in 2000 and 2001 above. While the company will continue to defend itself
primarily concerning certain types of client transactions. vigorously in all such matters, it is possible that the company’s
IBM believes that the investigation arises from a separate business, financial condition, results of operations or cash
investigation by the SECof Dollar General Corporation, a flows, could be affected in any particular period by the resolu-
client of IBM’s Retail Stores Solutions unit, which markets tionof one or more of these matters. Whether any losses,
and sells point of sale products. damages or remedies finally determined in any such claim,
On January 8, 2004, IBM announced that it received a suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a
“Wells Notice” from the staff of the SECin connection with material effect on the company’s business, financial condition,
the staff’s investigation of Dollar General Corporation, which results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number
as noted above, is a client of IBM’s Retail Stores Solutions unit. of variables, including the timing and amount of such losses
It is IBM’s understanding that an employee in IBM’s Sales & or damages, the structure and type of any such remedies, the
Distribution unit also received a Wells Notice from the SECin significance of the impact any such losses, damages or remedies
connection with this matter. The Wells Notice notifies IBM may have on IBM’s Consolidated Financial Statements, and
that the SECstaff is considering recommending that the SEC the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter
bring a civil action against IBMfor possible violations of the which may give rise to additional factors, such as, among
U.S. securities laws relating to Dollar General’s accounting other things, in the Cooper case referred to on page 101, the
for a specific transaction, by participating in and aiding and amount of any additional obligations that may be imposed
abetting Dollar General’s misstatement of its 2000 results. on the pension plan by the remedies finally determined,
In that transaction, IBMpaid Dollar General $11 million for whether such additional obligations would require addi-
certain used equipment as part of a sale of IBMreplacement tional contributions by the company and the size of any such
equipment in Dollar General’s 2000 fourth fiscal quarter. additional contributions.
Under the SEC’s procedures, IBM responded to the SEC
staff regarding whether any action should be brought against COMMITMENTS
IBM by the SEC. The separate SEC investigation noted The company’s extended lines of credit include unused
above, relating to the recognition of revenue by IBMin 2000 amountsof $2,208 million and $3,482 million at December 31,
and 2001 primarily concerning certain types of client trans- 2003 and 2002, respectively. Aportion of these amounts was
actions, is not the subject of this Wells Notice. available to the company’s business partners to support their
In January 2004, the Seoul District Prosecutors Office in working capital needs. In addition, the company committed
South Korea announced it had brought criminal bid rigging to provide future financing to its clients in connection with
charges against several companies, including IBMKorea and client purchase agreements for approximately $263 million
LG IBM(a joint venture between IBMKorea and LGElec- and $288 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively.
tronics) and had also charged employees of some of those The company has applied the disclosure provisions of
entities with, among other things, bribery of certain officials FIN45, “Guarantor’s Accounting and Disclosure Require-
of government-controlled entities in Korea, and bid rigging. ments for Guarantees, Including Indirect Guarantees of
In addition, the U.S.Department of Justice and the SEChave Indebtedness of Others,” to its agreements that contain guar-
both contacted the company in connection with this matter. antee or indemnification clauses. These disclosure provisions
In accordance with SFAS No.5, the company records a expand those required by SFAS No. 5, by requiring a guarantor
provision with respect to a claim, suit, investigation or pro- to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of
ceeding when it is probable that a liability has been incurred requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The follow-
and the amount of the loss can reasonably be estimated. Any ing is a description of arrangements in which the company
provisions are reviewed at least quarterly and are adjusted to is the guarantor.
102

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant P
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party taxes
with respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations
arise in the context of contracts entered into by the company, (dollars in millions)
under which the company customarily agrees to hold the FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
other party harmless against losses arising from a breach of Income from continuing
operations before
representations and covenants related to such matters as
income taxes:
title to assets sold, certain IPrights, specified environmental
U.S.operations $«««4,611 $«3,838 $«««5,644
matters, and certain income taxes. In each of these circum-
Non-U.S.operations 6,263 3,686 5,806
stances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other
Total income from
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in
continuing operations
the particular contract, which procedures typically allow the
before income taxes $«10,874 $«7,524 $«11,450
company to challenge the other party’s claims. Further, the
company’s obligations under these agreements may be limited
The continuing operations provision for income taxes by
in terms of time and/or amount, and in some instances, the
geographic operations is as follows:
company may have recourse against third parties for certain
payments made by the company. (dollars in millions)
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
amount of future payments under these or similar agree- U.S.operations $«1,234 $««««934 $«1,543
ments due to the conditional nature of the company’s Non-U.S.operations 2,027 1,256 1,761
obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved Total continuing operations
in each particular agreement. Historically, payments made provision for income taxes $«3,261 $«2,190 $«3,304
by the company under these agreements did not have a
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition
The components of the continuing operations provision
or results of operations. The company believes that if it were
for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows:
to incur a loss in any of these matters, such loss should not
have a material effect on the company’s business, financial (dollars in millions)
condition or results of operations. FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and U.S.federal:
financial commitments. The maximum potential future pay- Current $««««234 $««««287 $««««434
ment under these financial guarantees was $74 million and Deferred 339 (3) 333
$126 million at December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. 573 284 767
These amounts include the limited guarantee associated with U.S.state and local:
the company’s loans receivable securitization program. See Current 46 184 73
note J, “Sale and Securitization of Receivables,” on page 95. Deferred 183 3 155
Changes in the company’s warranty liability balance are
229 187 228
illustrated in the following table.
Non-U.S.:
(dollars in millions) Current 1,855 1,786 2,133
2003 2002 Deferred 604 (67) 176
Balance at January 1 $«614 $«520 2,459 1,719 2,309
Current period accruals 971 863
Total continuing operations
Accrual adjustments to reflect provision for income taxes 3,261 2,190 3,304
actual experience 65 121
Provision for social security,
Charges incurred (870) (890) real estate, personal property
Balance at December 31 $«780 $«614 and other taxes 3,277 2,789 2,730
Total continuing operations
Accrual adjustments in 2002 principally reflect a significant provision for taxes $«6,538 $«4,979 $«6,034
increase in the failure rates of HDD components in the
company’s Server and Storage products as a result of prod-
uct transitions.
103

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Areconciliation of the company’s continuing operations For tax return purposes, the company has available tax
effective tax rate to the statutory U.S.federal tax rate is as credit carryforwards of approximately $2,228 million, of which
follows: $1,344 million have an indefinite carryforward period and
the remainder begin to expire in 2005. The company also has
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
foreign, state and local, and capital loss carryforwards, the
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
tax effect of which is $711 million. Most of these carry-
Foreign tax differential (5) (7) (6)
forwards are available for five years or have an indefinite
State and local 1 1 1
carryforward period.
Other (1) — (1)
During 2003, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) com-
Effective rate 30% 29% 29% menced an examination of the years 1998 through 2000.
Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and lia-
company believes that adequate amounts of tax have been
bilities did not have a significant effect on the company’s
provided for any adjustments that are expected to result for
effective tax rate.
these years. The resolution of this audit will likely result in
The significant components of activities that gave rise to
the reduction of existing tax credit carryforwards rather
deferred tax assets and liabilities that are recorded in the
than a significant cash payment.
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position were as follows:
Undistributed earnings of non-U.S.subsidiaries included in
consolidated retained earnings were $18,120 million at
DEFERRED TAX ASSETS
December 31, 2003, and $16,631 million at December 31, 2002.
(dollars in millions)
These earnings, which reflect full provision for non-U.S.
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002*
income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in non-U.S.opera-
Retirement benefits $«««3,566 $«««3,587
tions or will be remitted substantially free of additional tax.
Capitalized research and development 1,907 2,251
Alternative minimum tax credits 1,344 1,316
Q
Bad debt, inventory and
warranty reserves 1,092 992 advertising and promotional expense
Employee benefits 1,021 1,069
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes
General business credits 884 798
media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,406 million,
Deferred income 598 733
$1,427 million and $1,615 million in 2003, 2002 and 2001,
Infrastructure reduction charges 440 560
respectively, and is recorded in SG&Aexpense.
Foreign tax loss carryforwards 311 304
State and local tax loss carryforwards 205 239
Capital loss carryforwards 195 — R
Other 2,253 2,474 research, development and engineering
Gross deferred tax assets 13,816 14,323
RD&Eexpense was $5,077 million in 2003, $4,750 million in
Less: Valuation allowance 722 628
2002 and $4,986 million in 2001.
Net deferred tax assets $«13,094 $«13,695
The company incurred expense of $4,609 million in 2003,
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation. $4,247 million in 2002 and $4,321 million in 2001 for
scientific research and the application of scientific advances
DEFERRED TAX LIABILITIES to the development of new and improved products and their
(dollars in millions) uses as well as services and their application. Of these
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002* amounts,software-related expense was $2,300 million, $1,974
Retirement benefits $«6,644 $«5,904 million and $1,926 million in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respec-
Leases 693 1,088 tively. Included in the expense was a charge of $9 million and
Software development costs 285 219 $4 million in 2003 and 2002, respectively, for acquired in-
Other 1,188 1,308 process R&D. There was no in-process R&D expense
Gross deferred tax liabilities $«8,810 $«8,519 recorded in 2001.
Expense for product-related engineering was $468 mil-
*Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
lion, $503 million and $665 million in 2003, 2002 and 2001,
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2003, principally respectively.
applies to certain foreign, state and local, and capital loss
carryforwards that, in the opinion of management, are more
likely than not to expire before the company can use them.
104

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
S
2002 actions
SECOND QUARTER ACTIONS
During the second quarter of 2002, the company executed several actions in its Microelectronics Division. The Microelectronics
Division is within the company’s Technology Group segment. These actions were the result of the company’s announced
intentions to refocus and direct its Microelectronics business to the high-end foundry, Application Specific Integrated
Circuits (ASICs) and standard products, while creating a technology services business. Amajor part of the actions related to a
significant reduction in the company’s manufacturing capacity for aluminum technology.
In addition, the company rebalanced both its workforce and its leased space resources primarily in response to the decline
in corporate spending on technology services in 2001 and 2002.
The following table summarizes the significant components of these actions.
(dollars in millions)
LIABILITY LIABILITY LIABILITY
RECORDED IN OTHER AS OF OTHER AS OF
PRE-TAX WRITE-OFF 2ND QTR. ADJUST- DEC. 31, ADJUST- DEC. 31,
CHARGES OF ASSETS 2002 PAYMENTS MENTS+ 2002 PAYMENTS MENTS++ 2003
Microelectronics:
Machinery/equipment: $««««423 $«323(a)
Current* $«««««67(b) $«««38 $«13 $«««42 $«««39 $««13 $«««16
Non-current** 33(b) — (16) 17 — «(15) 2
Noncancelable
purchase commitments: 60
Current* 35(c) 15 4 24 24 15 15
Non-current** 25(c) — (12) 13 — (13) —
Employee terminations: 45
Current* 44(d) 35 (8) 1 1 — —
Non-current** 1(d) — — 1 — — 1
Vacant space: 11
Current* 5(e) 1 1 5 5 3 3
Non-current** 6(e) — (1) 5 — (2) 3
Sale of Endicott facility* 223 221(f) 2(f) 3 11 10 6 (3) 1
Sale of certain operations* 63 53(g) 10(g) 9 — 1 1 — —
Global Services and other:
Employee terminations: 722
Current* 671(h) 505 (23) 143 109 (2) 32
Non-current** 51(h) — 27 78 — (3) 75
Vacant space: 180 29(i)
Current* 57(i) 29 16 44 72 71 43
Non-current** 94(i) — (8) 86 — (55) 31
Total $«1,727 $«626 $«1,101 $«635 $«««4 $«470 $«257 $««««9 $«222
* Recorded in Accounts payable and accruals in the Consolidated Statement of Financial ++Principally represents currency translation adjustments and reclassification of non-
Position. current to current. In addition, adjustments of $(26) million were recorded in SG&A
**Recorded in Other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. expense in 2003 to reduce previously recorded liabilities and $4 million was recorded
in Other (income) and expense to increase previously recorded liabilities. These adjust-
+ Principally represents currency translation adjustments and reclassification of non-
ments, along with adjustments of $(7) million were recorded in SG&Aexpense and
current to current. In addition, net adjustments of $(40) million were recorded in
$(2) million were recorded in Other (income) and expense for assets previously written
SG&Aexpense in the fourth quarter of 2002 to reduce previously recorded liabilities
off, were primarily for differences between the estimated and actual proceeds on the
and $10 million was recorded in Other (income) and expense to increase previously
disposition of certain assets as well as changes in the estimated cost of employee termina-
recorded liabilities in the fourth quarter of 2002. These adjustments, along with
tionsand in vacant space accrual estimates.
adjustments of $(19) million were recorded in SG&Aexpense and $9 million were
recorded in Other (income) and expense for assets previously written off, were for
differences between the estimated and actual proceeds on the disposition of certain
assets and changes in the estimated cost of employee terminations.
105

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(a)This amount was recorded in SG&Aexpense in 2002 and 2002 to sell its interconnect products operations in
primarily represents the abandonment and loss on sale of Endicott to Endicott Interconnect Technologies, Inc.
certain capital assets during the second quarter of 2002. (EIT). As a result of this transaction, the company
incurred a $223 million loss on sale, primarily relating to
(b)This amount comprises costs incurred to remove abandoned
land, buildings, machinery and equipment. This loss was
capital assets and the remaining lease payments for leased
recorded in Other (income) and expense in 2002. This
equipment that was abandoned in the second quarter of
transaction closed in the fourth quarter of 2002. The
2002. The liability at December 31, 2003 relates to the
company entered into a limited supply agreement with
remaining lease payments, which will continue through
EITfor future products, and it will also lease back, at fair
2005. These amounts were recorded in SG&A expense
market value rental rates, approximately one-third of the
in 2002.
Endicott campus’ square footage for operations outside
(c)The company is subject to certain noncancelable purchase the interconnect OEMbusiness.
commitments. As a result of the decision to significantly
(g)As part of the strategic realignment of the company’s
reduce aluminum capacity, the company no longer has a
Microelectronics business, the company agreed to sell
need for certain materials subject to these agreements.
certain assets and liabilities comprising its Mylex business
The required future payments for materials no longer
to LSILogic Corporation and the company sold part of its
needed under these contracts are expected to be paid
wireless phone chipset operations to TriQuint Semi-
through June 30, 2004. This amount was recorded in
conductor, Inc. in June 2002. The Mylex transaction was
SG&Aexpense in 2002.
completed in August 2002. The loss of $74 million for the
(d)The workforce reductions represent 1,400 people, all of Mylex transaction and the realized gain of $11 million for
whom left the company as of June 30, 2003. This amount the chipset sale were recorded in Other (income) and
was recorded in SG&A expense in 2002. The remaining expense in 2002.
liability relates to terminated employees who were granted
(h)The majority of the workforce reductions relate to the
annual payments to supplement their income in certain
company’s Global Services business. The workforce
countries. Depending on individual country legal require-
reductions represent 14,213 people, all of whom left the
ments, these required payments will continue until the
company as of June 30, 2003. See (c) above for information
former employee begins receiving pension benefits or dies.
on the remaining liability. These charges were recorded in
(e)The space accruals are for ongoing obligations to pay rent SG&Aexpense in 2002.
for vacant space that could not be sublet or space that was
(i) The space accruals are for ongoing obligations to pay rent
sublet at rates lower than the committed lease arrange-
for vacant space that could not be sublet or space that was
ments. The length of these obligations varies by lease with
sublet at rates lower than the committed lease arrange-
the longest extending through 2006. These amounts were
ments. This space relates primarily to workforce dynamics
recorded in Other (income) and expense in 2002.
in the Global Services business and the downturn in
(f)As part of the company’s strategic realignment of its corporate technology spending on services. The length of
Microelectronics business to exit the manufacture and these obligations varies by lease with the longest extending
sale of certain products and component technologies, the through 2016. These amounts were recorded in Other
company signed an agreement in the second quarter of (income) and expense in 2002.
106

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
FOURTH QUARTER ACTIONS
During the fourth quarter of 2002, the company executed several actions related to the company’s acquisition of PwCC.
Specifically, the company rebalanced both its workforce and its leased space resources. The following table summarizes the
significant components of these actions.
(dollars in millions)
RECORDED IN
PURCHASE
RECORDED IN THE CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTING
STATEMENT OF EARNINGS (SEE NOTE C)
TOTAL
TOTAL SALE OR LIABILITY LIABILITY LIABILITY LIABILITY
PRE-TAX WRITE-OFF RECORDED RECORDED RECORDED OTHER AS OF
CHARGES OF ASSETS IN 4TH QTR. IN 4TH QTR. IN 4TH QTR. PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENTS+ DEC. 31, 2002
Workforce: $«305(a) $«—
Current* $«248 $«««48(a) $«296 $«16 $«(2) $«278
Non-current** 57(a) — 57 — — 57
Vacant space: 17(b) 4
Current* 6 62(b) 68 1 — 67
Non-current** 7 173(b) 180 — — 180
Total $«322 $«««4 $«318 $«283 $«601 $«17 $«(2) $«582
(dollars in millions)
TOTAL
LIABILITY LIABILITY
AS OF AS OF
DEC. 31, OTHER DEC. 31,
2002 PAYMENTS ADJUSTMENTS++ 2003
Workforce:
Current* $«278 $«246 $«««6 $«««38
Non-current** 57 — 22 79
Vacant space:
Current* 67 64 37 40
Non-current** 180 — (47) 133
Total $«582 $«310 $«18 $«290
* Recorded in Accounts payable and accruals in the Consolidated Statement of These charges ($305 million in the table above) were
Financial Position. included in SG&A expense. The workplace reductions
**Recorded in Other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
also affected 1,203 acquired PwCCemployees all of whom
+ Principally represents currency translation adjustments.
++Principally represents currency translation adjustments and reclassifications between left the company as of December 31, 2003 ($48 million in
current and non-current. In addition, net adjustments of $(6) million were recorded the table above). These costs were included as part of the
in SG&Aexpense in 2003 to reduce previously recorded liabilities. These adjustments
liabilities assumed for purchase accounting in 2002.
were for changes in the estimated cost of employee terminations. There were also net
adjustments in 2003 to reduce goodwill and previously recorded liabilities of $36 million
for changes in the estimated cost of employee terminations and vacant space relating to (b)The majority of the space accruals are for ongoing obliga-
people and space acquired from PwC. tions to pay rent for vacant space of PwCCthat could not
(a)The majority of the workforce reductions relate to the be sublet or space that was sublet at rates lower than the
company’s Global Services business. The workforce committed lease arrangements. The length of these
reductions represent 3,541 people all of whom left the obligations varies by lease with the longest extending
company as of December 31, 2003. The non-current work- through 2012. The charges related to IBMspace ($17 million)
force accrual relates to terminated employees in certain were included in Other (income) and expense in 2002.
countries outside the U.S., for whom the company is The costs related to acquired PwCCspace are included
required to make annual payments to supplement their as part of the liabilities assumed for purchase accounting
incomes. Depending on individual country legal require- in 2002 ($235 million in the first table above comprise
ments, these required payments will continue until the $62 million current and $173 million non-current).
former employee begins receiving pension benefits or dies.
107

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
T
earnings per share of common stock
The following table sets forth the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per
share calculations are based:
Basic 1,721,588,628 1,703,244,345 1,733,348,422
Add—incremental shares under stock compensation plans 29,399,287 24,807,025 36,595,476
Add—incremental shares associated with convertible notes 4,695,956 1,191,136 —
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 406,818 1,698,548 1,277,222
Add—incremental shares associated with put options* — — 9,479
Assuming dilution 1,756,090,689 1,730,941,054 1,771,230,599
(dollars in millions except per share amounts)
Income from continuing operations applicable to common stockholders $«7,613 $«5,334 $«8,136
Loss from discontinued operations 30 1,755 423
Net income from total operations on which basic earnings per share is calculated $«7,583 $«3,579 $«7,713
Income from continuing operations applicable to common stockholders $«7,613 $«5,334 $«8,136
Add—income effect of contingently issuable shares 2 (18) (4)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings
per share is calculated 7,615 5,316 8,132
Loss from discontinued operations on which basic and diluted earnings
per share are calculated 30 1,755 423
Net income from total operations on which diluted earnings
per share is calculated $«7,585 $«3,561 $«7,709
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $«««4.34 $«««3.07 $«««4.59
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.01) (0.24)
Total $«««4.32 $«««2.06 $«««4.35
Basic:
Continuing operations $«««4.42 $«««3.13 $«««4.69
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.03) (0.24)
Total $«««4.40 $«««2.10 $«««4.45
*Represents short-term put option contracts sold by the company on a limited basis through private placements with independent third parties to reduce the cost of the share buy-back
program. The put option contracts that were executed permitted net share settlement at the company’s option and did not result in a put option liability in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position. As of December 31, 2003 and 2002, the company did not have any put option obligations outstanding.
Stock options to purchase 124,840,510 common shares in 2003, 111,713,072 common shares in 2002 and 67,596,737 common
shares in 2001 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise
price of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares and, therefore, the effect would have
been antidilutive. Net income applicable to common stockholders excludes preferred stock dividends of $10 million in 2001.
108

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
U
rental expense and lease commitments
Rental expense from continuing operations, including amounts charged to inventories and fixed assets, and excluding
amounts previously reserved, was $1,419 million in 2003, $1,377 million in 2002 and $1,324 million in 2001. The table below
depicts gross minimum rental commitments from continuing operations under noncancelable leases, amounts related to
vacant space associated with infrastructure reduction and restructuring actions taken through 1993, and in 1999 and 2002
(previously reserved), and sublease income commitments. These amounts reflect activities primarily related to office space as
well as manufacturing equipment.
(dollars in millions)
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 BEYOND 2008
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $«1,401 $«1,127 $«951 $«832 $«701 $«1,402
Vacant space 149 116 72 78 35 58
Sublease income commitments (53) (47) (32) (31) (27) (21)
V
stock-based compensation plans
reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 40.5 mil-
lion additional awards are considered authorized to be issued
The following is a description of the terms of the company’s
under the company’s Plans as of December 31, 2003. There
stock-based compensation plans:
were 87.1 million option awards outstanding under previous
INCENTIVE PLANS plans included in the total number of shares under option at
Incentive awards are provided to employees and members of December 31, 2003. There were 148.1 million and 183.3 million
the Board of Directors under the terms of the company’s unused shares available to be granted under the Plans as of
plans (the Plans). Employee awards are administered by the December 31, 2003 and 2002, respectively. Awards under the
Executive Compensation and Management Resources Plans resulted in compensation expense of $117 million, $183 mil-
Committee of the Board of Directors (the Committee). The lionand $170 million in 2003, 2002 and 2001, respectively.
Committee determines the type and terms of the awards to
be granted to employees, including vesting provisions. Stock Option Grants
Awards under the Plans may include stock options, stock Stock options are granted to employees and directors at an
appreciation rights, restricted stock, cash or stock awards, or exercise price equal to the fair market value of the company’s
any combination thereof. The amount of shares authorized to stock at the date of grant. Generally, options vest 25 percent
be issued under the company’s existing Plans is 274.1 million at per year, are fully vested four years from the grant date and
December 31, 2003. Certain incentive awards granted under have a term of ten years. The following tables summarize
previous plans, if and when those awards are cancelled, can be option activity under the Plans during 2003, 2002 and 2001.
2003 2002 2001
WTD. AVG. NUMBER WTD. AVG. NUMBER WTD. AVG. NUMBER
EXERCISE OF SHARES EXERCISE OF SHARES EXERCISE OF SHARES
PRICE UNDER OPTION PRICE UNDER OPTION PRICE UNDER OPTION
Balance at January 1 $««84 222,936,700 $««85 177,956,490 $««73 160,557,003
Options granted 83 41,275,832 77 59,966,106 110 43,410,364
Options exercised 40 (11,205,228) 33 (7,490,424) 37 (20,354,701)
Options canceled/expired 100 (8,041,252) 103 (7,495,472) 100 (5,656,176)
Balance at December 31 $««86 244,966,052 $««84 222,936,700 $««85 177,956,490
Exercisable at December 31 $««85 134,735,326 $««75 108,347,895 $««62 80,773,980
109

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The shares under option at December 31, 2003, were in the following exercise price ranges:
OPTIONS OUTSTANDING OPTIONS CURRENTLY EXERCISABLE
WTD. AVG.
WTD. AVG. NUMBER REMAINING WTD. AVG. NUMBER
EXERCISE OF SHARES CONTRACTUAL EXERCISE OF SHARES
EXERCISE PRICE RANGE PRICE UNDER OPTION LIFE (IN YEARS) PRICE UNDER OPTION
$13–$60 $««45 58,085,692 5 $««42 46,673,075
$61–$85 77 59,168,633 9 71 7,482,142
$86–$105 98 58,170,230 7 97 29,229,856
$106 and over 117 69,541,497 7 119 51,350,253
$««86 244,966,052 7 $««85 134,735,326
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there equals the lesser of 85 percent of the average market price
are an additional 3.5 million options outstanding at on the first business day of each offering period or 85 per-
December 31, 2003, as a result of the company’s assumption cent of the average market price on the last business day of
of options granted by the acquired entities. The weighted- each pay period. Individual ESPPparticipants are restricted
average exercise price of these options is $90. from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in
one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
IBM EMPLOYEES STOCK PURCHASE PLAN
Approximately 44.2 million, 4.6 million and 16.5 million
In July 2003, the IBM2003 ESPPbecame effective and 50
reserved unissued shares were available for purchase under
million additional shares of authorized common stock were
the 2003 ESPP(or a predecessor plan) at December 31, 2003,
reserved and approved for issuance. The ESPPenables sub-
2002 and 2001, respectively.
stantially all regular employees to purchase full or fractional
shares of IBMcommon stock through payroll deductions of PRO FORMA DISCLOSURE
up to 10 percent of eligible compensation. The 2003 ESPP See “Stock-Based Compensation” on pages 82 and 83, in
provides for semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for the pro forma
2003, and continuing as long as shares remain available disclosures of net income and earnings per share required
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion under SFAS No. 123.
of the Board of Directors. The share price paid by an employee
W
retirement-related benefits
IBMoffers defined benefit pension plans, defined contribution pension plans, as well as nonpension postretirement plans
primarily consisting of retiree medical benefits. These benefits form an important part of the company’s total compensation
and benefits program that is designed to attract and retain highly skilled and talented employees. The following table provides
the total retirement-related benefit plans’ impact on income before income taxes.
(dollars in millions)
U.S. NON-U.S. TOTAL
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002 2001
Total retirement-related plans—
cost/(income) $««««67 $«(154) $«(256) $«295 $«(17) $«(181) $«362 $«(171)* $«(437)*
Comprise:
Defined benefit and contribution
pension plans—(income)/cost $«(227) $«(478) $«(632) $«254 $«(46) $«(209) $«««27 $«(524) $«(841)
Nonpension postretirement
benefits—cost 294 324 376 41 29 28 335 353 404
*Includes amounts for discontinued operations costs of $77 million and $56 million for 2002 and 2001, respectively.
110

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
ACCOUNTING POLICY Financial Position. The ABO is the present value of the
Defined Benefit Pension and actuarially determined company obligation for pension pay-
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans ments assuming no further salary increases for the employees.
The company accounts for its defined benefit pension plans The offset to the minimum liability is a charge to equity, net
and its nonpension postretirement benefit plans using actuarial of tax. In addition, any prepaid pension asset in excess of
models required by SFAS No. 87, “Employers’ Accounting unrecognized prior service cost must be reversed through a
for Pensions,” and SFAS No. 106, “Employers’ Accounting for net-of-tax charge to equity. The charge to equity is included
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions,” respectively. in the Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained
These models use an attribution approach that generally earnings section of Stockholders’ equity in the Consolidated
spreads individual events over the average service lives of the Statement of Financial Position.
employees in the plan. Examples of “events” are plan amend- The company uses a December 31 measurement date for
ments and changes in actuarial assumptions such as discount the majority of its pension plans.
rate, rate of compensation increases and mortality. The
Defined Contribution Pension Plans
principle underlying the required attribution approach is
The company records pension expense for defined contri-
that employees render service over their service lives on a
bution plans when the employee renders service to the
relatively smooth basis and therefore, the income statement
company, essentially coinciding with the cash contributions
effects of pensions or nonpension postretirement benefit
to the plans.
plans are earned in, and should follow, the same pattern.
One of the principal components of the net periodic
DEFINED BENEFIT AND DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLANS
pension cost/(income) calculation is the expected long-term
The company and its subsidiaries have defined benefit and
rates of return on plan assets. The required use of expected
defined contribution pension plans that cover substantially
long-term rate of return on plan assets may result in recog-
all regular employees, and supplemental retirement plans
nized pension income that is greater or less than the actual
that cover certain executives.
returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over time,
however, the expected long-term returns are designed to U.S.Plans
approximate the actual long-term returns and therefore IBMPersonal Pension Plan (PPP) – IBMprovides U.S.regular,
result in a pattern of income and expense recognition that full-time and part-time employees with noncontributory
more closely matches the pattern of the services provided by defined benefit pension benefits (PPP). The PPPcomprises
the employees. Differences between actual and expected a tax qualified plan and a non-qualified plan. The qualified
returns are recognized in the calculation of net periodic plan is funded by company contributions to an irrevocable
pension cost/(income) over five years as provided for in the trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of participants.
accounting rules. The non-qualified plan, which provides benefits in excess of
These expected returns on plan assets are developed in IRSlimitations for qualified plans, is unfunded.
conjunction with external advisors, and take into account The number of individuals receiving benefits from the
long-term expectations for future returns and investment PPPat December 31, 2003 and 2002, was 136,302 and 136,365,
strategy. Amounts are tested for reasonableness against their respectively. The pre-tax net periodic pension income for
historical averages, usually over a ten year period. the qualified plan for the years ended December 31, 2003,
The discount rate assumptions used for pension and non- 2002 and 2001, was $(692) million, $(917) million and
pension postretirement benefit plan accounting reflect the $(1,086) million, respectively. The pre-tax net periodic pension
prevailing rates available on high-quality, fixed-income debt cost for the non-qualified plan was $107 million, $106 mil-
instruments. The rate of compensation increase is another lion and $118 million for the years ended December 31, 2003,
significant assumption used in the actuarial model for pen- 2002 and 2001, respectively. The costs of the non-qualified
sion accounting and is determined by the company, based plan are reflected in Cost of other defined benefit plans on
upon its long-term plans for such increases. For retiree med- page 112.
ical plan accounting, the company reviews external data and The funded status reconciliation for the qualified plan is
its own historical trends for health care costs to determine on page 113. The benefit obligation of the non-qualified plan
the health care cost trend rates. was $1,068 million and $940 million at December 31, 2003
As required by SFAS No. 87, for instances in which pension and 2002, respectively, and the amounts included in
plan assets are less than the accumulated benefit obligation Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obliga-
(ABO) as of the end of the reporting period (defined as an tions in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at
unfunded ABOposition), a minimum liability equal to this December 31, 2003 and 2002, were liabilities of $901 million
difference is established in the Consolidated Statement of and $798 million, respectively.
111

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
IBM Savings Plan – U.S. regular, full-time and part-time years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001, was $25 mil-
employees are eligible to participate in the IBM Savings lion, $18 million and $23 million, respectively. These amounts
Plan, which is a tax-qualified defined contribution plan are reflected in Cost of other defined benefit plans in the
under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. The table below. At December 31, 2003 and 2002, the benefit obli-
company matches 50 percent of the employee’s contribution gation was $181 million and $130 million, respectively, and
up to the first 6 percent of the employee’s compensation. All the amounts included in Retirement and nonpension postre-
contributions, including the company match, are made in tirement benefit obligations in the Consolidated Statement
cash, in accordance with the participants’ investment elections. of Financial Position at December 31, 2003 and 2002, were
There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in liabilities of $186 million and $165 million, respectively.
company stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring
Non-U.S.Plans
amounts out of the company’s stock to another investment
Most subsidiaries and branches outside the U.S.have defined
choice. The total cost of all of the company’s U.S. defined
benefit and/or defined contribution retirement plans that
contribution plans was $333 million, $315 million and $313
cover substantially all regular employees, under which the
million for the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and
company deposits funds under various fiduciary-type
2001, respectively.
arrangements, purchases annuities under group contracts or
U.S.Supplemental Executive Retention Plan – The company also provides reserves. Benefits under the defined benefit plans are
has a non-qualified U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention typically based either on years of service and the employee’s
Plan (SERP). The SERP, which is unfunded, provides defined compensation, generally during a fixed number of years
benefit pension benefits in addition to the PPP to eligible immediately before retirement, or on annual credits. The
executives based on average earnings, years of service and age range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S.defined
at retirement. Effective July 1, 1999, the company adopted the benefit plans reflects the different economic environments
SERP(which replaced the previous Supplemental Executive within various countries. The total non-U.S.retirement plan
Retirement Plan). Some participants of the prior SERP will cost/(income) of these plans for the years ended December
still be eligible for benefits under that plan, but will not be 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001, was $254 million, $(46) million and
eligible for the new plan. The total cost of this plan for the $(209) million, respectively.
Cost/(Income) of Pension Plans
(dollars in millions)
U.S. PLANS* NON-U.S. PLANS
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002 2001
Service cost $««««576 $««««650 $««««647 $««««537 $««««505 $««««429
Interest cost 2,518 2,591 2,560 1,477 1,270 1,214
Expected return on plan assets (3,703) (4,121) (4,202) (2,228) (2,132) (2,062)
Amortization of transition assets (144) (144) (143) (15) (12) (10)
Amortization of prior service cost 61 61 52 17 28 28
Recognized actuarial losses/(gains) — — — 101 33 (12)
Divestitures/settlement losses/(gains) — 46 — — 26 (12)
Net periodic pension income—U.S.Plan and
material non-U.S.Plans (692)* (917)* (1,086)* (111) (282) (425)
Cost of other defined benefit plans 132 124 141 100 58 54
Total net periodic pension income for all
defined benefit plans (560) (793) (945) (11) (224) (371)
Cost of defined contribution plans 333 315 313 265 178 162
Total retirement plan (income)/cost recognized
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings $«««(227) $«««(478) $«««(632) $««««254 $«««««(46) $«««(209)
*Represents the qualified portion of the PPP.
See beginning of note W, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on page 110 for the company’s total retirement-related benefits
cost/(income).
112

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The changes in the benefit obligations and plan assets of the qualified portion of the PPPand the significant non-U.S.defined
benefit plans for 2003 and 2002 were as follows:
(dollars in millions)
PPP-QUALIFIED PORTION NON-U.S. PLANS
2003 2002 2003 2002
Change in benefit obligation:
Benefit obligation at beginning of year $«38,357 $«37,762 $«25,699 $«21,801
Service cost 576 650 537 505
Interest cost 2,518 2,591 1,477 1,270
Plan participants’ contributions — — 43 34
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — 32 75 246
Amendments — 18 — (280)
Actuarial losses 3,472 47 1,167 80
Benefits paid from trust (2,819) (2,743) (1,093) (866)
Direct benefit payments — — (253) (221)
Foreign exchange impact — — 4,166 3,104
Plan curtailments/settlements/termination benefits — — 57 26
Benefit obligation at end of year 42,104 38,357 31,875 25,699
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at beginning of year 36,984 39,565 20,637 21,531
Actual return on plan assets 7,514 (3,801) 2,829 (3,135)
Employer contribution — 3,963 542 225
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 7 191
Plan participants’ contributions — — 43 34
Benefits paid from trust (2,819) (2,743) (1,093) (866)
Foreign exchange impact — — 3,581 2,657
Fair value of plan assets at end of year 41,679 36,984 26,546 20,637
Fair value of plan assets in excess of benefit obligation (425) (1,373) (5,329) (5,062)
Unrecognized net actuarial losses 11,849 12,187 10,775 8,991
Unrecognized prior service costs 523 584 (170) (187)
Unrecognized net transition assets (72) (216) (26) (36)
Net prepaid pension asset recognized in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position $«11,875 $«11,182 $«««5,250 $«««3,706
Amounts recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
Financial Position captions include:
Prepaid pension assets $«11,875 $«11,182 $«««6,129 $«««4,397
Intangible assets — — 52 54
Total prepaid pension assets 11,875 11,182 6,181 4,451
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligation — — (6,982) (5,865)
Accumulated gains and (losses) not affecting retained earnings — — 3,888 3,277
Deferred tax assets (investments and sundry assets) — — 2,163 1,843
Net amount recognized $«11,875 $«11,182 $«««5,250 $«««3,706
Accumulated benefit obligation $«40,423 $«36,738 $«30,240 $«24,186
Differences between the aggregate balance sheet amounts due to pension income and foreign exchange impacts. The
listed above (material pension plans) and on page 116 increase in the company’s Retirement and nonpension
(material nonpension postretirement plan) and the totals postretirement benefit obligation was primarily attributable
listed in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position to the required accounting for the unfunded status of the
and Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity, relate non-U.S.pension plans as discussed on page 114 as well as
to the non-material plans. The increase in the company’s accrued pension costs and foreign exchange impacts.
Prepaid pension asset balance from 2002 to 2003 was primarily
113

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Assumptions used to determine the year-end benefit obligations for principal pension plans follow:
U.S. PLANS NON-U.S. PLANS
WEIGHTED-AVERAGE ASSUMPTIONS AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002 2001
Discount rate 6.0% 6.75% 7.0% 3.0–6.0% 4.25–6.5% 4.5–7.1%
Rate of compensation increase 4.0% 4.0% 6.0% 1.5–5.0% 2.2–5.0% 2.0–6.1%
Assumptions used to determine the net periodic pension cost/(income) for principal pension plans during the year follow:
U.S. PLANS NON-U.S. PLANS
WEIGHTED-AVERAGE ASSUMPTIONS FOR YEARS ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002 2001
Discount rate 6.75% 7.0% 7.25% 4.25–6.5% 4.5–7.1% 4.5–7.1%
Expected long-term return on plan assets 8.0% 9.50% 10.0% 5.0–8.0% 5.0–9.25% 5.0–10.0%
Rate of compensation increase 4.0% 6.0% 6.0% 2.2–5.0% 2.0–6.1% 2.6–6.1%
The changes in the Expected long-term return on plan assets approximately $375 million during the year ended December 31,
in 2003 and 2002 for the PPPdecreased net periodic pension 2003 as compared to the year ended December 31, 2002.
income by approximately $715 million and $224 million, There was no contribution to the PPPduring the year ended
respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2003 as com- December 31, 2003.
pared to the year ended December 31, 2002 and for the year There were contributions of $542 million and $225 mil-
ended December 31, 2002 as compared to the year ended lion for the material non-U.S. plans during the year ended
December 31, 2001, respectively. The change in the Rate of December 31, 2003 and December 31, 2002, respectively.
compensation increase assumption for the PPP increased The company, however, decided not to fund certain of the
net periodic pension income by approximately $145 million company’s non-U.S.plans that had unfunded positions to the
for the year ended December 31, 2003 as compared to the ABO level. As a result and consistent with the accounting
year ended December 31, 2002. The changes in the Discount rules required by SFAS No. 87 for these “unfunded” positions
rate assumption since 2001 for the PPPdid not have a mate- as described on page 111, the company recorded an additional
rial impact on net periodic pension income for the years minimum liability of $560 million and a reduction to stock-
ended December 31, 2003, 2002, and 2001. holders’ equity of $72 million as of December 31, 2003. The
Net changes in assumptions for the material non-U.S.plans differences between these amounts and the amounts
had the net impact of decreasing net periodic pension income included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
by approximately $225 million and $200 million for the year and Consolidated Statement of Stockholders’ Equity relate to
ended December 31, 2003 as compared to the year ended the non-material plans. This accounting transaction did not
December 31, 2002 and for the year ended December 31, 2002 impact 2003 retirement-related plans cost/(income).
as compared to the year ended December 31, 2001, respectively. The company’s Benefit Obligation (BO) for its material
plans is disclosed at the top of page 113. BOis calculated simi-
Funded Status for Defined Benefit Pension Plans larly to ABOexcept for the fact that BOincludes an estimate
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pen- for future salary increases. SFAS No. 132 (revised 2003),
sions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth “Employers’ Disclosures about Pensions and Other Post-
in applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws, gen- retirement Benefits—an amendment of FASBStatements No.
erally up to the ABOlevel. From time to time, the company 87, 88 and 106,” requires that companies disclose the aggregate
contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate. BOand plan assets of all plans in which the BOexceeds plan
In the fourth quarter of 2002, the company voluntarily assets. Similar disclosure is required for all plans in which the
fully funded the qualilfied portion of the PPP, as measured ABOexceeds plan assets. The aggregate BOand plan assets are
by its ABO, through a total contribution of $3,963 million. also disclosed for plans in which the plan assets exceed the BO.
The contribution comprised $2,092 million in cash and The following table excludes the U.S. plans due to the fact
$1,871 million, or 24,037,354 shares, of IBMcommon stock. that these plans’ BOand plan assets, if any, appear either in
This contribution increased net periodic pension income by the narrative on pages 111 and 112 or the table on page 113.
(dollars in millions)
2003 2002
BENEFIT PLAN BENEFIT PLAN
AT DECEMBER 31: OBLIGATION ASSETS OBLIGATION ASSETS
Plans with BOin excess of plan assets $«21,101 $«12,985 $«20,212 $«13,132
Plans with ABOin excess of plan assets $«19,902 $«12,985 $«15,978 $«10,086
Plans with assets in excess of BO $«10,774 $«13,561 $«««5,487 $«««7,505
114

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
PLAN ASSETS included private market assets comprising approximately 10.5
The company’s pension plan weighted-average asset alloca- percent and 11.1 percent of total assets at December 31, 2003
tions at December 31, 2003 and 2002 and target allocation and 2002, respectively. The target allocation for private mar-
for 2004, by asset category, are as follows: ket assets in 2004 is 10.5 percent. The Fund has $2,465 million
in commitments for future private market investments to be
U.S. Plans
made over a number of years from plan assets. These com-
PLAN ASSETS mitments are expected to be fulfilled from plan assets.
AT DECEMBER 31: 2004
TARGET Derivatives are primarily used to hedge currency, adjust port-
ASSET CATEGORY 2003 2002 ALLOCATION folio duration, and reduce specific market risks.
Equity securities* 67.5% 61.9% 65.0% Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar,
Debt securities 29.2% 34.5% 31,0% subject to local regulations. In some countries, a higher
Real estate 3.3% 3.6% 4.0% percentage allocation to fixed income securities is required.
Total 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% In others, the responsibility for managing the investments
typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent
Non-U.S. Plans of members elected by employees and retirees. This can result
in slight differences compared to the strategies described
AT
P L
D
A
E
N
CE
A
M
S
B
S
E
E
R
T S
3 1: 2004
above. Generally, these non-U.S.funds are not permitted to
TARGET invest in liquid assets, such as private equities, and their use
ASSET CATEGORY 2003 2002 ALLOCATION
of derivatives is usually limited to passive currency hedging.
Equity securities 59.1% 55.2% 58.2%
Equity securities include IBM common stock in the
Debt securities 38.5% 40.9% 39.6%
amounts of $2,144 million (5.1 percent of total PPP plan
Real estate 1.9% 2.2% 1.8%
assets at December 31, 2003) and $2,006 million (5.4 percent
Other 0.5% 1.7% 0.4%
of total PPPplan assets at December 31, 2002).
Total 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS
*See discussion below regarding certain private market assets, and future funding
commitments thereof, that are not as liquid as the rest of the publicly traded securities. In 2004, the company expects to contribute to its non-U.S.
plans in an amount that is equal to or greater than such
The investment objectives of the PPPportfolio of assets (the
contributions in 2003 ($542 million). The legally mandated
Fund) are designed to generate returns that will enable the
minimum contributions to the company’s non-U.S. plans
Fund to meet its future obligations. The precise amount for
are expected to be $220 million. Depending upon market
which these obligations will be settled depends on future
conditions, the company may elect to contribute to the
events, including the life expectancy of the Plan’s members and
qualified portion of the PPP.
salary inflation. The obligations are estimated using actuarial
assumptions, based on the current economic environment. NONPENSION POSTRETIREMENT BENEFITS
The strategy balances the requirement to generate return, The total cost of the company’s nonpension postretirement
using higher-returning assets such as equity securities, with the benefits for the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and
need to control risk in the Fund with less volatile assets, such as 2001, was $335 million, $353 million and $404 million,
fixed income securities. Risks include, among others, the like- respectively. The company has a defined benefit postretire-
lihood of the Plans becoming underfunded, thereby increasing ment plan that provides medical and dental benefits as well
their dependence on contributions from the company. Within as life insurance for U.S. retirees and eligible dependents.
each asset class, careful consideration is given to balancing the The total cost of this plan for the years ended December 31,
portfolio among industry sectors, geographies, interest rate 2003, 2002 and 2001, was $294 million, $324 million and
sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, currency and $376 million, respectively. The changes in the benefit obliga-
other factors that affect investment returns. tion and plan assets for this plan are presented on page 116.
The assets are managed by professional investment firms Effective July 1, 1999, the company established a “Future
as well as by investment professionals who are IBMemployees. Health Account” (FHA) for employees who were more than
They are bound by precise mandates and are measured five years away from retirement eligibility. Employees who
against specific benchmarks. Among managers, consideration were within five years of retirement eligibility are covered
is given, among others, to balancing security concentration, under the company’s prior retiree health benefit arrange-
issuer concentration, investment style, and reliance on partic- ments. Under either the FHA or the prior retirees health
ular active investment strategies. Market liquidity risks are benefit arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the com-
tightly controlled, with only a small percentage of the PPP pany for retiree health benefits. For employees who retired
portfolio invested in private market assets consisting of before January 1, 1992, that maximum became effective in
private equities and private real estate investments, which 2001. For all other employees, the maximum is effective
are less liquid than publicly traded securities. The PPP upon retirement. Effective January 1, 2004, the company
115

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
amended its postretirement plan to provide that new hires The BOwas determined by applying the terms of medical,
will no longer be eligible for company-subsidized benefits. dental and life insurance plans, including the effects of estab-
Certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries have lished maximums on covered costs, together with relevant
similar plans for retirees. However, most of the retirees actuarial assumptions.
outside the U.S.are covered by government-sponsored and
WEIGHTED-AVERAGE DISCOUNT RATE
administered programs. The total cost of these plans for ASSUMPTIONS USED TO DETERMINE: 2003 2002 2001
the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001, was
The year-end benefit
$41 million, $29 million and $28 million, respectively. At obligation at December 31 6.0% 6.75% 7.0%
December 31, 2003 and 2002, Other liabilities in the The net periodic post-
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position include non- retirement benefit costs
U.S. postretirement benefit liabilities of $270 million and for years ended December 31 6.75% 7.0% 7.25%
$211 million, respectively.
The net periodic postretirement benefit cost for the U.S. For the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001, the
plan includes the following components: planassets of $14 million, $10 million and $8 million invested
in short-term highly liquid securities, and as a result, the
(dollars in millions)
expected long-term return on plan assets and the actual
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
return on those assets were not material for those years.
Service cost $«««36 $«««49 $«««65
The company evaluates its actuarial assumptions on an
Interest cost 382 421 437
annual basis and considers changes in these long-term fac-
Amortization of prior
tors based upon market conditions and the requirements of
service costs (130) (147) (148)
SFAS No. 106, “Employers’ Accounting for Postretirement
Recognized actuarial losses 6 30 22
Benefits Other than Pensions.” The discount rate changes
Divestiture — (29) —
did not have a material effect on net postretirement benefit
Net periodic post-retirement
cost for the years ended December 31, 2003, 2002 and 2001.
benefit cost $«294 $«324 $«376
ASSUMED HEALTH CARE COST TREND RATES
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002
The changes in the benefit obligation and plan assets of
Health care cost trend rate assumed
the U.S.plan for 2003 and 2002 are as follows:
for next year 8.9% 10.0%
(dollars in millions) Rate to which the cost trend rate is
2003 2002 assumed to decline (the ultimate
trend rate) 4.5% 4.5%
Change in benefit obligation:
Number of years to ultimate trend rate 4 5
Benefit obligation at
beginning of year $««5,882 $««6,148
Service cost 36 49 The health care cost trend rate has an insignificant effect
Interest cost 382 421 on plan costs and obligations. A one-percentage-point
Actuarial losses/(gains) 419 (170) change in the assumed health care cost trend rate would have
Direct benefit payments (538) (566) the following effects as of December 31, 2003:
Benefit obligation at end of year 6,181 5,882 (dollars in millions)
Change in plan assets: ONE-PERCENTAGE- ONE-PERCENTAGE-
POINT INCREASE POINT DECREASE
Fair value of plan assets at
beginning of year 10 8 Effect on total service and
Actual return on plan assets — 2 interest cost $«1 $«(1)
Participant contributions 153 119 Effect on postretirement
benefit obligation $«6 $«(7)
Benefits paid from trust (149) (119)
Fair value of plan assets at end of year 14 10
Benefit obligation in excess
of plan assets (6,167) (5,872)
Unrecognized net actuarial losses 1,004 595
Unrecognized prior service costs (363) (493)
Accrued postretirement benefit
liability recognized in the
Consolidated Statement of
Financial Position $«(5,526) $«(5,770)
116

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
PLAN ASSETS segment; and an Enterprise Investments segment. The seg-
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plan ments are determined based on several factors, including
assets at December 31, 2003 and 2002 are comprised of client base, homogeneity of products, technology and
short-term fixed-income investments. delivery channels.
This plan is not funded. The company makes payments Information about each segment’s business and the prod-
from company funds as they become due and also maintains ucts and services that generate each segment’s revenue is
a nominal, highly liquid fund balance to ensure payments are located in the “Description of Business” section of the
made timely. Management Discussion on page 48 and pages 55 to 57.
In 2003, the company renamed all of its hardware segments
RECENTLY ENACTED LEGISLATION without changing the organization of these segments. The
The Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and Enterprise Systems segment was renamed the Systems
Modernization Act of 2003 (the Act) was signed into law on Group segment, the Personal and Printing Systems segment
December 8, 2003. The Act introduces a prescription drug was renamed the Personal Systems Group segment and the
benefit under Medicare (Medicare Part D) as well as a federal Technology segment was renamed the Technology Group
subsidy to sponsors of retiree health care benefit plans that segment.
provide a prescription drug benefit that is at least actuarially Due to the 2002 sale of the HDDbusiness as described in
equivalent to Medicare Part D.
note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on page 92 and consistent
SFAS No. 106, requires presently enacted changes in with the “Basis of Presentation” discussed in note A,
relevant laws to be considered in current period measure- “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 80, the income
ments of postretirement benefit costs and the BO. See page statement and cash flow statement information for the
116 for the BO and cost of the company’s U.S. nonpension Technology Group segment has been reclassified to exclude
postretirement benefit plan. or to separate the results of the discontinued HDDbusiness.
In accordance with FSP FAS 106-1, “Accounting and Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transac-
Disclosure Requirements Related to the Medicare Prescrip- tions between the segments that are intended to reflect an
tion Drug, Improvement and Modernization Act of 2003,” arm’s-length transfer price. Specifically, semiconductors are
any measures of the BO or net periodic postretirement sourced internally from the Technology Group segment for
benefit cost in the Consolidated Financial Statements or use in the manufacture of the Systems Group segment and
accompanying notes do not reflect the effects of the Act on Personal Systems Group segment products. In addition,
the company’s postretirement health care plan. hardware and software that are used by the Global Services
The method of determining whether a sponsor’s plan will segment in outsourcing engagements are mostly sourced
qualify for actuarial equivalency is pending until the U.S. internally from the Systems Group, Personal Systems Group
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) completes and Software segments. For the internal use of ITservices,
its interpretative work on the Act. Once the interpretative the Global Services segment recovers cost, as well as a reason-
guidance is released by HHS and the FASB releases its able fee, reflecting the arm’s-length value of providing the
authoritative guidance on the appropriate method of services. The Global Services segment enters into arm’s-length
accounting for the subsidy, if eligible, the company could be leases at prices equivalent to market rates with the Global
required to account for the subsidy (or a portion thereof) in Financing segment to facilitate the acquisition of equipment
previously released financial statements. The FASBhas not used in services engagements. Generally, all internal transac-
finalized the accounting for the subsidy nor has it determined tion prices are reviewed and reset annually, if appropriate.
its transition provisions. The company uses shared-resources concepts to realize
economies of scale and efficient use of resources. Thus, a con-
siderableamount of expense is shared by all of the company’s
X
segment information segments. This expense represents sales coverage, marketing
and support functions such as Accounting, Treasury,
IBMuses business insight and its portfolio of ITcapabilities Procurement, Legal, Human Resources, and Billing and
to create client solutions. The company operates primarily in Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated
a single industry using several segments that create value by based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount.
offering solutions that include, either singularly or in some When a clear and measurable driver cannot be identified,
combination, services, software, hardware and financing. shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis that is con-
Organizationally, the company’s major operations com- sistent with the company’s management system; e.g., image
prise a Global Services segment; a Software segment; three advertising is allocated based on the gross profit of the
hardware product segments—Systems Group, Personal segments. The unallocated corporate amounts arising
Systems Group and Technology Group; a Global Financing from certain acquisitions, indirect infrastructure reductions,
117

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
certain IPincome, miscellaneous tax items, pre-divestiture senior management will use for joint strategy, budgets, and
HDDinternal activity from continuing operations and the resource allocation decisions, as well as performance and
unallocated corporate expense pool are recorded in net compensation scoring.
income but are not allocated to the segments. The following tables reflect the results of continuing
Over recent years, the company has been developing and operations of the segments consistent with the company’s
enhancing a “one team” approach to the collaboration management system. These results are not necessarily a
between the Systems Group and Technology Group. This depiction that is in conformity with GAAP; e.g., employee
relationship is crucial given the core technology of the retirement plan costs are developed using actuarial assump-
Systems Group products are a key competitive differentiator tions on a country-by-country basis and allocated to the
for the company. The degree of this collaboration has segments based on headcount. Different amounts could
increased whereby in 2004, the company is managing these result if actuarial assumptions that are unique to the segment
groups as one. Accordingly, in the first quarter of 2004, the were used. Performance measurement is based on income
company combined the two segments into one reporting before income taxes (pre-tax income). These results are used,
segment. The new Systems and Technology Group segment in part, by management, both in evaluating the performance
will generate one consolidated set of financial results, which of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments.
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM SEGMENT VIEW
(dollars in millions)
HARDWARE
PERSONAL
GLOBAL SYSTEMS SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY GLOBAL ENTERPRISE TOTAL
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: SERVICES GROUP GROUP GROUP SOFTWARE FINANCING INVESTMENTS SEGMENTS
2003:
External revenue $«42,635 $«14,002 $«11,387 $««2,871 $«14,311 $«2,827 $«1,065 $«89,098
Internal revenue 2,837 837 171 805 1,613 1,300 5 7,568
Total revenue $«45,472 $«14,839 $«11,558 $««3,676 $«15,924 $«4,127 $«1,070 $«96,666
Pre-tax income/(loss) $«««4,499 $«««2,046 $«««««(118) $««««(252) $«««3,808 $«1,182 $«««(252) $«10,913
Revenue year-to-year change 16.0% 11.5% 3.3% (23.6)% 11.4% (0.4)% 4.3% 9.9%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 23.0% 31.1% (307.0)% 76.2% 7.1% 23.8% 14.0% 29.4%
Pre-tax income margin 9.9% 13.8% (1.0)% (6.9)% 23.9% 28.6% (23.6)% 11.3%
2002:
External revenue $«36,360 $«12,646 $«11,049 $««3,935 $«13,074 $«3,203 $«1,022 $«81,289
Internal revenue 2,854 659 139 877 1,225 939 4 6,697
Total revenue $«39,214 $«13,305 $«11,188 $««4,812 $«14,299 $«4,142 $«1,026 $«87,986
Pre-tax income/(loss) $«««3,657 $«««1,561 $««««««««57 $«(1,057) $«««3,556 $««««955 $«««(293) $«««8,436
Revenue year-to-year change 4.3% (7.9)% (7.2)% (27.1)% 2.7% (2.4)% (8.6)% (2.2)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (29.1)% (14.7)% 137.3% (697.2)% 12.2% (16.4)% 7.6% (23.4)%
Pre-tax income margin 9.3% 11.7% 0.5% (22.0)% 24.9% 23.1% (28.6)% 9.6%
2001:
External revenue $«34,956 $«13,743 $«11,982 $««5,149 $«12,939 $«3,407 $«1,118 $«83,294
Internal revenue 2,647 710 73 1,451 981 836 4 6,702
Total revenue $«37,603 $«14,453 $«12,055 $««6,600 $«13,920 $«4,243 $«1,122 $«89,996
Pre-tax income/(loss) $«««5,161 $«««1,830 $«««««(153) $«««««177 $«««3,168 $«1,143 $«««(317) $«11,009
Revenue year-to-year change 5.7% (2.6)% (20.5)% (8.0)% 3.7% (4.5)% (18.2)% (2.2)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 14.3% (4.8)% (251.5)% (74.6)% 13.4% (2.8)% (6.7)% 0.9%
Pre-tax income margin 13.7% 12.7% (1.3)% 2.7% 22.8% 26.9% (28.3)% 12.2%
118

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Reconciliations to IBMas Reported goodwill, plant, property and equipment, and investment in
capitalized software. The assets of the Hardware segments
(dollars in millions)
primarily are inventory and plant, property and equipment.
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
The assets of the Global Financing segment are primarily
Revenue:
financing receivables and fixed assets under operating leases.
Total reportable segments $«96,666 $«87,986 $«89,996
To accomplish the efficient use of the company’s space
Other revenue and
and equipment, it usually is necessary for several segments to
adjustments 33 (103) (227)
share plant, property and equipment assets. Where assets
Elimination of internal
revenue (7,568) (6,697) (6,702) are shared, landlord ownership of the assets is assigned to
one segment and is not allocated to each user segment. This
Total IBMconsolidated $«89,131 $«81,186 $«83,067
is consistent with the company’s management system and is
reflected accordingly in the schedule on page 120. In those
(dollars in millions) cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 pre-tax income and segment assets.
Pre-Tax Income: Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each
Total reportable segments $«10,913 $«««8,436 $«11,009 segmentare based on the assigned landlord ownership and
Elimination of internal may not be consistent with the amounts that are included
transactions (55) (164) 108 in the segments’ pre-tax income. The amounts that are
Unallocated corporate included in pre-tax income reflect occupancy charges from
amounts 16 (748) 333
the landlord segment and are not specifically identified by
Total IBMconsolidated $«10,874 $«««7,524 $«11,450 the management reporting system. Capital expenditures
that are reported by each segment also are in line with the
IMMATERIAL ITEMS landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
Investment in Equity Alliances and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses) The Global Financing segment amounts on page 120
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains for Interest income and Cost of Global Financing interest
and (losses) from these investments that are attributable to expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
the segments do not have a material effect on the financial associated with the Global Financing business, including
position or the financial results of the segments. the intercompany financing activities discussed on page
69 as well as the income from the investment in cash and
SEGMENT ASSETS AND OTHER ITEMS marketable securities. The explanation of the difference
The Global Services assets primarily are accounts receivable, between Cost of Global Financing and Interest expense for
goodwill, maintenance inventory, and plant, property and segment presentation versus presentation in the Consoli-
equipment including those associated with the segment’s dated Statement of Earnings is included on page 73 of the
outsourcing business. The Software segment assets mainly are Management Discussion.
119

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
MANAGEMENT SYSTEM SEGMENT VIEW
(dollars in millions)
HARDWARE
PERSONAL
GLOBAL SYSTEMS SYSTEMS TECHNOLOGY GLOBAL ENTERPRISE TOTAL
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: SERVICES GROUP GROUP GROUP SOFTWARE FINANCING INVESTMENTS SEGMENTS
2003:
Assets $«16,683 $«2,916 $«1,894 $«5,852 $«5,017 $«35,916 $«««69 $«68,347
Depreciation/amortization:
Continuing operations 1,487 344 95 766 883 2,160 7 5,742
Discontinued operations — — — 10 — — — 10
Capital expenditures/
investment in software:
Continuing operations 1,753 301 109 940 691 2,318 6 6,118
Discontinued operations — — — 5 — — — 5
Interest income — — — — — 2,349 — 2,349
Interest expense — — — — — 653 — 653
2002:
Assets $«14,462 $«3,124 $«1,776 $«5,771 $«3,361 $«35,242 $«««88 $«63,824
Depreciation/amortization:
Continuing operations 1,213 335 116 1,167 809 2,413 8 6,061
Discontinued operations — — — 617 — — — 617
Capital expenditures/
investment in software:
Continuing operations 1,294 307 96 1,365 687 2,561 9 6,319
Discontinued operations — — — 323 — — — 323
Interest income — — — — — 2,703 — 2,703
Interest expense — — — — — 825 — 825
2001:
Assets $«10,340 $«3,208 $«1,904 $«9,136 $«3,356 $«36,670 $«106 $«64,720
Depreciation/amortization:
Continuing operations 1,219 308 131 676 782 2,476 8 5,600
Discontinued operations — — — 429 — — — 429
Capital expenditures/
investment in software:
Continuing operations 1,519 390 128 1,495 839 3,143 7 7,521
Discontinued operations — — — 360 — — — 360
Interest income — — — — — 2,941 — 2,941
Interest expense — — — — — 1,140 — 1,140
120

===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATIONAND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Reconciliations to IBMas Reported outsourcing of client’s design team work, and technology and
manufacturing consulting services associated with the
(dollars in millions)
Engineering & Technology Services Division. The Systems
AT DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
Group segment’s storage comprises revenue from the
Assets:
Enterprise Storage Server, other disk storage products and
Total reportable segments $«««68,347 $«63,824 $«64,720
tape subsystems. Enterprise Investments software revenue is
Elimination of internal
primarily from product life-cycle management products. The
transactions (5,613) (5,061) (4,884)
following table is presented on a continuing operations basis.
Unallocated amounts:
Cash and marketable (dollars in millions)
securities 6,523 4,568 5,313
CONSOLIDATED
Notes and accounts
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001
receivable 3,334 3,553 2,810
Technology Group:
Deferred tax assets 6,486 6,631 4,624
OEM $«««2,546 $«««3,612 $«««4,805
Plant, other property
and equipment 3,380 3,239 3,260 Technology services 325 323 344
Pension assets 18,416 15,996 11,398 Systems Group:
Other 3,584 3,734 3,062 Servers $«11,148 $«10,047 $«10,947
Storage 2,849 2,581 2,755
Total IBMconsolidated $«104,457 $«96,484 $«90,303
Networking products 5 18 41
Global Services:
REVENUE BY CLASSES OF SIMILAR PRODUCTS OR SERVICES Services $«37,178 $«31,290 $«29,953
For the Personal Systems Group, Software and Global Maintenance 5,457 5,070 5,003
Financing segments, the segment data on page 118 represents Enterprise Investments:
the revenue contributions from the products that are con- Software $««««««981 $««««««916 $««««««913
tained in the segments and that are basically similar in Hardware 72 95 181
nature. The following table provides external revenue for Others 12 11 24
similar classes of products within the Technology Group,
Systems Group, Global Services and Enterprise Investments
MAJOR CLIENTS
segments. The Technology Group segment’s OEMhardware
No single client represents 10 percent or more of the company’s
comprises revenue primarily from the sale of semiconductors
total revenue.
and display devices. Technology services comprise the
Technology Group’s circuit design business for its OEM
clients,as well as the component design services, strategic
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION
(dollars in millions)
REVENUE* LONG-LIVED ASSETS**+
FOR THE YEAR ENDED DECEMBER 31: 2003 2002 2001 2003 2002++ 2001++
United States $«33,762 $«32,759 $«34,233 $«29,594 $«27,819 $«22,658
Japan 11,694 10,939 11,512 2,738 2,814 4,034
Other countries 43,675 37,488 37,322 16,373 13,027 11,560
Total $«89,131 $«81,186 $«83,067 $«48,705 $«43,660 $«38,252
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on location of client and are for continuing operations.
**Includes all non-current assets except non-current financial instruments and deferred tax assets.
+ At December 31.
++Reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
121

===== PAGE 124 =====
five-year comparison of selected financial data
(dollars in millions except per share amounts)
FOR THE YEAR: 2003 2002 2001 2000 1999
Revenue $«««89,131 $«81,186 $«83,067 $«85,089 $«83,334
Income from continuing operations 7,613 5,334 8,146 7,874 7,359
(Loss)/income from discontinued operations (30) (1,755) (423) 219 353
Net income 7,583 3,579 7,723 8,093 7,712
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations 4.34 3.07 4.59 4.32 3.93
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.01) (0.24) 0.12 0.19
Total 4.32 2.06 4.35 4.44 4.12
Basic:
Continuing operations 4.42 3.13 4.69 4.45 4.06
Discontinued operations (0.02) (1.03) (0.24) 0.12 0.20
Total 4.40 2.10 4.45 4.58* 4.25*
Cash dividends paid on common stock 1,085 1,005 956 909 859
Per share of common stock 0.63 0.59 0.55 0.51 0.47
Investment in plant, rental machines
and other property 4,398 5,022 5,660 5,616 5,959
Return on stockholders’ equity 29.9% 15.5% 35.3% 40.0% 39.1%
AT END OF YEAR:
Total assets $«104,457 $«96,484 $«90,303 $«90,412 $«89,571
Net investment in plant, rental machines
and other property 14,689 14,440 16,504 16,714 17,590
Working capital** 7,098 7,502 7,484 7,474 3,577
Total debt 23,632 26,017 27,151 28,576 28,354
Stockholders’ equity 27,864 22,782 23,448 20,550 20,426
* Does not total due to rounding.
**Prior years reclassified to conform with 2003 presentation.
122

===== PAGE 125 =====
selected quarterly data
(dollars in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
FIRST SECOND THIRD FOURTH FULL
2003: QUARTER QUARTER QUARTER QUARTER YEAR
Revenue $«20,065 $«21,631 $«21,522 $«25,913 $«89,131
Gross profit 7,233 7,998 7,812 9,975 33,018
Income from continuing operations 1,387 1,725 1,785 2,716 7,613
Loss from discontinued operations 3 20 — 7 30
Net income 1,384 1,705 1,785 2,709 7,583
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations 0.79 0.98 1.02 1.56 4.34**
Discontinued operations — (0.01) — — (0.02)**
Total 0.79 0.97 1.02 1.55+ 4.32**
Basic:
Continuing operations 0.80 1.00 1.04 1.59 4.42**
Discontinued operations — (0.01) — — (0.02)**
Total 0.80 0.99 1.04 1.59 4.40**
Dividends per share of common stock 0.15 0.16 0.16 0.16 0.63
Stock prices:++
High $«««88.95 $«««90.40 $«««93.47 $«««94.54
Low 73.17 78.12 78.73 87.53
FIRST SECOND THIRD FOURTH FULL
2002: QUARTER QUARTER QUARTER QUARTER YEAR
Revenue $«18,030 $«19,651 $«19,821 $«23,684 $«81,186
Gross profit 6,500 7,270 7,323 9,191 30,284
Income from continuing operations 1,284 445* 1,694 1,911* 5,334
Loss from discontinued operations 92 389 381 893 1,755
Net income 1,192 56 1,313 1,018 3,579
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations 0.73 0.25 0.99 1.11 3.07**
Discontinued operations (0.05) (0.22) (0.22) (0.52) (1.01)
Total 0.68 0.03 0.76+ 0.59 2.06
Basic:
Continuing operations 0.75 0.26 1.00 1.12 3.13
Discontinued operations (0.05) (0.23) (0.23) (0.53) (1.03)**
Total 0.69+ 0.03 0.78+ 0.60+ 2.10
Dividends per share of common stock 0.14 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.59
Stock prices:++
High $«126.39 $«104.00 $«««82.85 $«««89.46
Low 95.76 66.10 57.99 54.01
* The company executed special actions in the second and fourth quarter of 2002 recording charges of $1,727 million and $322 million, respectively. See note S, “2002 Actions,” on pages
105 through 107 for additional information regarding these actions.
**Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
+ Does not total due to rounding.
++The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the last two years.
123

===== PAGE 126 =====
Board of Directors and Senior Executive Officers
board of directors
CATHLEEN BLACK NANNERL O. KEOHANE JOHN B. SLAUGHTER ALEX TROTMAN*
President President President and Retired Chairman
Hearst Magazines Duke University Chief Executive Officer Imperial Chemical Industries PLC
National Action Council for
KENNETH I. CHENAULT CHARLES F. KNIGHT Minorities in Engineering, Inc. CHARLES M. VEST
Chairman and Chairman President
Chief Executive Officer Emerson Electric Co. JOAN E. SPERO Massachusetts Institute
American Express Company President of Technology
LUCIO A. NOTO Doris Duke Charitable
CARLOS GHOSN Managing Partner Foundation LORENZO H. ZAMBRANO
Co-Chairman, President and Midstream Partners LLC Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer SIDNEY TAUREL Chief Executive Officer
Nissan Motor Co. Ltd. SAMUEL J. PALMISANO Chairman, President and CEMEX, S.A.de C.V.
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
Chief Executive Officer Eli Lilly and Company
IBM *Retiring effective April 27, 2004
senior executive officers
NICHOLAS M. DONOFRIO JON C. IWATA MARK LOUGHRIDGE SAMUEL J. PALMISANO
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Chairman of the Board
Technology and Manufacturing Communications General Manager President and
Global Financing Chief Executive Officer
DOUGLAS T. ELIX JOHN R. JOYCE
Senior Vice President and Senior Vice President and J. RANDALL MACDONALD LINDA S. SANFORD
Group Executive Chief Financial Officer Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Global Services Human Resources Enterprise On Demand
JOHN E. KELLY III Transformation and
JESSE J. GREENE, JR. Senior Vice President and STEVEN A. MILLS Information Technology
Vice President and Treasurer Group Executive, Technology Senior Vice President and
Systems and Technology Group Group Executive STEPHEN M. WARD, JR.
J. BRUCE HARRELD Software Group Senior Vice President and
Senior Vice President ABBY F. KOHNSTAMM General Manager
Strategy Senior Vice President ROBERT W. MOFFAT, JR. Personal Systems Group
Marketing Senior Vice President
PAUL M. HORN Integrated Supply Chain ROBERT F. WOODS
Senior Vice President J. MICHAEL LAWRIE Vice President and Controller
Research Senior Vice President and DANIEL E. O’DONNELL
Group Executive Vice President WILLIAM M. ZEITLER
Sales and Distribution Assistant General Counsel Senior Vice President and
and Secretary Group Executive, Systems
EDWARD M. LINEEN Systems and Technology Group
Senior Vice President and
General Counsel
124

===== PAGE 127 =====
stockholder information
IBM STOCKHOLDER SERVICES IBM INVESTOR SERVICES PROGRAM
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
EquiServe Trust Company, N.A. provided for IBMstockholders and potential IBMinvestors, including
P.O.Box 43072 the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3072 IBMstock certificates for safekeeping. Call (888) 421-8860 for a copy
(888) IBM-6700 of the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
should call (781) 575-2727. Investors with other requests may write to:
IBM Corporation
Stockholders can also reach EquiServe Trust Company, N.A.via e-mail
Stockholder Relations
at: ibm@equiserve.com
New Orchard Road
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Armonk, New York 10504
device (TDD) can communicate directly with EquiServe Trust Company,
N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the IBM STOCK
United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694. IBMcommon stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and
on other exchanges in the United States and around the world.
IBM ON THE INTERNET
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found via the IBMhome ANNUAL MEETING
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM The IBMAnnual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
products, services and other activities can also be found via that address. April 27, 2004, at 10 a.m. at the Rhode Island Convention Center,
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and One Sabin Street, Providence, Rhode Island.
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
via the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). STOCKHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS
Stockholders in the United States and Canada can get quarterly
Stockholders of record can also consent to receive future IBM financial results, listen to a summary of the Annual Meeting remarks
Annual Reports and Proxy Statements online through the Internet
and hear voting results from the meeting by calling (800) IBM-7800.
at this site.
Callers can also request printed copies of the information via mail
IBMfiles reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission or fax. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and
(SEC), including annual reports on Form 10-K,quarterly reports Puerto Rico should call (402) 573-9861.
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-Kand any other filings
required by the SEC. Certifications by IBM’s Chief Executive LITERATURE FOR IBM STOCKHOLDERS
The following literature on IBMis available without charge from: Officer and Chief Financial Officer are included in SECreports
EquiServe Trust Company, N.A.
as required.
P.O. Box 43072
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3072
information about IBM, including our annual report on Form 10-K, (888) IBM-6700
quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable
should call (781) 575-2727.
after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the
SEC(www.ibm.com/investor). These materials are available free of The Form 10-KAnnual Report and Form 10-QQuarterly Reports to
charge on or through our website. the SECprovide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released in March; 10-Qreports are released in May, August
IBM’s website also includes our Corporate Governance Guidelines
and November.
and the charters for our Audit Committee, Executive Compensation
and Management Resources Committee, and Directors and Corporate An audio cassette recording of the 2003 Annual Report will be
Governance Committee (www.ibm.com/investor/corporategovernance). available for sight-impaired stockholders in June.
In addition, our website contains IBM’s Business Conduct Guidelines
“What is the value of a company? IBMCorporate Responsibility
(BCGs), which is our code of business conduct and ethics for our
Report” reports on IBM’s community relations programs and employee directors, executive officers and employees. Any amendment to
programs, its commitment to improving education, the company’s
our BCGs that applies to our directors or executive officers will
corporate governance and management system, its health and safety be disclosed on IBM’s website, and any waiver of the BCGs for
programs, environmental and energy priorities, and the importance
directors or executive officers may be made only by the IBM
for IBMof diversity in the workplace and the marketplace. Board of Directors or a Board committee and will be disclosed on
IBM’s website. These materials are also available in print to any
GENERAL INFORMATION
stockholder who requests them.
For answers to general questions about IBMfrom within
The public may read and copy any materials we file with the SECat the continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU.
the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 450 Fifth Street, NW, Washington, From outside the United States, call (404) 238-1234.
DC20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of
the Public Reference Room by calling the SECat (800) SEC-0330. CORPORATE OFFICES
The SECmaintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains International Business Machines Corporation
reports, proxy and information statements, and other information New Orchard Road
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
hpargohtiL
nosrednA
:gnitnirP
niktiW
naitsirhC
,sretniW
naD
,gnillamS
kraM
,oarreS
solraC
,ssooI
retlaW
,daorB
nailuJ
:yhpargotohP
yramirP
ogacihC
,.cnI
,srentraPASV
:ngiseD
AIX, Blue Gene, DB2, e-business on demand, e-business Hosting, IBM, iSeries, Lotus, Lotus Notes, POWER, PowerPC, pSeries, Rational, System/360, ThinkVantage, Tivoli,
WebSphere, xSeries and zSeries are registered trademarks or trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Intel is a registered
trademark of Intel Corporation.Linux is a trademark of Linus Torvalds. PayPal is a registered trademark of eBay Company. Microsoft, Windows and Xbox are registered trademarks
or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. JAVAis a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. UNIXis a registered trademark of The Open Group in the United States and other
countries. Other company, product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
Printed in the U.S.A. G507-0501-09

===== PAGE 128 =====
IBM
ANNUAL
REPORT
2003