

===== PAGE 1 =====
2011 Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
1
A Letter from
the President and CEO
I am pleased to report that IBM had Cash flow: IBM has consistently generated strong
cash flow, a key indicator of real business performance.
another strong year in 2011. Your
In 2011 our free cash flow was $16.6 billion. We have
company continued to outperform
improved our free cash flow by nearly $10 billion over
our industry and the market at large. the past decade. We ended 2011 with $11.9 billion of
We capped IBM’s first century by cash and marketable securities.
achieving record revenue, profit, Investment and return to shareholders: Our cash flow
free cash flow and earnings per share. has enabled us to invest in the business and to generate
substantial returns to investors, while spending
At the same time, we continued to
$6.3 billion on R&D. In 2011 we invested $1.8 billion for
deliver superior returns to you, and we
five acquisitions in key areas of software and $4.1 billion
are well positioned for future growth in net capital expenditures. We were able to return
in a globally integrating economy. $18.5 billion to you — $15 billion through share
repurchases and $3.5 billion through dividends. Last year’s
dividend increase was 15 percent, marking the 16th
Revenue and income: Our revenue in 2011 was
year in a row in which we have raised our dividend, and
$107 billion, up 7 percent. We grew operating pre-tax
the 96th consecutive year in which we have paid one.
income by 9 percent, to $21.6 billion, our highest ever.
Margins: IBM’s operating pre-tax income margin rose for A road map to the future
the ninth consecutive year — to 20.2 percent, up 10 points
This performance was the result of disciplined execution
since 2000. We achieved this by continuing to shift our
by more than 400,000 IBMers and the strategic
business mix to more profitable segments and by driving
repositioning of the company over the past decade.
productivity. More than 90 percent of our segment profit
We have steadily realigned our business to lead in a
in 2011 was from software, services and financing.
new era of computing and to enable our clients to
benefit from the new capabilities that era is creating.
Earnings per share: We have continued to achieve
As a consequence, our investors benefit from a business
strong EPS growth. Last year was another record, with
model that is both sustainable over the long term
diluted operating earnings per share of $13.44, up
and fueled by some of the world’s most attractive high-
15 percent. This marked nine straight years of double-
growth markets and technologies.
digit EPS growth.

===== PAGE 4 =====
2
Virginia M. Rometty, President and CEO
Samuel J. Palmisano, Chairman of the Board

===== PAGE 5 =====
A Letter from the President and CEO 3
You see this expressed in financial terms in our EPS road 3. Cloud. IBM has helped thousands of clients adopt
maps. We introduced our first in 2007, and surpassed aspects of cloud computing, where IT resources are
our 2010 objectives. Now, we are well on track toward our virtualized, highly automated and accessed by self-service.
2015 Road Map goal of at least $20 in operating earnings Our cloud revenue in 2011 was more than three times
per share. the prior year.
As before, the road map is not simply a list of targets,
but a management model built on exploiting multiple
ways to create value. Operating leverage will come Our strong strategic positioning,
from our continuing shift to higher-margin businesses
solid balance sheet, recurring
and improving enterprise productivity — expected to
be $8 billion over this five-year period. We will create revenue, robust profit streams
value for shareholders through an anticipated $50 billion
and unmatched global
in share repurchases and $20 billion in dividends.
reach give us confidence that
When it comes to growth strategies, we are focused
on four high-growth spaces that should drive we will achieve success in
approximately $20 billion in revenue growth by 2015:
the next five years, as we have
1. Growth Markets. Revenue for our Growth Markets
during the past decade.
Unit was up 11 percent at constant currency for the second
year in a row. Growth markets contributed 22 percent
of IBM’s geographic revenue in 2011, up from 11 percent in
2000, and we expect them to approach 30 percent by 2015. 4. Smarter Planet. All of this comes together in our
solutions to build Smarter Planet systems, transforming
2. Business Analytics. Our analytics business grew
systems such as supply chains, retail, energy, transportation,
16 percent for the year. Having spotted early the
telecommunications, food and water. It includes the
emergence of “big data,” IBM built the world’s leading
successful establishment of large new market categories,
analytics software and consulting practice, and we are
such as Smarter Cities and Smarter Commerce. Smarter
translating it into powerful new capabilities, which
Planet revenue grew by almost 50 percent in 2011.
enable our clients to identify, manage and even predict
outcomes that matter to their success.

===== PAGE 6 =====
4
In sum, our strong strategic positioning, solid balance sheet, The fact that we enter IBM’s second century with such
recurring revenue, robust profit streams and unmatched strength and confidence is a testament to the extraordinary
global reach give us confidence that we will achieve success leadership of Sam Palmisano as IBM’s CEO. I will leave
in the next five years, as we have during the past decade. to Sam the description of our historic transformation.
The information on pages 9 to 15 — “Generating Higher But there is no doubt that IBM today is far stronger than
Value at IBM”— explains how. it was a decade ago, in both its performance and its impact
on the world.
The decade ahead
Let me close by expressing my pride in the worldwide
The next decade holds enormous promise for IBM,
IBM team for bringing us to this point, and my gratitude
most importantly because of what it holds for business
to you, our shareholders, for your unwavering support.
and society at large. We are uniquely positioned to deliver
I trust you share our excitement about your company’s
the benefits of a vast new natural resource — a gusher
performance and the way in which IBMers are building
of data from both man-made and natural systems that
on our storied past to build an even brighter future.
can now be tapped to help businesses and institutions
succeed in an increasingly complex and dynamic global
economy. Together, we can create economic and societal
value of incalculable potential, across the developed
and developing worlds, as well as in new global markets
such as those in Africa. Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer
Without question, the world is undergoing disruption.
But IBM now stands out among our industry peers
and in business at large as distinctively able to keep moving
to the future, and to keep generating differentiating
value for our clients, our employees and the citizens of the
world. And that, in turn, promises to continue generating
high value for our owners.
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance.
For information about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash
flow, which are in each case non-GAAP measures, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the SEC on January 19, 2012 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).

===== PAGE 7 =====
5
A Letter from
the Chairman of the Board
As we look back on our strong First, how have we done in answering: Why would
someone invest in us? Some technology companies,
performance in 2011 — the culmination
particularly start-ups, are attractive to investors because
of an impressive decade — Ginni
they grow meteorically — but often without profit or
and I thought it would be appropriate positive cash flow. Others provide a broad portfolio
for me to share a perspective on this of products and services — but their very breadth makes
them mystifying to the investor.
most recent phase of IBM’s 100-year
journey, and to offer some thoughts A decade ago we committed to providing our owners
with clarity about our business model, strategies, finances
on what it has taught us.
and governance principles. We would manage and grow
IBM through the basics — revenue, profit, earnings, cash
I recently took a look at my notes from my first meeting
and margins. And we pledged to deliver consistent investor
with IBM’s senior leadership after becoming chairman
returns through dividends and repurchased shares.
in January 2003. I was surprised to see how little I had
At the same time, we believed we could provide a unique
written down. At the top were just four questions:
investment opportunity — participation in attractive
+ Why would someone invest in us? new growth areas in technology and in emerging markets,
+ Why would customers buy from us? with confidence that IBM would safeguard shareholders’
+ Why would society allow us to operate? investments.
+ Why would someone work here?
It all came together in our 2010 Road Map, and we
Our history teaches us that IBM became one of the world’s
are continuing to demonstrate progress against our
great companies by continually creating value for all
2015 Road Map. The results for investors speak for
of these stakeholders. Certainly, that was the IBM I joined
themselves. Over the past five years, we have increased
38 years ago. And as IBM’s incoming chairman nine years
our market capitalization by $70 billion, and returned
ago, I couldn’t imagine an agenda that wasn’t built on that
$50 billion to shareholders in net share repurchases
multidimensional goal.
and $14 billion in dividends — creating approximately
$135 billion in value for our owners.
Let’s consider how we have done against each of these
fundamental questions.

===== PAGE 8 =====
6
Second, why would customers buy from us? The result? Client after client — from Bharti, which is
IBM’s business model has always been to provide value accelerating the modernization of Africa through mobile
to our clients that they cannot get from anyone else — telecom; to Macy’s, which is redefining the online
value that gives them a competitive advantage. This shopping experience; to the city of Rio de Janeiro, which
model is not universal in our industry — where some is inventing the Smarter City of the 21st century — is
choose to compete on the basis of greater efficiency saying, “We couldn’t have done it without IBM.” This
and lower cost. But it was ours. is music to our ears.
A decade ago, however, we straddled two worlds — of
enterprise and consumer technology — at a time when
computing was starting to move beyond the PC. This At this institution, an individual
emerging model of technology, in which intelligence
can actually change the
was being infused into all the ways our world works,
could be of enormous value to our clients. But delivering world, can learn something new
this potential meant we had to transform our portfolio
every day, can collaborate
of technologies and skills.
with some of the smartest people
We did so. We got out of PCs and disk drives, and
increased our presence in key areas of software, industry on the planet, can work in a
expertise and process know-how, increasing software
progressive environment and
and services from 65 percent of IBM’s segment profit in
2000 to 84 percent today. We invested nearly $70 billion can truly be a global citizen.
in R&D since the beginning of 2000, shifting research
into new areas and generating more than 47,000 patents —
extending IBM’s streak of leadership in U.S. patents to
Third, why would society allow us to operate?
19 years. And we acquired 130 companies, in strategic areas
Over the past decade, we have increasingly sought to
of software and services.
address the world’s biggest problems, driven by the idea
of building a smarter planet. Without question, we do
this in pursuit of large new profit opportunities. But it
is more than that. It represents the fusion of IBM’s business
and citizenship goals. And that shows up not only in our
broad strategies, but in how we work as individuals around
the world.

===== PAGE 9 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 7
We hear again and again from schools, governments, more than $5 billion in employee learning and
nongovernmental organizations and communities that development. In 2005, we became the first corporation
the thing they value most is the expertise of IBMers — to guarantee our employees’ genetic privacy. The
more even than donations of cash or technology (although way we develop leaders was ranked number one in the
those are also welcome, and plentiful). IBMers bring world by Fortune. And we have received widespread
expertise in engineering, finance, marketing, management recognition for our diversity, work/life, environmental
and more to help cities actually become smarter; to and collaboration policies and programs.
reimagine existing school models, as with P-TECH in
In the end, it comes back to our values as IBMers. It was
New York City; and to develop global citizens and leaders,
no accident that the first major work effort I launched
as we’re doing through Corporate Service Corps.
at that senior leadership meeting nine years ago was a
One consequence of this business-citizenship fusion is collective “jam” on who we are and why we exist. What
that we can deliver its benefits at increasing scale. Our resulted — the values IBMers themselves shaped — has
On Demand Community, for example, has grown ninefold held up remarkably well as a distillation of what it means
in volunteers since it began. In one example alone — to be “an IBMer.”
our Centennial Celebration of Service — more than
We still have a long way to go to fully realize these values
300,000 IBMers performed more than 4 million hours
in our work, our management systems and our behavior.
of service across 120 countries.
But I think it’s safe to say, after nearly a decade, that we
Fourth, why would someone work here? In an earlier laid the right foundation. I am also convinced that the
era, this had a lot to do with job security and stability. transformation we have carried out since then was only
We learned the hard way that that was unsustainable. possible because we first undertook this deeper dive
And yet, IBM today remains an employer of choice. of self-discovery.
Why? I believe it is because, at this institution, an individual The road ahead
can actually change the world, can learn something new
None of these shifts was easy — but that comes with the
every day, can collaborate with some of the smartest people
territory, when you choose to live at the intersection
on the planet, can work in a progressive environment and
of all of your company’s key constituencies. You must
can truly be a global citizen.
accept — indeed, embrace — the inherent tensions.
Since 2002 we have invested about $100 billion in And you must balance continual forward motion with
non-salary employee compensation — bonuses, a clear understanding of what must never change.
commissions, benefits and employee equity — including

===== PAGE 10 =====
8
The result is a fundamentally different IBM than existed
a decade ago — one that is delivering historic results This is a fundamentally
despite a global economic downturn, even as it more fully
different IBM than existed
exemplifies the company’s century-old character. We
have outperformed our industry and the market as a whole, a decade ago — one that is
and we did it the hard way — through technology
delivering historic results despite
breakthroughs, the creation of client value, and driving
change in how the company operates. That record is a global economic downturn,
something of which we can all be proud.
even as it more fully exemplifies
The fact that we enter our second century on such a high
the company’s century-old
note is a testament to a unique institution and a remarkable
group of people. For nine years, it has been my privilege character.
to be the temporary steward of that institution. For 38 years,
it has been my even deeper privilege to have worked with
those women and men.
To IBM’s steadfast investors, to our clients, and to the
Clearly, 38 years with one company is rare these days. citizens of all the communities where IBMers work to
However, there is benefit to developing deep under- build a smarter planet, please know that you have my
standing of an industry and the culture of a company, deepest thanks. I am confident that our second century
even if this sort of longevity is not valued as highly in together will be even more remarkable than our first.
today’s world. I believe such knowledge is what made it
possible to transform IBM and position it for the future.
Both my own experience and the promise of our new
CEO give me enormous hope for the decade ahead. Ginni
Rometty is a brilliant leader who has also spent her entire Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman of the Board
career with IBM. I could not be prouder or happier for her,
or more optimistic about IBM’s future in her hands.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 9
Generating
Higher Value
at IBM
2015 IBM Road Map Each year IBM describes how the company manages its business and serves its shareholders
in a detailed financial road map.
A long-term perspective ensures IBM is well positioned to take advantage of major shifts
occurring in technology, business and the global economy. It also galvanizes the company
to deliver superior performance.
2011 Performance In 2011 IBM delivered record performance in revenue,
profit, earnings per share and free cash flow.
$107 $16.6
billion billion
$13.44
15%
revenue free cash flow
13.44
11.67 up 7 percent from 2010 up for the ninth
operating consecutive year
earnings
per share*
$16.3 $18.5
billion billion
up 15 percent, the ninth
operating net income* returned
consecutive year of
double-digit growth
up 9 percent from 2010 in share repurchases
*non-GAAP 2010 2011 *non-GAAP and dividends
Looking ahead to 2015, we will continue our
transformation for growth…

===== PAGE 12 =====
10
IBM has built a record of leadership by pursuing the most
transformational opportunities, inventing the breakthrough
technologies to capture them and building an organization
able to deliver superior results over the long term.
1.
We continually change Segment Pre-Tax Income*
our business mix toward ($ in billions)
higher-value, more profitable
3.3 3.7 2.6
technologies and market
opportunities. 2000** 35% 38% 27%
About 3.6 9.3 10.0
50%
2011 16% 41% 44%
of IBM segment
profit expected 0 4 8 12 16 20 $24
to come from
Software by 2015 Hardware/Financing Services Software
* S um of external segment pre-tax income not equal to IBM pre-tax income.
** E xcludes Enterprise Investments and not restated for stock-based compensation. 2000 Segment PTI is reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
2.
We have become a globally IBM operations in more than 170 countries Growth Markets Share of Geographic Revenue
integrated enterprise, to leverage the company’s global scale and
capture new growth and expertise. 22%
improve productivity. 2011
Global integration of all our major enterprise
functions—from service delivery to
21%
Approaching marketing—has enabled IBM to gain more 2010
30% than $6 billion in enterprise productivity 19% 2009
savings over the past five years while 18%
2008
improving quality.
of geographic revenue 17%
2007
from growth markets
A globally integrated model allows us to 16%
by 2015 2006
focus resources on client-oriented work and
11%*
enable rapid deployment of IBM capabilities 2000
to growth markets. * Excluding divested businesses of PCs and printers.
3.
By aligning our business Our operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income Operating Pre-tax Income Margin and Free Cash Flow
model with our clients’ margin in 2011 was 20.2 percent, 10 points ($ in billions)
needs we generated higher than in 2000. The primary driver
$18
superior financial results … of this performance was gross profit margin 16.6
expansion, as a result of the shift in
our business mix to more profitable, higher- 15
value segments and improved productivity
across the enterprise. 20.2%
12
At the same time, we’ve increased R&D
investment. Since the beginning of
9
2000, we’ve spent nearly $70 billion in R&D,
enabling us to deliver key innovations 6.7
and maintain U.S. patent leadership for 6
our 19th consecutive year in 2011. 10.1%
Our strong business model performance 3
has resulted in consistently strong free cash
flow generation. In 2011 our free cash flow 0
was $16.6 billion—an increase of nearly 00 11
$10 billion since 2000. Operating Pre-tax Income Margin Free Cash Flow

===== PAGE 13 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 11
… allowing us to invest in Capital Expenditures—We have invested more Primary Uses of Cash
Since the Beginning of 2000
future sources of growth than $50 billion over the past 12 years to advance ($ in billions)
and provide record returns our capabilities, including a global delivery center
to our shareholders. in Columbia, Missouri, advanced semiconductor
manufacturing in Fishkill, New York, and a research $22
facility in Ontario, Canada. $51
$ 70
billion
Acquisitions—Since the beginning of 2000, we have
in capital expected acquired 130 companies in strategic areas including $214
to be returned analytics, cloud, security and Smarter Commerce.
$30
through 2015 We expect to spend $20 billion in acquisitions over the $111
2015 Road Map period to support growth initiatives.
Share Repurchase and Dividends—We have
returned $133 billion to our shareholders since the
beginning of 2000. At the end of 2011 our quarterly Capital Expenditures
dividend per share was six times higher than 2000. Acquisitions
During this period we reduced shares outstanding Share Repurchases
by one third. We expect to return $70 billion to share- Dividends
holders in our 2015 Road Map period—$50 billion
through share repurchases and $20 billion in dividends.
4.
This delivers long-term value
and high performance for
all key IBM stakeholders—
investors, clients, employees
and society …
Key Drivers for 2015 EPS Road Map
At Least $20
Our 2015 Road Map continues the Revenue Growth Share Repurchase Operating EPS*
drive to higher value—with the A combination of base Leveraging our strong cash
expectation of at least $20 operating revenue growth, a shift to generation to return value
(non-GAAP) EPS* in 2015. faster growing businesses to shareholders by reducing
and strategic acquisitions. shares outstanding.
Key objectives for 2015: Operating Leverage
A shift to higher-margin
+ Software becomes about half
businesses and enterprise
of segment profit
productivity derived from
+ Growth markets approach global integration and process $13.44
efficiencies.
30 percent of geographic revenue
+ Generate $8 billion in productivity $11.67
through enterprise transformation
+ $70 billion of capital returned
to shareholders
+ $20 billion in spending on
acquisitions
Operating (non-GAAP) EPS* $3.32
Segment Pre-tax Income*, ** $1.81
Software
Services
Hardware/Financing
* E xcludes acquisition-related and nonoperating
retirement-related charges.
** 2 000 and 2001 exclude Enterprise Investments
and not restated for stock-based compensation.
Sum of external segment pre-tax income not
equal to IBM pre-tax income.
2000 2002 2010 2011 2015

===== PAGE 14 =====
12
5.
… while driving a new era Our four complementary growth initiatives—business analytics, cloud, growth markets
of growth and leadership and Smarter Planet—target opportunities that are changing the global IT landscape. With
for IBM… strong contribution from these initiatives, IBM delivered 7 percent revenue growth in 2011.
2011 Performance
2015 Road Map Objective: Growth Markets Business Analytics
22% of IBM’s 16% revenue increase
Growth initiatives geographic revenue from 2010
will contribute about
$2 0
billion
in incremental
revenue growth
Cloud Smarter Planet
3.8 times 2010 revenue Nearly 50% revenue
increase from 2010
Growth Markets
2011 Results: The world’s emerging markets will drive more than 60 percent of global GDP growth in
the next four years. IBM is investing in more than 100 of these countries, which are building
22%
out critical infrastructure, developing strategic industries and responding to massive
demographic shifts, such as rapid urbanization.
of IBM’s geographic
revenue
Geographic Gross Profit Growth
11%
$1.9
billion In 2011, growth markets
revenue increase generated nearly half
at constant currency Growth Markets of IBM’s geographic gross
from 2010 profit growth.
Nearly $2.2
billion
40
Major Markets
countries grew
double digits at
constant currency
In 2011 we opened nearly 100 new branch Banking Centers in Singapore and São Paulo;
Nearly offices to expand our presence beyond and a Latin American micro-financing center
large cities and beyond the BRICs (Brazil, in Lima.
60%
Russia, India and China), and to participate
In Africa, IBM is investing to bring expertise
in high-growth industries.
of growth markets in areas like financial services. For example,
revenue is now outside We are creating hubs of expertise around the we are working with five leading Kenyan
the BRICs world. These include the Institute for Electronic banks on infrastructure projects and helping
Government and the Energy and Utilities Safaricom, through a partnership with
Solution Lab in China; Natural Resource Vodafone, provide its M-PESA mobile money
Solution Centers in Perth and Rio de Janeiro; service to more than 15 million customers.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 13
Business Analytics
2011 Results: Organizations are reaching far beyond the structured tables of databases. They are
analyzing the streaming, unstructured data generated by events as they occur in the
16%
world, and acting upon those insights—from customer preferences or patient outcomes,
to process inefficiencies or safety—in real time. They are integrating analytics into the
revenue increase way they work.
from 2010
IBM has the world’s deepest portfolio of Mazda Motor Corporation collaborated
Almost analytics solutions and software; a leading with IBM analytics, data modeling and traffic
9 , 000 position in powerful optimized systems; and simulation experts to reduce human error
the business and industry expertise of almost in driving. The result was an early warning
analytics and 9,000 business analytics and optimization system using IBM analytics software that
optimization consultants, 400 researchers and eight identifies accident-prone areas, warns drivers
consultants analytics solution centers. IBM has acquired of danger and learns as conditions change.
28 companies to build targeted analytics and
Guangdong Hospital of Traditional
information expertise since 2005. We have
Chinese Medicine worked with IBM
generated hundreds of patents a year
Research to understand the effectiveness
in analytics, and invented breakthrough
of traditional Chinese and Western treatments
technologies like IBM Watson, a learning
of chronic kidney disease. IBM information
system that answers questions in natural
management and analytics software helps
language, and InfoSphere Streams, software
the hospital correlate patient information
that can correlate and analyze thousands
with demographics, such as age and
of real-time data sources.
gender, and relevant anonymized cases
to improve outcomes, boost quality of care
and reduce costs.
Cloud
2011 Results: Cloud, which delivers business and IT services over the network, is transforming the way
data centers are designed and software is developed, providing far more efficiency and
3.8
x flexibility. That has the potential to change the way many industries work. But it requires
addressing important issues of security and privacy. So, enterprises seek not just clouds,
2010 revenue but smarter clouds. IBM is helping them build private clouds in areas central to their
business, while also enabling them, like consumers, to tap into cloud services provided
IBM analyzes by IBM and others.
more than
$1 00 billion IBM is focused on the enterprise cloud. Dutch Cloud, a service provider in the
We have more than 1 million enterprise Netherlands, uses IBM SmartCloud
in commerce application users working in the IBM cloud technologies to build low-touch infrastructure-
transactions a and analyze more than $100 billion in as-a-service for its small and medium-sized
year in the cloud commerce transactions a year in the cloud. business clients.
We monitor 13 billion security events every
Lockheed Martin uses IBM SmartCloud
day and have more than 1,000 researchers
technology to develop mission critical
and developers working on security and
applications and technologies and to support
privacy breakthroughs.
a broader evolution to cloud computing for
The IBM SmartCloud portfolio addresses the the U.S. Government.
full scope of enterprise client requirements:
Lucky Brand, a designer clothing retailer,
+ IBM SmartCloud Foundation enables is using IBM cloud-based analytics to
clients to build private clouds. personalize customers’ online shopping
experience, resulting in improved customer
+ IBM SmartCloud Services offers cloud
loyalty and increased sales.
infrastructure services managed and run
by IBM.
+ IBM SmartCloud Solutions offers software
and business processes as a service.

===== PAGE 16 =====
14
Smarter Planet
… and for the economies,
cities and people of
The infusion of digital intelligence into the world’s systems is changing the way people,
the world.
organizations and entire industries approach what they do—how they interact, organize
and create value. Nowhere is the potential for transformation greater than in our cities.
Around the world, city leaders are struggling with economic challenges, overtaxed
2011 Results: infrastructures and dramatic demographic shifts. In more than 2,000 Smarter Cities
engagements, we see forward-thinking leaders emerging with new approaches to make
Nearly
their communities smarter and to make them work better.
50%
revenue growth
from 2010
Smarter Law Enforcement
More than
2 000 Memphis Police Department
,
30%
Smarter Cities
engagements
decrease in
serious crime
Inside the solution:
15%
The system relies on IBM predictive
analytics software that correlates historic
decrease in data with the latest incident reports
violent crime
to create multilayer maps of “hot spots.”
Memphis Police Department precinct “ Memphis Police Department
commanders start their day with now has the invaluable insight
data. A predictive analytics system
all of our staff can use — from
looks for patterns in criminal
activity that help the department the commanders to the patrolling
see emergent trends in their officers — to specifically focus
communities in time to make
investigative and patrol resources
a difference.
with the goal of preventing
crime and making our neighbor-
Smarter Water and Sewer Systems
hoods safer.”
San Francisco Public Utilities
Commission —C olonel James Harvey,
Commander, Ridgeway Station,
70% Memphis Police Department
increase in ability
to track critical assets
11%
Inside the solution:
The system integrates IBM asset
improvement in the ratio
management and geographic information
of preventative to corrective
maintenance software to locate and monitor assets
such as pumps, fittings and other parts
of the water infrastructure.
Drawing on usage data and many
other variables, San Francisco is “ Not only can we solve most
predicting and preventing break-
problems within 24 hours, but
downs and reducing pollution from
its sewer system’s 1,000 miles of pipes we’re able to use insights from
and three treatment facilities, which the data to reduce water pollution.”
together process 500 million gallons
of wastewater and storm runoff —T ommy Moala, Assistant General Manager,
per day during the rainy season. SFPUC Wastewater Enterprise

===== PAGE 17 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 15
Smarter Transportation
Singapore’s Land Transport Authority
Smarter Government Services
80%
Bolzano, Italy
Remote Patient Monitoring reduction in lost
transactions due
80%
to system issues
of participants 100%
felt more secure
increase in performance
70% Inside the solution: capacity to 20 million fare
The solution was created by IBM with transactions per day
improved their the support of TIS Innovation Park,
mobility through
developed on an IBM application Singapore commuters move easily
exercises
server, with data management and among all forms of public transportation,
messaging software integrated with thanks to a smart system that charges
As part of a pilot to extend healthcare Android mobile devices. by distance, not by mode of transport.
services without increasing costs, A highly intelligent algorithm constructs
elderly citizens in Bolzano, Italy, were “T he monitoring network the ideal journey for each commuter
given access to advice and medical allows us to provide services across rail and bus lines. In the process,
attention from their homes, via the Land Transport Authority gets real-
with a human touch — but
mobile devices. In addition, wireless time insight to anticipate capacity needs.
sensors monitored the environment it’s now the right touch,
within the homes, generating alerts at the right time.” Inside the solution:
delivered via sms text message,
email and Twitter to family members — Michela Trentini, The Authority’s fare processing clearing-
and social services professionals. Director of Social Planning, Bolzano house uses IBM data management,
analytics and transaction processing
software running on IBM Power systems.
“ By unifying our payment
systems, we can build
composite models of typical
journeys, such as a person
driving a car into the city,
being charged for congestion,
Smarter Operations Center
parking his car, catching
Rio de Janeiro’s Integrated
the bus and then the rail.”
Operations Center
30% — Silvester Prakasam, Director of Fare Systems,
Singapore Land Transport Authority
decrease in emergency
response times Inside the solution:
The Intelligent Operations Center combines
Rio de Janeiro’s operations center
patented analytics technologies, created
provides a single dashboard of the
by IBM Research in collaboration with the
city’s critical systems. Information on
city, and IBM collaboration, analytics and
weather, traffic and medical services
asset management software and systems
“Generating Higher Value at IBM” includes selected
helps city agencies anticipate looming references to certain non-GAAP financial measures
integration expertise. that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the
problems, engage citizens as part of company’s ongoing operational performance. For
information about the company’s financial results related
the solution and plan for major events, “C ommunicating with citizens about to (i) operating (non-GAAP) EPS and (ii) free cash flow
like the upcoming World Cup and for 2011, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the
Rio’s day-to-day life is key. When SEC on January 19, 2012 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP
Olympic Games. A predictive weather Supplementary Materials). For information about the
forecasting system designed by people are well-informed, they act in company’s financial results related to (i) growth markets
share of geographic revenue excluding divested PCs
IBM researchers helps model flooding ways that help the city work better.” and printers and (ii) free cash flow, in each case for
patterns, identifying where events 2000, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to
the SEC on May 12, 2010 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP
such as mud slides are likely to occur. —Eduardo Paes, Mayor, Rio de Janeiro Supplementary Materials).

===== PAGE 18 =====
Financial Highlights
16 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010
Revenue $106,916 $ 99,870
Net income $ 15,855 $ 14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 16,318 $ 15,023
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 13.06 $ 11.52
Basic $ 13.25 $ 11.69
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 13.44 $ 11.67
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 19,846 $ 19,549
Capital expenditures, net 4,059 3,984
Share repurchases 15,046 15,375
Cash dividends paid on common stock 3,473 3,177
Per share of common stock 2.90 2.50
At December 31: 2011 2010
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 11,922 $ 11,651
Total assets 116,433 113,452
Working capital 8,805 7,554
Total debt 31,320 28,624
Total equity 20,236 23,172
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 1,163 1,228
Market capitalization $213,886 $180,220
Stock price per common share $ 183.88 $ 146.76
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 433,362 426,751
* See page 38 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Report of Financials
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 17
Management Discussion Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements
Overview 18
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 18 A Significant Accounting Policies 76
Management Discussion Snapshot 19 B Accounting Changes 86
Description of Business 20 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 89
Year in Review 26 D Financial Instruments 93
Prior Year in Review 44 E Inventories 100
Other Information 55 F Financing Receivables 101
Looking Forward 55 G Property, Plant and Equipment 104
Liquidity and Capital Resources 56 H Investments and Sundry Assets 104
Critical Accounting Estimates 58 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 105
Currency Rate Fluctuations 61 J Borrowings 106
Market Risk 61 K Other Liabilities 108
Financing Risks 62 L Equity Activity 110
Employees and Related Workforce 63 M Contingencies and Commitments 112
Global Financing 63 N Taxes 115
O Research, Development and Engineering 117
Report of Management 68
P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 117
Report of Independent Registered Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 118
Public Accounting Firm 69 R Stock-Based Compensation 118
S Retirement-Related Benefits 121
T Segment Information 135
Consolidated Financial Statements
U Subsequent Events 139
Earnings 70
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 140
Comprehensive Income 71
Financial Position 72 Selected Quarterly Data 141
Cash Flows 73
Performance Graphs 142
Changes in Equity 74
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 144
Stockholder Information 145

===== PAGE 20 =====
Management Discussion
18 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Overview • Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report,
certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded
The financial section of the International Business Machines
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are
Cor por ation (IBM or the company) 2011 Annual Report includes the
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial Statem ents and
the Notes to the Consolidated Financial State ments. This Over view
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
is designed to provide the reader with some perspective regarding
the information contained in the financial section. In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results
of the business, the company separated business results into
operating and non-operating categories beginning January 1, 2011.
Organization of Information
Operating earnings is a non-GAAP measure that excludes the effects
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers
of certain acquisition-related charges and retirement-related costs,
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the
and their related tax impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings
company’s financial results and certain factors that may affect
exclude the amortization of purchased intangible assets and
its future prospects from the perspective of the company’s
acquisition-related charges such as in-process research and
management. The “Management Discussion Snaps hot” on pages
development, transaction costs, applicable restructuring and related
19 and 20, presents an overview of the key performance drivers
expenses and tax charges related to acquisition integration. For
in 2011.
retirement-related costs, the company has characterized certain
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 26, the Managem ent
items as operating and others as non-operating. The company
Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable
includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit
segment of the business and a discussion of the company’s
plan service cost, amortization of prior service cost and the cost of
financial position and cash flows. Other key sections within the
defined contribution plans in operating earnings. Non-operating
Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” on page
retirement-related cost includes defined benefit plan and nonpension
55, and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on pages 56 to 58. It
postretirement benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan
is useful to read the Management Dis cussion in conjunction with
assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan
note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 135 to 139.
curtailments/settlements and multi-employer plan costs, pension
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a
insolvency costs and other costs. Non-operating costs are primarily
stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section is
related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are
included beginning on page 63.
tied to financial market performance and the company considers
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on pages
these costs to be outside the operational performance of the business.
70 through 75. These statements provide an overview of the
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a view
company’s income and cash flow performance and its financial
of operating earnings as described above provides increased
position.
transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among
business and the performance of the company’s pension plans;
other items, the Notes contain the company’s accounting policies
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts
(pages 76 to 86), acquisitions and divestitures (pages 89 to 93),
on operational performance; enables better comparison to peer
detailed information on specific items within the financial statements,
companies; and allows the company to provide a long-term strategic
certain contingencies and commitments (pages 112 to 115) and
view of the business going forward. For its 2015 earnings per share
retirement-related benefits information (pages 121 to 135).
Road Map, the company is utilizing an operating view to establish
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have been
its objectives and track its progress. Effective January 1, 2011, the
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
company’s segment financial results and performance reflect
accepted in the United States (GAAP).
operating earnings, consistent with the company’s management
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant currency”
and measurement system. The 2010 and 2009 financial results
in the Management Discussion do not include operational
in this Annual Report have been reclassified to conform with the
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency
2011 presentation of business results into operating and non-
rates. Certain financial results are adjusted based on a simple
operating categories.
mathematical model that translates current period results in local
currency using the comparable prior year period’s currency
Forward-Looking
conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the
functional currency is the local country currency. This information and Cautionary Statements
is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed without
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute
the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance.
Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking statement
See “Currency Rate Fluctuations” on page 61 for additional
in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is made;
information.
the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any such

===== PAGE 21 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 19
statements. Forward-looking statements are based on the company’s In 2011, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted by
current assumptions regarding future business and financial solid revenue performance, continued margin expansion, strong profit
performance; these statements by their nature address matters that and cash generation and effective use of cash. In its centennial year,
are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking statements the company achieved record levels of revenue, profit, free cash flow
involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could and earnings per share (EPS). The financial performance is the result
cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed more of the transformation of the company which began years ago. This
fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s filings transformation has been focused on shifting the business to higher
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the value areas of the market, improving productivity and investing in
company’s 2011 Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2012. opportunities to drive future growth. These changes have contributed
to nine consecutive years of double-digit earnings per share growth.
Management Discussion Snapshot More importantly, this transformation has strengthened the business
and put the company on track to achieve its 2015 Road Map objective
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts) of at least $20 of operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share.
Yr.-to-Yr. The focus on key growth initiatives and investments in innovation
Percent/
are enabling the company to expand into new markets and capitalize
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change on trends like business analytics and cloud computing. The growth
Revenue $106,916 $ 99,870 7.1%* markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT infrastructures
Gross profit margin 46.9% 46.1% 0.8 pts. and lead in specific industries is driving strong performance and
Total expense and other income $ 29,135 $ 26,291 10.8% market share gains. Growth markets revenue increased 16.0 percent
Total expense and other (11 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 contributing approximately
income-to-revenue ratio 27.3% 26.3% 0.9 pts. two-thirds of the total constant currency revenue growth for the year
Income before income taxes $ 21,003 $ 19,723 6.5% and represented 22 percent of total geographic revenue. The
Provision for income taxes 5,148 4,890 5.3% company’s business analytics solutions helps clients leverage
massive amounts of data and content to gain business insight and
Net income $ 15,855 $ 14,833 6.9%
optimize results. Business analytics revenue increased 16 percent
Net income margin 14.8% 14.9% 0.0 pts.
compared to 2010. The Smarter Planet offerings generated close to
Earnings per share
50 percent growth year to year, with Smarter Commerce demonstrating
of common stock
strong market momentum. In cloud computing, the company is
Assuming dilution $ 13.06 $ 11.52 13.4%
helping its clients improve the economics of information technology.
Weighted-average shares
In 2011, the company continued to expand its offerings and cloud
outstanding
revenue for the year was more than three times the prior year results.
Assuming dilution 1,213.8 1,287.4 (5.7)%
With strong contribution from these growth initiatives, the company
Assets** $116,433 $113,452 2.6%
delivered revenue growth of 7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for
Liabilities** $ 96,197 $ 90,279 6.6%
currency) compared to 2010.
Equity** $ 20,236 $ 23,172 (12.7)%
Segment performance was led by Software which increased
* 3.4 percent adjusted for currency. revenue 10.9 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key
** At December 31. branded middleware which increased 15.6 percent (13 percent adjusted
for currency) and continued to extend its lead in the middleware
market. In the Global Services business, Global Technology Services
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
increased 7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and Global
earnings for 2011 and 2010.
Business Services grew revenue 5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for
currency) driven by strong performance in the growth markets where
($ in millions except per share amounts)
both segments grew revenue 11 percent at constant currency. Systems
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent and Technology delivered revenue growth of 5.6 percent (3 percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
adjusted for currency) driven by strong performance in Power Systems
Net income as reported $15,855 $14,833 6.9% which increased 12.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and
Non-operating adjustments the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent (12 percent
(net of tax)
adjusted for currency).
Acquisition-related charges 495 443 12.0 The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.8 points versus
Non-operating retirement-related 2010 to 46.9 percent. This was the eighth consecutive year of
costs/(income) (32) (253) (87.3)
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $16,318 $15,023 8.6% gross margin of 47.2 percent increased 1.1 points compared to the
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2011 was driven by margin
earnings per share $ 13.44 $ 11.67 15.2%
improvements in Software, Systems and Technology and Global
* See page 38 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings. Services, and an improved revenue mix driven by Software.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Management Discussion
20 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other income increased 10.8 percent in 2011 Total equity of $20,236 million decreased $2,937 million from
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other December 31, 2010 as a result of:
income increased 10.2 percent compared to the prior year. The
year-to-year drivers for both categories were approximately: • Increased treasury stock ($14,803 million) driven by
share repurchases, pension adjustments ($2,448 million)
• Currency* 4 points and currency translation adjustments ($711 million),
• Acquisitions** 3 points partially offset by
• Base expense 3 points • Higher retained earnings ($12,326 million) and common
stock ($2,711 million).
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
The company generated $19,846 million in cash flow from
Pre-tax income grew 6.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010, primarily
19.6 percent, a decrease of 0.1 points versus 2010. Net income driven by the increase in net income. Net cash used in investing
increased 6.9 percent and the net income margin was 14.8 percent, activities of $4,396 million was $4,111 million lower than 2010, driven
flat versus 2010. The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent, by less cash used for acquisitions ($4,111 million). Net cash used in
compared with 24.8 percent in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) financing activities of $13,696 million was $1,267 million higher,
pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) compared to 2010, primarily due to lower cash from common stock
pre-tax margin was 20.2 percent, an increase of 0.3 points versus transactions ($991 million) and increased dividend payments ($296
the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings increased 8.6 percent million).
and the operating (non-GAAP) earnings margin of 15.3 percent As a result of the strong cash performance, the company continued
increased 0.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) to invest in capital and acquisitions and delivered significant returns
effective tax rate was 24.5 percent versus 24.4 percent in 2010. to its shareholders with over $18 billion in share repurchase and
Diluted earnings per share improved 13.4 percent reflecting the dividends in 2011.
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase The estimated Global Services backlog was $141 billion at
program. In 2011, the company repurchased approximately 89 million December 31, 2011, down $2 billion (flat adjusted for currency) versus
shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of $13.06 the prior year-end balance, and up $4 billion ($5 billion adjusted for
increased $1.54 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted currency), from September 30, 2011.
earnings per share of $13.44 increased $1.77 versus 2010 driven In January 2012, the company disclosed that it is expecting GAAP
by the following factors: earnings of at least $14.16 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at
least $14.85 per diluted share for the full year 2012.
• Revenue increase at actual rates $0.82 For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review”
• Margin expansion $0.18 section on pages 26 through 43.
• Common stock repurchases $0.77
Description of Business
At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
positions remain strong and are well positioned to support the Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with
company’s objectives. Cash and cash equivalents at year end was the SEC on February 28, 2012 for a more detailed version of this
$11,922 million. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows Des cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
are highlighted below. The company creates business value for clients and solves
Total assets increased $2,981 million ($4,636 million adjusted for business problems through integrated solutions that leverage
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by: information technology and deep knowledge of business processes.
IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s operational
• Increases in total receivables ($1,564 million), cash and cash costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate revenue. These
equivalents ($1,262 million), goodwill ($1,077 million) and solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting,
prepaid expenses and other assets ($1,022 million), partially delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems
offset by and financing.
• Decreases in marketable securities ($990 million) and
investments and sundry assets ($883 million).
Total liabilities increased $5,918 million ($6,324 million adjusted for
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by:
• Increases in total debt ($2,695 million), retirement and
nonpension postretirement benefit obligations ($2,396 million),
accounts payable ($713 million) and deferred income
($798 million), partially offset by
• Decreases in taxes ($903 million).

===== PAGE 23 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 21
Strategy Two recently announced initiatives that are already driving
Despite the volatility of the information technology (IT) industry significant value illustrate IBM’s deep commitment to building a smarter
over the past decade, IBM has consistently delivered excellent planet: Smarter Commerce and Smarter Cities. IBM’s Smarter
performance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings per Commerce model integrates and transforms how companies manage
share growth. The company has shifted its business mix, exiting and adapt their buy, market, sell and service processes, placing the
certain segments while increasing its presence in higher-value areas customer squarely at the center of their business. IBM’s Smarter Cities
such as services, software and integrated solutions. As part of this initiative enables local governments to make smarter decisions,
shift, the company has acquired over 120 companies since 2000, anticipate issues and coordinate resources more effectively, and deliver
complementing and scaling its portfolio of products and offerings. citizen-centric services that underpin sustainable economic growth.
IBM’s clear strategy has enabled steady results in core business
areas, while expanding its offerings and addressable markets. The Growth Markets
key tenets of this strategy are: The company has benefited from its investments over the past
several years in growth markets. The focus now is on geographic
• Deliver value to enterprise clients through integrated expansion of IBM’s presence; on selected industries of the highest
business and IT innovation; impact and opportunity; on countries’ build-out of infrastructure
• Shift the business mix to higher-value areas; and aligned with their national agendas; and on creating markets and
• Become the premier globally integrated enterprise new business models to serve the different requirements that exist
in these emerging countries. The company’s efforts in developing
These priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending toward new growth markets within the African continent is a good example
integrated solutions, as companies seek higher levels of business of this focus. Many of these initiatives are leading edge, both in
value from their IT investments. IBM has been able to deliver this technologies and business models and are delivering both increased
enhanced client value thanks to its industry expertise, understanding revenue and margin expansion.
of clients’ businesses and the breadth and depth of the company’s In order to support this growth, IBM is continuing to invest
capabilities. significantly in these markets to expand capacity, to develop talent
Consistent with this strategy IBM is leveraging its capabilities to and to deepen its research and development (R&D) capabilities on
build and expand strong positions in targeted growth areas. IBM’s the ground. At the same time, IBM continues to leverage talent across
growth initiatives include Smarter Planet, Growth Markets, Business growth markets under its globally integrated enterprise model to the
Analytics and Optimization and Cloud Computing. Each initiative benefit of both its clients and the company globally.
represents a significant growth opportunity with attractive profit
margins for IBM.
Business Analytics and Optimization
Business Analytics and Optimization is core to achieving a Smarter
Smarter Planet Planet, helping leaders of this new information-centric and insight-
Smarter Planet is IBM’s vision of a technology-enabled world that driven world make better and faster business decisions. As the
is more instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent than ever before, proliferation of “big data” continues from both structured and
enabling people and organizations to tackle significant business unstructured sources, IBM is helping organizations leverage analytics
and societal challenges. At the heart of this vision is the opportunity in new ways to address market uncertainty, complexity and volatility.
for meaningful innovation—exploring and extending the boundaries These capabilities allow decision makers to identify patterns and
of businesses, industries and communities. It’s about helping the gain deeper insights in a way that is unimaginable by other means.
company’s clients become better at what they do for their clients. These insights give organizations the ability to anticipate and shape
IBM’s strategy is to accelerate progress towards a “smarter planet” better outcomes so they can grow, retain and satisfy customers.
by equipping its clients with the advanced, integrated capabilities They can now dynamically plan, forecast and align resources and
that they will need to thrive in this exciting new world that is unfolding manage risk, reduce fraud and ensure compliance. They can also
before us—capabilities such as business analytics, business process leverage analytics to increase operational efficiency and agility.
management, social business and cloud computing. IBM’s approach is to ensure customers have complete end-to-
Over the past year, IBM has steadily deepened its commitment end solutions across industries and functional focus areas like sales,
to understanding and delivering on the promise of a smarter planet finance and risk. These solutions are designed to help organizations:
for its line of business and IT clients across a broad range of develop an information and analytics strategy that flows from the
industries. An industry-based approach is central to the strategy, business strategy; establish a strong information foundation; make
since every industry confronts a distinct set of challenges and analytics skills and capabilities pervasive; and create a culture that
opportunities in today’s constantly transforming world. Whether takes action on analytics. IBM continues to invest in its analytics
“smarter” means helping a hospital group to deliver improved health- capabilities to deliver real world solutions that its clients can put to
care, a local government to ease traffic congestion, or a retail chain work today. These ongoing investments in both organic development
to execute a successful cross-channel campaign, IBM is aggressively and new acquisitions are complemented by IBM’s focus on game-
developing and investing in a portfolio of industry solutions that will changing innovations like Watson, which is ushering in a new
help these clients achieve their goals. generation of probabilistic analytics that can dramatically improve

===== PAGE 24 =====
Management Discussion
22 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
decision making through natural language processing, hypotheses Business Segments and Capabilities
generation and evidence-based learning. It Is another unique example The company’s major operations consists of five business segments:
of just how far organizations can go with IBM analytics. Global Tech nology Services, Global Business Services, Soft ware,
Systems and Technology and Global Finan cing.
Cloud Computing
Cloud is a new model for consuming and delivering business and Global Services is a critical component of the company’s strategy
IT services. It can deliver significant economies of scale, enable of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to
higher qualities of service and even serve as a transformative platform clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software
for business innovation. From a business perspective, the promise and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client solution
of cloud computing lies in the ability to shape influential communities, requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services
launch product innovations and explore new business models with segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourcing
minimal time, cost and effort. From an IT perspective, the power of and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services backlog
the model comes from harnessing vast stores of underutilized provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within Global
technology with highly efficient virtualization and management, Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech nology
consumer-style user interfaces and ubiquitous broadband. Services and Global Business Services.
IBM has already helped thousands of its clients adopt and leverage
cloud computing through its broad portfolio of IBM SmartCloud Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT
products, solutions and services. Today, IBM delivers many line-of- infra structure services and business process services, delivering
business solutions via cloud-based hosting models, enabling rapid business value through global scale, standardization and automation.
adoption and exploration of new capabilities that can drive significant
business value for its clients and their customers. For developers and GTS Capabilities
IT organizations seeking to leverage cloud computing, IBM can help Strategic Outsourcing Services: comprehensive IT outsourcing
build out private, on-premise cloud-based environments, provide services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing infrastructures
security and integration services across private and hybrid cloud to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk management
models, and/or offer its own cloud-based infrastructure and services, and financial value. The company integrates long-standing expertise
including advanced analytics, collaboration, and IT infrastructure such in service management and technology with the ability to exploit
as virtual servers, storage and tools for testing software. Across IBM’s the power of new technologies from IBM systems and software,
entire SmartCloud portfolio, the company offers expert consulting, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, to deliver
breakthrough technologies and a portfolio of cloud-based services high performance, innovation and improved ability to achieve
squarely focused on the requirements of the enterprise. business objectives.
Global Process Services: a range of standardized through
Business Model
transformational offerings including processing platforms and
The company’s business model is built to support two principal business process outsourcing. These services deliver improved
goals: helping clients to become more innovative, efficient and business results to clients through the strategic change and/or
competitive through the application of business insight and IT operation of the client’s business processes, applications and
solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders. The business infrastructure.
model has been developed over time through strategic investments
in capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth Integrated Technology Services: project-based portfolio of services
and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients. that enable clients to optimize their IT environments by driving
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, efficiency, flexibility and productivity, while reducing costs. The
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad standardized portfolio is built around key assets and patented
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide integrated software, and incorporates best practices and proven methodologies
solutions to the company’s clients. that ensure predictive quality of delivery, security and compliance.
The business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously
changing market and economic environment. The company continues
to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position through
strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-value segments
like business analytics, smarter planet and cloud computing. In addition,
the company has transformed itself into a globally integrated enterprise
which has improved overall productivity and is driving investment and
expanding participation in the world’s fastest growing markets.
This business model, supported by the company’s financial
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 23
Maintenance: a complete line of support services from product Software Capabilities
maintenance through solution support to maintain and improve the WebSphere Software: delivers capabilities that enable clients to
availability of clients’ IT infrastructures. integrate and manage business processes across their organizations
with the flexibility and agility they need to respond to changing
GTS Services Delivery: responsible for the worldwide delivery conditions quickly. With a services-oriented architecture (SOA),
of IBM’s technology- and process-based services. Operating within businesses can more easily link together their fragmented data and
a globally integrated delivery model enables regional client-facing business processes to extract value from their existing technology.
teams to utilize a global network of competencies and centers, Smarter Commerce software enables seamless interaction between
providing industry-leading, standardized, integrated tools and companies, their customers and suppliers throughout the business
processes. By leveraging insights and experience drawn from IBM’s cycle, resulting in better customer experience, higher sales, lower
global scale, skills and technology, with applied innovation from IBM inventories, better service levels and improved response times.
Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, high-quality services
with improved productivity, flexibility, cost and outcomes. Information Management Software: enables clients to integrate,
manage and use their information to gain business value and improve
Global Business Services (GBS) primarily provides professional their outcomes. Solutions include advanced database management,
services and application management services, delivering business enterprise content management, information integration, data
value and innovation to clients through solutions which leverage warehousing, performance management business analytics and
industry and business-process expertise while integrating the intelligence, as well as the emerging area of big data analytics.
industry-leading portfolio of IBM and strategic partners, to define
the upper end of client-valued services. Tivoli Software: helps clients manage their technology and business
assets by providing visibility, control and automation across their
GBS Capabilities organizations. With solutions for identity management, data security,
Consulting and Systems Integration: delivery of value to clients storage management, cloud computing, enterprise mobility and the
through consulting services for Strategy and Transformation; Application ability to provide automation and provisioning of the datacenter, Tivoli
Innovation Services; Enterprise Applications and Business Analytics helps build the infrastructure needed to make the world’s systems—
and Optimization. from transportation to water, energy and telecommunications—
run smarter.
Application Management Services: application development,
management, maintenance and support services for packaged Lotus Software: enables businesses to connect people and processes
software, as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered for more effective communication and increased productivity through
through advanced capabilities in areas such as applications testing collaboration, messaging and social networking software. By remaining
and modernization, cloud application security, the company’s highly at the forefront of collaboration tools, Lotus helps organizations reap
differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry knowledge the benefits of social networking and social business.
and the standardization and automation of application development.
Rational Software: supports software development for both IT as
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems well as complex and embedded system solutions with a suite of
software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate systems, Collaborative Lifecycle Management products. Jazz, Rational’s
processes and applications across a standard software platform to technology platform, transforms the way people work together to
improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain build software, making software delivery more integrated and
competitive advantage within their industries. IBM middleware is collaborative, while optimizing for successful business outcomes.
designed on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate
business applications, developed by different methods and Security Systems Software: provides clients with a single security
implemented at different times. Operating systems are the software intelligence platform that aligns with their business objectives and
engines that run computers. Approximately two-thirds of external enables them to more intelligently secure their enterprises by
software segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring applying deep analytics to better identify and prevent vulnerabilities
license charges and ongoing subscription and support. The remaining within traditional, cyber, cloud and mobile security.
one-third relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which
Operating Systems: software that manages the fundamental
clients pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically,
processes that make computers run.
the sale of OTC software includes one year of subscription and
support. Clients can also purchase ongoing subscription and support
after the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades
and technical support.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Management Discussion
24 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology provides clients with business solutions Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems,
requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities. software and services. Global Financing invests in financing assets,
Approximately half of Systems and Technology’s server and storage leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the
sales transactions are through the company’s business partners; objective of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The
with the balance direct to end-user clients. In addition, Systems and primary focus on the company’s offerings and clients mitigates many
Technology provides leading semiconductor technology, products of the risks normally associated with a financing company. Global
and packa ging solutions for IBM’s own advanced technology needs Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its client base
and for external clients. and a clear insight into the products and services that are being
financed. This combination allows Global Financing to effectively
Systems and Technology Capabilities manage two of the major risks (credit and residual value) that are
Systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems normally associated with financing.
designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific
computing needs. These systems—System z, Power Systems and Global Financing Capabilities
System x—are typically the core technology in data centers that Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal
provide required infrastructure for business and institutions. Also, clients for terms generally between one and seven years. Internal
these systems form the foundation for IBM’s integrated offerings, financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term
such as IBM Smart Analytics, IBM Netezza, IBM SmartCloud Entry client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected
and IBM BladeCenter for Cloud. IBM servers use both IBM and non- portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash
IBM microprocessor technology and operating systems. All IBM management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at
servers run Linux, a key open-source operating system. arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to retain Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receivable
and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital information. financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products.
These solutions address critical client requirements for information
retention and archiving, security, compliance and storage optimization Remanufacturing and Remarketing: as equipment is returned at
including data deduplication, availability and virtualization. The the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished
portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and tape storage systems and sold or leased to new or existing clients both externally and
and software, including the ultra-scalable disk storage system XIV. internally. Exter nally remarketed equipment revenue represents sales
or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equipment
Retail Store Solutions: provider of market leadership solutions that revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold or leased
include hardware, software and services for the retail industry, internally to Systems and Technology and Global Services. Systems
including point-of-sale and self-service systems and peripherals. and Technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from
Solutions leverage industry standards and interfaces enabling Global Financing to external clients.
efficient rollouts and superior integration.
Microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily .
for use in IBM systems and storage products as well as delivering
semiconductors and related services to external clients.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 25
IBM Worldwide Organizations Research, Development and Intellectual Property
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s delivery IBM’s R&D operations differentiate the company from its competitors.
of value to its clients: IBM annually invests approximately $6 billion for R&D, focusing on
high-growth, high-value opportunities.
• Sales and Distribution IBM Research works with clients and IBM business units
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property on near-term and mid-term innovations and solutions and, in
• Enterprise Transformation many cases, qualifies new technologies to be transferred to IBM
• Integrated Supply Chain development organizations. It also explores the boundaries of science
and technology—from nanotechnology, to systems, to analytics, to
Sales and Distribution cloud, to IBM Watson, a computer system that applied advanced
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than analytics to defeat the all-time champions on the television quiz
170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribution show, Jeopardy!
of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization In addition to producing world-class systems, software and
manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based technology products, IBM innovations also are a major differentiator
operating units focused on delivering client value. Within these units, in providing solutions for the company’s clients through its services
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of businesses. IBM Research has the world’s largest mathematics
consultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to department of any public company. This unit is actively involved with
improve clients’ business performance. These teams deliver value many of the company’s business analytics client engagements.
by understanding the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring In 2011, the company once again was awarded more U.S. patents
together capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of than any other company, the 19th consecutive year IBM has been
Business Partners to develop and implement solutions. the patent leader. IBM’s 6,180 patents in 2011 were the most U.S.
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s patents ever awarded to one company in a single year; more than
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for local 70 percent of the patents IBM was issued in 2011 were for software
clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and timely and services.
investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic units align The company continues to actively seek intellectual property
industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. IBM extends protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other
capabilities to mid-market client segments by leveraging industry initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership.
skills with marketing, ibm.com and local Business Partner resources. The company’s investments in R&D also result in intellectual property
Through its growth markets organization, the company continues (IP) income of approximately $1 billion annually. Some of IBM’s
to increase its focus on the emerging markets around the world that technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM products,
have market growth rates greater than the global average—countries while others are licensed and may be used in either/both IBM
within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Latin products and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s
America. The company’s major markets include the G7 countries of various proprietary intellectual property rights are important to its
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States (U.S.) and success, IBM believes its business as a whole is not materially
the United Kingdom (U.K.) plus Austria, the Bahamas, Belgium, the dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular
Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number
Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products. Licenses
Switzerland. under many of the patents owned by IBM have been and are being
The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s original granted to others under reasonable terms and conditions.
equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, occurs in
industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors: Enterprise Transformation
A key element of the company’s strategy has been focused on
• Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance becoming the premier globally integrated enterprise. The company
• Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences has implemented a consistent set of processes and standards
• Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive, worldwide to reduce inefficiencies and improve collaboration.
Chemical and Petroleum, Electronics With its processes fully integrated, the company implemented
• Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail, a new operating model with work shared in global resource
Travel and Trans portation centers of excellence located where it made the most business
• Communications: Telecommunications, sense. Since 2005, global integration has enabled the company to
Media and Entertain ment, Energy and Utilities deliver over $6 billion in productivity and improve service quality,
• General Business: Mainly companies with fewer than speed and risk management. The company has shifted resources
1,000 employees toward building client relationships and employees skills, while
positioning the company for new market opportunities. During this
transformation, IBM pioneered this new operating model, changing
from a classic “multinational,” with smaller versions of the parent

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion
26 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
company replicated in countries around the world, to a global model Services organization. The supply, manufacturing and logistics
with one set of processes, shared services and broadly distributed and customer fulfillment operations are integrated in one operating
decision making. unit that has optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and
The company has now embarked on the next generation of its streamlining internal processes has improved sales force productivity
transformation in which new capabilities and technologies like and operational effectiveness and efficiency. Continuous
business analytics and cloud computing will drive performance. The improvements to supply chain resiliency against market-place
proven principles of the globally integrated enterprise will be applied changes and risks have been particularly valuable in maintaining
to all of the company’s spending to continue to drive additional continuity during natural disasters and other disruptive events that
productivity benefits in shared services, integrated operations and are occurring with increased frequency.
end-to-end process transformation. The company’s continuing efforts to derive business value from
its own globally integrated supply chain provides a strategic
Integrated Supply Chain advantage for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages
IBM spends approximately $35 billion annually through its supply its supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain
chain, procuring materials and services globally. In addition, in business transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help
2011, the company managed approximately $20 billion in operate clients’ end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement
procurement spending for its clients through the Global Process to logistics.
Year in Review
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2011 versus 2010 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 40,879 $38,201 7.0% 2.7%
Gross margin 35.0% 34.5% 0.5 pts.
Global Business Services 19,284 18,223 5.8% 1.5%
Gross margin 28.8% 28.0% 0.7 pts.
Software 24,944 22,485 10.9% 8.0%
Gross margin 88.5% 87.9% 0.5 pts.
Systems and Technology 18,985 17,973 5.6% 3.2%
Gross margin 39.8% 38.1% 1.6 pts.
Global Financing 2,102 2,238 (6.1)% (9.1)%
Gross margin 49.8% 51.3% (1.5 ) pts.
Other 722 750 (3.8)% (6.3)%
Gross margin (54.5)% (8.6)% (45.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $106,916 $99,870 7.1% 3.4%
Total consolidated gross profit $ 50,138 $46,014 9.0%
Total consolidated gross margin 46.9% 46.1% 0.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangibles assets 340 260 30.8%
Acquisition-related charges 1 0 NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 2 (204) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 50,481 $46,070 9.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 47.2% 46.1% 1.1 pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 29 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 27
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue as a percentage of total segment external revenue and each
reportable segment’s pre-tax income as a percentage of total segment pre-tax income.
Revenue Pre-tax Income*+
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2011 2010
Global Technology Services 38.5% 38.5% 27.4% 26.3%
Global Business Services 18.2 18.4 13.1 12.2
Total Global Services 56.7 56.9 40.6 38.4
Software 23.5 22.7 43.5 45.2
Systems and Technology 17.9 18.1 7.1 7.0
Global Financing 2.0 2.3 8.8 9.4
Total 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
* Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items;
see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 135 to 139 for additional information.
+ Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
The Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) transaction gain recorded revenue in 2011, an increase of 6.6 percent (2 percent adjusted for
in the first quarter of 2010 impacted the year-to-year results of the currency) compared to 2010. Services revenue performance, adjusted
company’s reportable segments for 2011 compared to 2010. In for currency, was consistent over the course of the year driven
addition, workforce rebalancing charges were incurred in every by stability in the backlog. Performance in 2011 was led by strength
segment in the first quarter of both years. The PLM transaction gain in the growth markets with total services revenue up 16.9 percent
($591 million) was recorded in Software in the first quarter of 2010. (11 percent adjusted for currency) and gross margin 2 points higher
In the segment analysis below and in the Global Financing analysis than in the major markets. The services segments also had good
on pages 63 and 64, each segment’s pre-tax income and pre-tax performance in the other key growth initiatives: cloud, business analytics
margin for 2011 and 2010 is presented on an as-reported basis and and Smarter Planet. Total outsourcing revenue of $28,301 million,
on a basis normalized for these actions in both years to provide a better which includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Application Management
perspective of the underlying operational performance of the segments. Services Outsourcing, increased 7.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for
currency) and total transactional revenue of $24,348 million, which
Global Services includes Consulting and Systems Integration within GBS and Integrated
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services (GTS) Technology Services within GTS, increased 6.2 percent (2 percent
and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered $60,163 million of adjusted for currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $60,163 $56,424 6.6% 2.3%
Global Technology Services $40,879 $38,201 7.0% 2.7%
Outsourcing 23,911 22,241 7.5 3.0
Integrated Technology Services 9,453 8,714 8.5 4.1
Maintenance 7,515 7,250 3.6 (0.2)
Global Business Services $19,284 $18,223 5.8% 1.5%
Outsourcing 4,390 4,007 9.5 4.8
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,895 14,216 4.8 0.5
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation of Outsourcing and Consulting and Systems Integration revenue within GBS.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion
28 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Technology Services revenue of $40,879 million increased GTS gross profit increased 8.5 percent in 2011 and gross margin
7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. improved 0.5 points year to year. Margin expansion was driven by
Revenue performance was led by the growth markets which were improved gross profit performance in all lines of business. Pre-tax
up 16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing income increased to $6,284 million in 2011 with a pre-tax margin of
revenue increased 7.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 14.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in
2011 and gained share. Outsourcing performance in 2011 was driven 2011 increased 10.9 percent and margin expanded 0.6 points to
by strength in the growth markets with revenue up 11 percent, 15.2 percent.
adjusted for currency, as the outsourcing offerings are continuing to GBS gross profit increased 8.6 percent in 2011 and gross margin
help clients build out their IT infrastructures. Integrated Technology improved 0.7 points to 28.8 percent, led primarily by margin
Services (ITS) revenue increased 8.5 percent (4 percent adjusted improvement in Application Management Services Outsourcing.
for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, also led by the growth markets GBS segment pre-tax income improved 18.1 percent to $3,006 million
which increased 13 percent, adjusted for currency. Revenue growth with a pre-tax margin of 15.0 percent. On a normalized basis,
year over year, adjusted for currency, in both GTS Outsourcing and segment pre-tax income in 2011 increased 14.1 percent with a pre-tax
ITS was relatively consistent over the course of the year. margin of 15.2 percent, an increase of 1.1 points year to year.
Global Business Services revenue of $19,284 million increased Total Global Services segment pre-tax income was $9,290 million
5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 led by strength in 2011, an increase of $1,246 million or 15.5 percent year to year.
in the growth markets with revenue up 17.4 percent (11 percent The combined pre-tax margin in 2011 improved 1.2 points versus
adjusted for currency). Application Outsourcing revenue increased 2010. On a normalized basis, total Global Services pre-tax income
9.5 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 year to year. in 2011 increased 11.9 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent,
Consulting and Systems Integration (C&SI), which includes Consulting, up 0.8 points year to year. In 2011, the company established two
Application Management Services systems integration and the U.S. Global Services integration hubs which will drive the business to a
Federal business, grew revenue in 2011 4.8 percent (1 percent new level of global consistency, integration and standardization in
adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had strong year- the development and delivery of solutions to clients. Both Global
to-year performance in the growth markets with double-digit constant Services segments had strong profit and margin performance in
currency revenue growth. GBS was impacted in 2011 by revenue 2011 as they continue to mix to higher value offerings and markets,
declines in Japan and in the Public Sector; excluding Japan and and continue to focus on productivity and cost management.
the Public Sector, total GBS revenue increased 11.9 percent in 2011
(8 percent adjusted for currency). Global Services Backlog
The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2011 was
($ in millions) $141 billion, a decrease of $1.7 billion (flat adjusted for currency)
Yr.-to-Yr. compared to the December 31, 2010 balance, and an increase of
Percent/
$3.8 billion ($4.7 billion adjusted for currency) compared to the
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change September 30, 2011 balance. There are three primary drivers
Global Services of total services revenue: backlog, new sales into the existing
Global Technology Services contract base and new client signings. A very high percentage
External gross profit $14,320 $13,194 8.5% of annual services revenue, approximately 70 percent, comes
External gross profit margin 35.0% 34.5% 0.5 pts. from the run out of the opening backlog. The December 31, 2011
backlog position provides a very solid base of revenue for total
Pre-tax income $ 6,284 $ 5,499 14.3%
Services to begin 2012. In 2012, the company expects approximately
Pre-tax margin 14.9% 13.9% 1.0 pts.
3 percent revenue growth from the backlog, at consistent foreign
Pre-tax income—normalized** $ 6,399 $ 5,771 10.9%
exchange currency rates. The estimated outsourcing backlog
Pre-tax margin—normalized 15.2% 14.6% 0.6 pts.
at December 31, 2011 was $93 billion, a decrease of $4.0 billion
Global Business Services
($2.8 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2010
External gross profit $ 5,545 $ 5,106 8.6% balance, and an increase of $2.2 billion ($2.8 billion adjusted
External gross profit margin 28.8% 28.0% 0.7 pts. for currency) from the September 30, 2011 level.
Pre-tax income $ 3,006 $ 2,546 18.1%
Pre-tax margin 15.0% 13.4% 1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized+ $ 3,052 $ 2,674 14.1%
Pre-tax margin—normalized 15.2% 14.1% 1.1 pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
** Excludes $116 million and $273 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
+ Excludes $45 million and $128 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 29
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. Adjusted for
At December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Backlog
Total backlog $140.6 $142.4 $(1.7) $ 0.0
Outsourcing backlog 92.5 96.5 (4.0) (2.8)
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS the type and duration of the agreement, and the presence of termination
Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Maintenance. charges or wind-down costs.
Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Outsourcing. Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and
Total backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work under Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract extensions
contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog estimates and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of
are subject to change and are affected by several factors, including the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included in signings
terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjustments for currency. revenues equal renewals.
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services contract. There positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
of signings. The calculation used by management involves estimates recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or
and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commitment, including coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change Currency
Total signings $57,435 $57,696 (0.5)% (4.0)%
Outsourcing signings $29,251 $31,268 (6.5)% (9.7)%
Transactional signings 28,184 26,428 6.6 2.6
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change Currency
Software external revenue $24,944 $22,485 10.9% 8.0%
Middleware $20,650 $18,445 12.0% 9.0%
Key Branded Middleware 16,051 13,879 15.6 12.7
WebSphere Family 40.5 37.4
Information Management 12.5 9.6
Lotus 3.8 0.2
Tivoli 10.2 7.4
Rational 4.9 1.8
Other middleware 4,600 4,565 0.8 (1.9)
Operating systems 2,479 2,282 8.6 5.6
Other 1,814 1,758 3.2 0.4
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion
30 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software revenue of $24,944 million increased 10.9 percent (8 percent Tivoli revenue increased 10.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. Adjusting for the currency) in 2011 when compared to 2010 and gained share. Revenue
divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 11.8 percent (9 percent growth was led by Storage software with growth of 25 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2011. Revenue growth was driven by key (22 percent adjusted for currency). Security solutions software also
branded middleware, reflecting continued strong demand for the delivered growth in 2011, with revenue up 9 percent (6 percent
company’s offerings and solid growth in key focus areas such as adjusted for currency).
Smarter Commerce and business analytics. Overall, the Software Rational revenue increased 4.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for
business had another very good year in 2011, delivering nearly currency) in 2011 versus 2010 and gained share. Revenue growth
$10 billion in segment pre-tax income, an increase of $500 million was driven by Telelogic, which increased 11 percent (7 percent
from 2010. The company continues to invest in additional capabilities adjusted for currency) year to year.
for the Software business through both organic investments and Operating systems revenue increased 8.6 percent (6 percent
strategic acquisitions, including the completion of five acquisitions in adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010, driven primarily by
2011, plus acquisitions announced in the fourth quarter of 2011 that growth in Power Systems.
closed in the first quarter of 2012. Other software revenue increased 3.2 percent (flat adjusted for
Key branded middleware revenue increased 15.6 percent currency) with growth in software-related services partially offset
(13 percent adjusted for currency) and again gained market share by the divestiture of the PLM operations in the first quarter of 2010.
in 2011, as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware
market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing ($ in millions)
branded middleware which accounted for 64 percent of total software Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
revenue in 2011, an increase of 3 points from 2010. Performance in
Margin
2011 was led by strong double-digit growth in WebSphere. The Software For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change
business continued to have solid performance in its growth initiatives, Software
with business analytics revenue up double digits in 2011 year to year. External gross profit $22,065 $19,774 11.6%
WebSphere revenue increased 40.5 percent (37 percent adjusted External gross profit margin 88.5% 87.9% 0.5 pts.
for currency) in 2011 with strong performance throughout the year Pre-tax income $ 9,970 $ 9,466 5.3%
and gained share. WebSphere’s five product areas all had revenue
Pre-tax margin 35.3% 37.2% (1.9) pts.
growth of 18 percent or higher in 2011, led by the Smarter Commerce
Pre-tax income—normalized** $10,009 $ 8,972 11.6%
offerings, which more than tripled year to year. This performance
Pre-tax margin—normalized 35.5% 35.3% 0.2 pts.
contributed to the company’s overall growth in the retail industry in
each of the last two years. The 2010 acquisitions of Sterling * Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Commerce, Coremetrics and Unica Corporation all contributed to ** Excludes $39 million and $98 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in
the WebSphere year-to-year performance. the first quarter of 2010.
Information Management revenue increased 12.5 percent
(10 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share in 2011 compared Software gross profit increased 11.6 percent to $22,065 million in
to 2010. Distributed Database revenue increased 33 percent in 2011, 2011 driven primarily by the growth in revenue. Gross profit margin
led by strong performance from the Netezza offerings. Since improved 0.5 points versus 2010. Software delivered segment
acquiring Netezza in November 2010, the Software business has pre-tax income of $9,970 million in 2011, an increase of 5.3 percent
expanded its customer base by over 40 percent. The company’s versus 2010. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income
business analytics software offerings, most of which are part of increased 11.6 percent and segment pre-tax margin improved
Information Management, continue to outpace the market with 0.2 points to 35.5 percent in 2011. The Software segment delivered
double-digit revenue growth, year to year in 2011. strong margin and profit growth in 2011 and contributed to the
Lotus revenue increased 3.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) company’s continued margin expansion and profit performance.
in 2011 compared to 2010, with growth driven by the Social Business
offerings.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 31
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $18,985 $17,973 5.6% 3.2%
System z 0.3% (2.1)%
Power Systems 12.0 9.5
System x 5.7 2.4
Storage 5.8 3.1
Retail Store Solutions 11.6 9.4
Total Systems 6.5 3.8
Microelectronics OEM 0.2 0.1
Systems and Technology revenue increased 5.6 percent (3 percent Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 11.6 percent (9 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Performance in 2011 was adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus the prior year. The brand gained
driven by the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent (12 percent share in 2011 and contributed to the company’s overall improved
adjusted for currency). The major markets increased 2.7 percent, performance in the retail industry.
but were essentially flat at constant currency versus the prior year Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 0.2 percent (flat adjusted
period. for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, as the company shifted its
System z revenue increased 0.3 percent (down 2 percent adjusted production to meet internal demand.
for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. MIPS (millions of instructions per
second) shipments increased 16 percent in 2011 versus 2010. The ($ in millions)
revenue performance and lower MIPS growth was a result of the Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
strong prior-year performance and was consistent with prior mainframe
Margin
product cycles, as the company successfully launched its zEnterprise For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* Change
196 server in the third quarter of 2010. Since the z196 server began Systems and Technology
shipping, the company has added over 115 new System z clients, with External gross profit $7,555 $6,856 10.2%
more than 33 percent in the growth markets. External gross profit margin 39.8% 38.1% 1.6 pts.
Power Systems revenue increased 12.0 percent (9 percent Pre-tax income $1,633 $1,456 12.2%
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010 with performance driven
Pre-tax margin 8.2% 7.8% 0.5 pts.
by strong growth in high-end systems. High-end systems revenue
Pre-tax income—normalized** $1,652 $1,513 9.2%
increased 31 percent (28 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011
Pre-tax margin—normalized 8.3% 8.1% 0.3 pts.
compared to 2010. The company extended its market leadership in
2011, having posted 15 consecutive quarters of year-to-year share * Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
gains. In addition, this was the second consecutive year that the ** Excludes $19 million and $57 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
company had over 1,000 competitive displacements, which this
year generated over $1 billion of business; approximately 50 percent The increase in external gross profit for 2011 versus 2010 was due
of this business was from Hewlett Packard, with most of the balance to higher revenue and an improved overall gross profit margin.
from Oracle/Sun. Overall gross margin increased 1.6 points in 2011 versus the prior
System x revenue increased 5.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for year. The increase was primarily driven by margin improvements
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. High-end System x revenue in Power Systems (1.2 points), System z (0.4 points) and System x
increased 35 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus (0.6 points), partially offset by lower margins in Microelectronics
the prior year. System x revenue increased 22 percent (18 percent (0.6 points) and Storage (0.2 points).
adjusted for currency) in the growth markets and closed the year with Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased $177 million
its ninth consecutive quarter with a double-digit increase in the (12.2 percent) to $1,633 million in 2011 and on a normalized basis
growth markets. increased $139 million to $1,652 million in 2011, when compared
Storage revenue increased 5.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for to the prior year. Pre-tax margin increased 0.5 points, and on a
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Total disk revenue increased 7 percent normalized basis 0.3 points, versus the prior year.
(4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, driven by growth
in enterprise disk products. Tape revenue increased 3 percent (flat Global Financing
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. When combined with See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
storage software, total storage revenue increased 10 percent in 2011 segment results.
compared to the prior year.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion
32 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Total revenue $106,916 $99,870 7.1% 3.4%
Geographies $104,170 $97,060 7.3% 3.6%
Americas 44,944 42,044 6.9 6.2
Europe/Middle East/Africa 33,952 31,866 6.5 1.6
Asia Pacific 25,273 23,150 9.2 1.7
Major markets 5.1% 1.6%
Growth markets 16.0% 11.4%
BRIC countries 18.6% 16.1%
Total geographic revenue increased 7.3 percent (4 percent adjusted Asia Pacific revenue increased 9.2 percent (2 percent adjusted
for currency) to $104,170 million in 2011, led by strong performance for currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets increased
in the growth markets. 16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by growth in
The growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted China of 21.6 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) and India
for currency) in 2011 and gained 4 points of market share. The growth of 10.9 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue
markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT infrastructures increased 2.0 percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted for currency).
and lead in specific industries is driving the strong performance and OEM revenue of $2,746 million in 2011 decreased 2.3 percent
share gains. Revenue growth outpaced growth in the major markets (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010, driven by the
by 10 points in 2011 on a constant currency basis. In the BRIC countries Microelectronics OEM business.
(Brazil, Russia, India and China), revenue increased 18.6 percent
(16 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, with double-digit growth Total Expense and Other Income
in each country. Overall in 2011, the company had double-digit constant
currency revenue growth in nearly 40 growth market countries. ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
These countries contributed nearly two-thirds of the company’s 2011
Percent/
constant currency revenue growth and represented 22 percent of Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
total geographic revenue in 2011. To further drive market expansion,
Total consolidated expense
the company opened 92 new branches and added over 1,500 new
and other (income) $29,135 $26,291 10.8%
sales resources in 2011.
Non-operating adjustments
Americas revenue increased 6.9 percent (6 percent adjusted
Amortization of acquired
for currency) in 2011. Within the major market countries, the U.S.
intangible assets (289) (253) 14.4
increased 4.2 percent and Canada increased 14.3 percent (10 percent
Acquisition-related charges (45) (46) (1.8)
adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets
Non-operating retirement-related
increased 16.9 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) with growth
(costs)/income 74 210 (64.6)
in Brazil of 13.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency).
Total operating (non-GAAP)
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue increased 6.5 percent
expense and other (income) $28,875 $26,202 10.2%
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. In
Total consolidated
the major market countries, revenue growth was led by the U.K. up expense-to-revenue ratio 27.3% 26.3% 0.9 pts.
9.4 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), Spain up 11.2 percent
Operating (non-GAAP)
(6 percent adjusted for currency), Germany up 5.8 percent (1 percent expense-to-revenue ratio 27.0% 26.2% 0.8 pts.
adjusted for currency) and France up 4.4 percent (flat adjusted for
currency). Revenue in Italy decreased 0.6 percent (5 percent adjusted
for currency). The EMEA growth markets increased 11.6 percent
(10 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, led by growth in Russia
of 49.8 percent (49 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 35 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 33
Total expense and other (income) increased 10.8 percent in 2011 Total Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense increased
versus 2010. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) 8.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010.
increased 10.2 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers of the Overall the increase was driven by currency impacts (3 points),
year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) for both acquisition-related spending (3 points) and base expense (2 points).
expense presentations were approximately: Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense increased 7.6 percent (5 percent
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by the same factors. Workforce
• Currency* 4 points rebalancing charges decreased $201 million due primarily to
• Acquisitions** 3 points actions taken in the first quarter of 2010 ($558 million). Bad debt
• Base expense 3 points expense increased $47 million in 2011 primarily due to higher
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. receivable balances and the current economic environment in
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. Europe. The accounts receivable provision coverage was 1.5 percent
at December 31, 2011, a decrease of 30 basis points from year-
In the execution of its strategy, the company continues to invest end 2010.
in its growth initiatives, innovation and strategic acquisitions. The
company also has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency Other (Income) and Expense
and productivity across the business.
($ in millions)
For additional information regarding total expense and other
Yr.-to-Yr.
income, see the following analyses by category. Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
Selling, General and Administrative Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction
($ in millions)
losses/(gains) $ 513 $ 303 69.2%
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent (Gains)/losses on derivative
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change instruments (113) (239) (52.9)
Selling, general and Interest income (136) (92) 48.4
administrative expense
Net (gains)/losses from securities
Selling, general and and investment assets (227) 31 NM
administrative—other $20,287 $18,585 9.2%
Other (58) (790) (92.7)
Advertising and promotional expense 1,373 1,337 2.7
Total consolidated other
Workforce rebalancing charges 440 641 (31.3) (income) and expense $ (20) $(787) (97.4)%
Retirement-related costs 603 494 22.1 Non-operating adjustment
Amortization of acquired Acquisition-related charges (25) (4) NM
intangibles assets 289 253 14.4
Operating (non-GAAP)
Stock-based compensation 514 488 5.4 other (income) and expense $ (45) $(791) (94.3)%
Bad debt expense 88 40 116.6
NM—Not meaningful
Total consolidated selling, general
and administrative expense $23,594 $21,837 8.0%
Other (income) and expense was income of $20 million and
Non-operating adjustments
$787 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in income
Amortization of acquired in 2011 was primarily driven by the net gain ($591 million) from the
intangible assets (289) (253) 14.4
PLM transaction recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and a net gain
Acquisition-related charges (20) (41) (52.3)
associated with the disposition of a joint venture in the third quarter
Non-operating retirement-related of 2010 ($57 million) reflected in Other in the table above. In addition,
(costs)/income (13) 84 NM
foreign currency rate volatility drove higher foreign currency transaction
Operating (non-GAAP)
losses ($210 million) and lower gains on derivative instruments
selling, general and
($126 million). These decreases in income were partially offset
administrative expense $23,272 $21,628 7.6%
by higher net gains from securities and investment asset sales
NM—Not meaningful ($258 million), primarily in the first quarter of 2011.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion
34 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering Stock-Based Compensation
($ in millions) Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $697 million
Yr.-to-Yr. increased $68 million compared to 2010. The increase was primarily
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change the result of an increase related to the company’s assumption of stock-
Total consolidated research, based awards previously issued by acquired entities ($22 million)
development and engineering $6,258 $6,026 3.8% and increases related to restricted stock units and performance share
Non-operating adjustment units ($48 million), partially offset by a reduction related to stock
Non-operating retirement-related options ($2 million). Cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected
(costs)/income 88 126 (30.4) in the following categories: Cost: $120 million, up $27 million; SG&A
Operating (non-GAAP) research, expense: $514 million, up $26 million; and RD&E expense: $62 million,
development and engineering $6,345 $6,152 3.1% up $14 million.
See note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 118 to 121
The company continues to invest in research and development, for additional information on stock-based incentive awards.
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities
and to extend its technology leadership. Total research, development
Retirement-Related Plans
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 3.8 percent in 2011
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
versus 2010, primarily driven by acquisitions (up 4 points) and
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated
currency impacts (up 2 points), partially offset by base expense
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E)
(down 2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased
relating to the job function of the plan participants.
3.1 percent in 2011 compared to the prior year primarily driven by
the same factors. RD&E investments represented 5.9 percent of
revenue in 2011, compared to 6.0 percent in 2010. ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
Retirement-related plans—cost
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Service cost $ 549 $ 550 (0.2)%
Percent Amortization of prior
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
service cost/(credits) (157) (183) (14.6)
Sales and other transfers
Cost of defined contribution plans 1,513 1,430 5.8
of intellectual property $ 309 $ 203 52.3%
Total operating costs $ 1,905 $ 1,796 6.0%
Licensing/royalty-based fees 211 312 (32.5)
Interest cost 4,601 4,763 (3.4)
Custom development income 588 638 (8.0)
Expected return on plan assets (6,574) (6,488) 1.3
Total $1,108 $1,154 (4.0)%
Recognized actuarial losses 1,788 1,194 49.7
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may Plan amendments/curtailments/
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing settlements 1 27 (98.0)
of divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and Multi-employer plan/other costs 112 89 26.0
the timing of new patents and know-how development. There were Total non-operating costs/
no significant individual IP transactions in 2011 or 2010. (income) $ (72) $ (414) (82.5)%
Total retirement-related
Interest Expense plans—cost $ 1,832 $ 1,382 32.6%
($ in millions) In 2011, total retirement-related plans cost increased by $450 million
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent compared to 2010, primarily driven by an increase in recognized
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change actuarial losses of $594 million and increased cost associated with
Interest expense defined contribution plans ($83 million), partially offset by lower
Total $411 $368 11.6% interest cost of $162 million and an increased expected return on
plan assets of $87 million.
The increase in interest expense in 2011 versus 2010 was primarily
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in
the Consolidated State ment of Earnings only if the related external
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2011 was $964 million, an
increase of $41 million year to year.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 35
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on Financial Position
page 18, the company characterizes certain retirement-related costs Dynamics
as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this characterization, At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
operating retirement-related costs in 2011 were $1,905 million, an positions remain strong and are well positioned to support the
increase of $108 million compared to 2010, primarily driven by the company’s long-term objectives. Cash and cash equivalents at
$83 million increase in defined contribution plan costs. Non-operating year end was $11,922 million, an increase of $271 million from the
costs of $(72) million increased $342 million in 2011 compared to the prior year-end position. During the year, the company continued
prior year driven primarily by the increase in recognized actuarial to manage its investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation
losses ($594 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($162 million) and liquidity objectives, which resulted in a shift to higher rated
and the increase in expected return on plan assets ($87 million). institutions. At year end, a significant portion of the investment
portfolio was invested in U.S. sovereign instruments with no holdings
Income Taxes of European sovereign debt securities.
Total debt of $31,320 million increased $2,695 million from
The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent compared with
the prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at
24.8 percent in 2010. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2011
December 31, 2011 was $2,300 million, an increase of $1,156 million
was 24.5 percent compared with 24.4 percent in 2010. The 0.3 point
from the prior year. Within total debt, $23,332 is in support of the
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven
Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. The
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (0.6 points),
company continues to have substantial flexibility in the market.
the lack of prior year impacts related to certain intercompany
During 2011, the company completed bond issuances totaling
payments made by foreign subsidiaries (6.6 points) and a reduced
$4,850 million, with terms ranging from three to ten years and priced
impact associated with the intercompany licensing of certain
from 0.875 to 2.90 percent depending on the maturity. In addition,
intellectual property and acquisition integration costs (2.2 points).
the company renewed its $10 billion global credit facility for five
These benefits were offset by a decrease in the utilization of foreign
years, with 100 percent of the facility available on a same day basis.
tax credits (3.7 points) and a decrease in the benefits associated
Consistent with accounting standards the company remeasures
with the settlements of the U.S. federal income tax audit (5.5 points).
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
The remaining items were individually insignificant.
December 31. At December 31, 2011, the overall net underfunded
position was $16,389 million, an increase of $2,654 million from
Earnings Per Share
December 31, 2010 as the increase in the benefit obligation due to
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted- the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans
period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of the were well funded and its cash requirements related to these plans
weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding remain stable going-forward. In 2011, the return on the U.S. Personal
plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during Pension Plan assets was 8.4 percent and the plan was 98 percent
the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common funded. Overall, global asset returns were 6.1 percent and the company’s
shares include outstanding stock options and stock awards. qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 96 percent funded.
The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European
Yr.-to-Yr. sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retirement-
Percent Related Benefits,” on page 129 for additional information.
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
During 2011, the company generated $19,846 million in cash from
Earnings per share of common stock
operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010. In addition,
Assuming dilution $13.06 $11.52 13.4%
the company generated $16,604 million in free cash flow in 2011, an
Basic $13.25 $11.69 13.3%
increase of $305 million over the prior year. See pages 56 and 57
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $13.44 $11.67 15.2% for additional information on free cash flow. The company returned
Weighted-average shares $18,519 million to shareholders in 2011, with $15,046 million in share
outstanding (in millions)
repurchases and $3,473 million in dividends. In 2011, the company
Assuming dilution 1,213.8 1,287.4 (5.7)% repurchased approximately 89 million shares and had $8.7 billion
Basic 1,197.0 1,268.8 (5.7)% remaining in share repurchase authorization at year end. The
company has consistently generated strong cash from operations
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010 were
and strong free cash flow and this permits the company to invest
1,163.2 million and 1,228.0 million, respectively. The average number
and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-term
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 73.6 million
opportunities.
shares lower in 2011 versus 2010. The decrease was primarily the
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing
result of the common stock repurchase program. See note L, “Equity
business are a significant part of the company’s financial position.
Activity,” on page 110 for additional information regarding common
The financial position amounts appearing on page 72 are the
stock activities. Also see note P, “Earnings Per Share of Common
consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts
Stock,” on page 117.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion
36 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on • An increase in deferred income of $617 million ($638 million
page 63, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an adjusted for currency) driven by the software business,
understanding of the Global Financing business. including acquisitions; partially offset by
• A decrease of $903 million in taxes payable primarily due
Working Capital to tax payments in the U.S. during 2011; and
• A decrease in other accrued expenses and liabilities of
($ in millions)
$621 million ($473 million adjusted for currency) primarily
At December 31: 2011 2010
due to derivatives valuations.
Current assets $50,928 $48,116
Current liabilities 42,123 40,562
Cash Flow
Working capital $ 8,805 $ 7,554
The company’s cash flow from operating, investing and financing
Current ratio 1.21:1 1.19:1
activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
on page 73, is summarized in the table below. These amounts include
Working capital increased $1,251 million from the year-end 2010
the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
position. The key changes are described below:
Current assets increased $2,812 million ($3,734 million adjusted
for currency), due to: ($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010
• An increase of $1,337 million ($1,594 million adjusted Net cash provided by/(used in)
for currency) in short-term receivables due to: Operating activities $ 19,846 $ 19,549
– Higher volumes of financing receivables of $644 million Investing activities (4,396) (8,507)
($789 million adjusted for currency) driven by customer Financing activities (13,696) (12,429)
loans and inventory financing; and Effect of exchange rate changes
– Higher software sales volumes of approximately on cash and cash equivalents (493) (135)
$300 million, and Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ 1,262 $ (1,522)
– Reclasses of approximately $300 million of long-term
other receivables to reflect maturity dates. Net cash from operating activities increased by $298 million in 2011
• An increase of $1,022 million ($1,181 million adjusted for as compared to 2010 driven by the following key factors:
currency) in prepaid expenses and other current assets
primarily due to: • Improved net income of $1,022 million; and
– An increase of $387 million in collateral received related • A decrease in net gains on asset sales of $459 million, driven
to derivatives valuations; and by the PLM transaction gain in 2010; partially offset by
– An increase of $326 million in income taxes primarily driven • A decrease in cash provided by operating assets and liabilities
by tax payments in the U.S.; and of $1,152 million due to:
– An increase of $310 million in various prepaid expenses; and – Higher net tax payments of approximately $900 million
• An increase of $1,262 million ($1,755 million adjusted during 2011 compared to 2010; and
for currency) in cash and cash equivalents (see the following – A decrease in cash provided by receivables of $790 million
cash flow analysis); partially offset by as a result of higher volumes in 2011; partially offset by
• A decline of $990 million in marketable securities due – A decrease in cash used related to retirement-related plans
to sales of securities during 2011. of $196 million, primarily driven by lower non-U.S. employer
funding in 2011; and
Current liabilities increased $1,561 million ($1,779 million adjusted for – A decrease in cash used for workforce rebalancing activities
currency) as a result of: of $278 million during 2011 compared to 2010.
• An increase in short-term debt of $1,685 million primarily Net cash used in investing activities decreased $4,111 million due to
driven by: a decrease in cash used for acquisitions.
– New debt issuances of $6,123 million including commercial Net cash used in financing activities increased $1,267 million as
paper; and a result of:
– Reclasses of $4,325 million from long-term to short-term
debt to reflect maturity dates; partially offset by • A net decrease of $991 million in cash from common
– Payments of $8,910 million. stock transactions; and
• An increase in accounts payable of $713 million ($766 million • An increase in dividends paid of $296 million in 2011
adjusted for currency) reflecting higher year-end activity as compared to 2010; partially offset by
well as the increase in collateral related to derivatives; and • A decrease in common stock repurchases of $329 million
in 2011 compared to 2010.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 37
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2011 2010 strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liability
profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility to
Noncurrent assets $65,505 $65,335
access global funding sources as needed.
Long-term debt $22,857 $21,846
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $31,217 $27,871
($ in millions)
The increase in noncurrent assets of $169 million ($902 million At December 31: 2011 2010
adjusted for currency) was driven by: Total company debt $31,320 $28,624
Total Global Financing segment debt $23,332 $22,823
• An increase of $1,077 million in goodwill ($1,282 million Debt to support external clients 20,051 19,583
adjusted for currency) driven by acquisitions during 2011; and Debt to support internal clients 3,281 3,240
• An increase of $282 million in deferred taxes ($256 million
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by retirement related Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the company’s
activity; partially offset by external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by other
• An increase of $227 million ($330 million adjusted IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, generate
for currency) in long-term financing receivables driven long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing
by increased volumes; and asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global Services
• A decrease of $883 million ($753 million adjusted for currency) assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset
in investments and sundry assets driven by net asset sales of base. The debt analysis above is further detailed in the Global
$395 million during 2011 as well as a reclass to short-term Financing section on pages 66 and 67.
other receivables of approximately $300 million to reflect Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-to-
maturity dates; and capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and equity
• A decrease of $225 million ($66 million adjusted as management believes this is more representative of the company’s
for currency) in prepaid pension assets resulting from core business operations. This ratio can vary from period to period
pension remeasurements; and as the company manages its global cash and debt positions.
• A decrease of $214 million in property, plant and equipment “Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing
(net) primarily due to currency. debt and equity) was 32.0 percent at December 31, 2011 compared
to 22.6 percent at December 31, 2010. The increase was primarily
Long-term debt increased by $1,011 million due to new debt issuances driven by an increase in non-Global Financing debt of $2,186 million
of $5,194 million, partially offset by reclasses of $4,325 million to and by a decrease in non-Global Financing equity of $2,929 million
short-term debt as certain instruments approach maturity. from December 31, 2010 balances.
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $3,346 million Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2011
($3,544 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by: was 60.7 percent versus 55.3 percent at December 31, 2010.
• An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations Equity
of $2,396 million ($2,488 million adjusted for currency) Total equity decreased by $2,937 million as a result of an increase in
primarily driven by remeasurements in the U.S., treasury stock of $14,803 million, driven by common stock repurchases
the United Kingdom and Japan; and in 2011; a higher pension adjustment of $2,448 million reflecting the
• An increase of $770 million ($834 million adjusted for impact of pension remeasurements as well as increased foreign
currency) in other noncurrent liabilities primarily due to an currency translation adjustments of $711 million; partially offset by
increase in tax related liabilities. an increase in retained earnings of $12,326 million, and an increase
of $2,711 million in common stock primarily driven by stock option
exercises and stock based compensation.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion
38 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,138 $ 341 $ 2 $50,481
Gross profit margin 46.9% 0.3 pts. 0.0 pts. 47.2%
SG&A $23,594 $(309) $ (13) $23,272
RD&E 6,258 0 88 6,345
Other (income) and expense (20) (25) 0 (45)
Total expense and other (income) 29,135 (334) 74 28,875
Pre-tax income 21,003 675 (72) 21,605
Pre-tax income margin 19.6% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 20.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,148 $ 179 $ (40) $ 5,287
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.1) pts. 24.5%
Net income $15,855 $ 495 $ (32) $16,318
Net income margin 14.8% 0.5 pts. (0.0) pts. 15.3%
Diluted earnings per share $ 13.06 $0.41 $(0.03) $ 13.44
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2010: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $46,014 $ 260 $ (204) $46,070
Gross profit margin 46.1% 0.3 pts. (0.2) pts. 46.1%
SG&A $21,837 $(294) $ 84 $21,628
RD&E 6,026 0 126 6,152
Other (income) and expense (787) (4) 0 (791)
Total expense and other (income) 26,291 (298) 210 26,202
Pre-tax income 19,723 558 (414) 19,867
Pre-tax income margin 19.7% 0.6 pts. (0.4) pts. 19.9%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,890 $ 116 $ (162) $ 4,844
Effective tax rate 24.8% (0.1) pts. (0.3) pts. 24.4%
Net income $14,833 $ 443 $ (253) $15,023
Net income margin 14.9% 0.4 pts. (0.3) pts. 15.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 11.52 $0.34 $(0.20) $ 11.67
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 39
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results by the growth markets which were up 11.4 percent (13 percent adjusted
for currency). Within Systems and Technology, Power Systems
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
delivered revenue growth of 6.3 percent (6 percent adjusted for
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ currency) while continuing to drive competitive displacements and
Margin
extend its share gains in Unix. In the fourth quarter, each of the
For the fourth quarter: 2011 2010 Change
company’s 16 brands gained or held share, with the exception of
Revenue $29,486 $29,019 1.6%*
System z, which had the largest revenue growth in the last decade
Gross profit margin 49.9% 49.0% 0.9 pts.
in the fourth quarter of 2010. The company estimates that System z
Total expense and other income $ 7,448 $ 7,271 2.4%
lost share in the fourth quarter, primarily to Power Systems .
Total expense and other
The company’s ongoing focus on productivity together with the
income-to-revenue ratio 25.3% 25.1% 0.2 pts.
relative strength of the Software business drove strong margin
Income before income taxes $ 7,274 $ 6,956 4.6%
performance in the fourth quarter of 2011. The consolidated gross
Provision for income taxes 1,784 1,698 5.1%
profit margin increased 0.9 points versus the fourth quarter of 2010
Net income $ 5,490 $ 5,257 4.4% to 49.9 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin increased
Net income margin 18.6% 18.1% 0.5 pts. 1.1 points to 50.2 percent. The improvement was driven by margin
Earnings per share of common stock expansion in both services segments, and an improved segment
Assuming dilution $ 4.62 $ 4.18 10.5% mix due to the Software revenue performance.
Weighted-average shares outstanding Total expense and other income increased 2.4 percent in the
Assuming dilution 1,188.7 1,258.4 (5.5)% fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other income increased 2.1 percent compared to the
* 1.4 percent adjusted for currency.
fourth quarter of 2010. The year-to-year drivers for both categories
were approximately:
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2011 and 2010. • Acquisitions* 1 point
• Base expense 1 point
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr. * Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2011 2010 Change
Pre-tax income grew 4.6 percent and the pre-tax margin was
Net income as reported $5,490 $5,257 4.4%
24.7 percent, an increase of 0.7 points versus the fourth quarter of
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax) 2010. Net income increased 4.4 percent and the net income margin
Acquisition-related charges 119 170 (30.0) of 18.6 percent improved 0.5 points year to year. The effective tax rate
Non-operating retirement-related for the fourth quarter was 24.5 percent, compared with 24.4 percent
costs/(income) (12) (74) (84.0) in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $5,597 $ 5,354 4.5% 5.6 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 25.1 percent, an increase of 0.9 points versus the prior year. Operating
earnings per share $ 4.71 $ 4.25 10.8% (non-GAAP) earnings increased 4.5 percent and the operating (non-
* See page 43 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings. GAAP) earnings margin of 19.0 percent increased 0.5 points versus
the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was
Snapshot 24.4 percent versus 23.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010.
Diluted earnings per share improved 10.5 percent reflecting the
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the company grew revenue, expanded
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase
gross, pre-tax and net income margins and delivered earnings per
program. In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 19 million
share of $4.62, up 10.5 percent as reported, and $4.71, up 10.8 percent
shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of $4.62
on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $7.1 billion
increased $0.44 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted
in cash from operations in the quarter enabling shareholder returns of
earnings per share of $4.71 increased $0.46 versus the fourth quarter
$4.5 billion in common stock repurchases and dividends in the period.
of 2010 driven by the following factors:
The company’s performance in the fourth quarter was driven by
several factors. The Software segment continued its momentum
• Revenue increase at actual rates $0.07
with performance reflecting both strong demand for its offerings
• Margin expansion $0.13
and solid sales execution. Software revenue increased 8.7 percent
• Common stock repurchases $0.26
(9 percent adjusted for currency) driven by strong growth in the focus
areas of Smarter Commerce, business analytics and storage solutions. Gross margin expansion drove $0.19 of operating (non-GAAP)
Software pre-tax income increased 12.5 percent. Global Services earnings per share growth, partially offset by a $0.02 per share
delivered strong margin and profit growth, with pre-tax income up impact from expense and a $0.04 per share impact from the higher
16.9 percent. Total Global Services revenue growth was again led tax rate. Overall, margin expansion contributed $0.13 of improvement.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion
40 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2011 versus the fourth quarter of 2010 reportable segment external revenue and gross
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2011 2010* Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $10,452 $10,165 2.8% 2.6%
Gross margin 36.6% 34.5% 2.1 pts.
Global Business Services 4,877 4,758 2.5% 1.7%
Gross margin 29.3% 28.0% 1.3 pts.
Software 7,648 7,039 8.7% 8.7%
Gross margin 89.8% 89.6% 0.2 pts.
Systems and Technology 5,803 6,277 (7.6)% (7.7)%
Gross margin 40.5% 43.6% (3.1) pts.
Global Financing 548 628 (12.9)% (12.6)%
Gross margin 49.7% 51.8% (2.1) pts.
Other 159 151 4.7% 4.7%
Gross margin (11.0)% 10.3% (21.3) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $29,486 $29,019 1.6% 1.4%
Total consolidated gross profit $14,722 $14,227 3.5%
Total consolidated gross margin 49.9% 49.0% 0.9 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 81 82 (1.2)%
Acquisition-related charges 0 0 0.0%
Retirement-related costs/(income) (10) (60) (82.9)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $14,793 $14,249 3.8%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.2% 49.1% 1.1pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Global Services Global Technology Services revenue increased 2.8 percent
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services (GTS) (3 percent adjusted for currency) to $10,452 million in the fourth
and Global Business Services (GBS) delivered $15,329 million of quarter versus the same period in 2010. Adjusted for currency,
revenue in the fourth quarter, an increase of 2.7 percent (2 percent the fourth-quarter revenue growth rate was consistent with the
adjusted for currency) year to year. Overall revenue growth in the growth rate in the third quarter. GTS Outsourcing revenue increased
quarter was driven by the growth markets with revenue up 11.4 percent 3.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter
(13 percent adjusted for currency) with double-digit constant currency and gained share. Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue
revenue growth in the outsourcing, transactional and maintenance increased 4.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
businesses. Total outsourcing revenue of $7,210 million increased quarter. ITS had strong performance in the growth markets, driven
3.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional by the benefits of geographic expansion in offerings such as Business
revenue of $6,246 million increased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted Continuity and Resiliency Services. GTS gross profit increased
for currency) year over year. Total Global Services segment pre-tax 9.0 percent in the fourth quarter compared to the same period in
income was $2,771 million, an increase of 16.9 percent year to year. 2010 and the gross profit margin improved 2.1 points with improvement
The combined pre-tax margin improved 2.1 points year to year to in all lines of business. GTS fourth-quarter 2011 pre-tax income
17.5 percent. increased 18.0 percent to $1,930 million with the pre-tax margin
expanding 2.3 points to 18.0 percent, versus the prior year, driven
by productivity and cost management, along with a mix into the
higher margin growth markets.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 41
Global Business Services revenue increased 2.5 percent gross profit margin expanded 0.2 points. Software delivered segment
(2 percent adjusted for currency) to $4,877 million in the fourth quarter pre-tax income of $3,710 million in the fourth quarter, a growth of
of 2011. Application Outsourcing revenue increased 4.7 percent (4 12.5 percent compared to the fourth quarter of 2010, with a pre-tax
percent adjusted for currency), led by strong performance in the margin of 43.7 percent, up 1.4 points.
growth markets. Consulting and Systems Integration had revenue
growth in the fourth quarter of 1.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for Systems and Technology
currency), an improved constant currency growth rate compared to Systems and Technology revenue decreased 7.6 percent (8 percent
the third quarter. Overall GBS revenue continued to be impacted by adjusted for currency) to $5,803 million in the fourth quarter versus
Japan and the Public Sector; total GBS revenue, excluding Japan the same period in 2010. The year-to-year decline reflects very strong
and the Public sector, increased 8.1 percent (9 percent adjusted for growth in the fourth quarter of 2010 of over 20 percent, driven by
currency) in the fourth quarter of 2011. Although, revenue declines mainframe growth of nearly 70 percent. System z revenue decreased
in Japan and the Public Sector continued in the fourth quarter, 31.2 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) and MIPS (millions
performance in the Public Sector improved compared to the prior of instructions per second) shipments decreased 4 percent year to
two quarters of 2011. GBS gross profit increased 7.2 percent in the year. The decline in revenue was a result of the strong fourth quarter
fourth quarter and gross profit margin expanded 1.3 points versus of 2010 when the company successfully launched its zEnterprise
the prior year. GBS segment pre-tax income increased 14.4 percent 196 server. Power Systems revenue increased 6.3 percent (6 percent
to $841 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 with pre-tax margin adjusted for currency) and gained share. This reflected 15 consecutive
expanding 1.8 points to 16.6 percent. quarters of share gains in Power Systems. In the fourth quarter, the
company had over 350 competitive displacements resulting in over
Software $350 million of business; approximately 60 percent of this business
Software revenue increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for was from Hewlett Packard with most of the balance coming from
currency) to $7,648 million in the fourth quarter. Key branded Oracle/Sun. This was the strongest quarter of competitive
middleware revenue increased 11.3 percent (11 percent adjusted for displacements since the company started tracking this activity in
currency) year to year. This was the fifth consecutive quarter of 2006. System x revenue decreased 2.5 percent (3 percent adjusted
double-digit revenue growth in key branded middleware along with for currency) in the fourth quarter year to year. Storage revenue
17 consecutive quarters of share gains as the business continues to decreased 1.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
extend its leadership in the middleware market. WebSphere revenue quarter of 2011 versus the comparable period in 2010. Total disk
increased 21.4 percent (21 percent adjusted for currency) in the revenue decreased 1 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and
fourth quarter of 2011 year to year and gained share. Each of tape revenue decreased 4 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency)
WebSphere’s five product areas had revenue growth of 10 percent in the fourth quarter. When combined with the storage software
or higher in the fourth quarter including the Smarter Commerce revenue growth of 30 percent, total storage revenue increased
offerings, which were up over 25 percent. Information Management 5 percent in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Retail
revenue increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) in Stores Solutions revenue increased 8.9 percent (9 percent adjusted
the fourth quarter year to year and gained share. Distributed Database for currency) in the fourth quarter and continued to gain share.
software revenue grew double digits in the fourth quarter, led by Systems and Technology gross margin decreased 3.1 points versus
performance from the Netezza offerings which were up nearly 70 the prior year driven primarily by product mix (approximately 2 points).
percent. Revenue from business analytics software offerings, most Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased 32.6 percent
of which are part of Information Management, continued to outpace to $790 million in the fourth quarter and pre-tax margin decreased
the market with double-digit growth in the fourth quarter. The 4.8 points to 13.2 percent.
acquisition of Algorithmics in the fourth quarter of 2011 further
strengthens the business analytics and optimization offerings by Global Financing
providing risk analytics capabilities that help customers make Global Financing revenue of $548 million decreased 12.9 percent
informed decisions. Tivoli revenue increased 13.7 percent (14 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency), driven primarily by a decrease in
adjusted for currency) year over year in the fourth quarter and gained used equipment sales revenue. The Global Financing segment
share, driven by Storage software growth of 30 percent (30 percent fourth-quarter pre-tax income decreased 9.1 percent to $514 million
adjusted for currency). In addition, Security solutions had revenue and the pre-tax margin declined 0.9 points to 46.1 percent.
growth of 15 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency). With the
recent acquisition of Q1 Labs, the company can now offer clients a
new level of intelligence around security to enable them to better
predict, prevent and detect all types of security threats. Rational
revenue increased 3.7 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) in
the fourth quarter and gained share, driven by strong performance
in Telelogic. Software gross profit increased 8.9 percent and the

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion
42 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue Total expense and other income increased 2.4 percent year to
Total geographic revenue increased 1.9 percent (2 percent adjusted year with an expense-to-revenue-ratio of 25.3 percent compared
for currency) to $28,772 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 compared to 25.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010. The increase in total
to the prior year. Revenue in the major markets increased 0.5 percent expense and other income was primarily driven by the company’s
(flat adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter. In North America, acquisitions over the past 12 months (1 point) and higher base
revenue performance was led by Canada which was up 11.6 percent expense (1 point). There was effectively no year-to-year impact
(13 percent adjusted for currency). The U.S. was up 1.1 percent from the combination of currency translation and hedging dynamics
compared to a strong fourth quarter of 2010, which increased in the fourth quarter. Within Selling, general and administrative
10 percent driven by mainframe performance. In Europe, the revenue expense, accounts receivable provisions increased approximately
growth rate at constant currency improved sequentially compared $55 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 year to year due to higher
to the third quarter of 2011. Germany returned to growth in the receivables balances and the European credit environment. The
quarter with revenue up 2.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). accounts receivable reserve coverage at December 31, 2011 decreased
Revenue increased in Spain 8.2 percent (9 percent adjusted for 30 basis points compared to December 31, 2010, and decreased
currency) and in the U.K. 8.4 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency). 20 basis points since September 2011.
This was the fifth and ninth consecutive quarters of constant
currency revenue growth in Spain and the U.K, respectively. Growth Cash Flow
markets revenue increased 7.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for The company generated $7,097 million in cash flow from operations,
currency) in the fourth quarter and outpaced growth in the major an increase of $302 million compared to the fourth quarter of 2010,
markets by 8 points on a constant currency basis. The growth markets primarily driven by higher net income. Net cash used in investing
gained 4 points of share in the fourth quarter. Revenue performance activities of $3,505 million decreased $577 million, primarily due
was broad based with double-digit constant currency revenue growth to less cash used for acquisitions ($1,340 million), partially offset
in 40 growth market countries. In the BRIC countries, combined by a net reduction of $762 million from purchases and sales of
revenue increased 9.6 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency). marketable securities and other investments in 2011 versus 2010. Net
cash used in financing activities of $2,810 million increased $950
Expense million compared to the prior year, primarily due to a net decrease
in cash from common stock transactions ($704 million).
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 19 million shares
Percent/ of its common stock. The weighted-average number of diluted common
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2011 2010 Change shares outstanding in the fourth quarter of 2011 was 1,188.7 million
Total consolidated expense compared with 1,258.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2010.
and other (income) $7,448 $7,271 2.4%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (72) (75) (4.2)
Acquisition-related charges (13) (23) (42.8)
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income 25 61 (58.9)
Total operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other (income) $7,388 $7,235 2.1%
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue ratio 25.3% 25.1% 0.2 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 25.1% 24.9% 0.1 pts.

===== PAGE 45 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 43
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $14,722 $ 81 $ (10) $14,793
Gross profit margin 49.9% 0.3 pts. (0.0) pts. 50.2%
SG&A $ 6,076 $ (82) $ 2 $ 5,996
RD&E 1,555 0 23 1,578
Other (income) and expense (44) (2) 0 (46)
Total expense and other (income) 7,448 (85) 25 7,388
Pre-tax income 7,274 166 (35) 7,405
Pre-tax income margin 24.7% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 25.1%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,784 $ 47 $ (24) $ 1,808
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.2) pts. 24.4%
Net income $ 5,490 $ 119 $ (12) $ 5,597
Net income margin 18.6% 0.4 pts. (0.0) pts. 19.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 4.62 $0.10 $(0.01) $ 4.71
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2010: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $14,227 $ 82 $ (60) $14,249
Gross profit margin 49.0% 0.3 pts. (0.2) pts. 49.1%
SG&A $ 5,951 $ (95) $ 28 $ 5,884
RD&E 1,578 0 33 1,611
Other (income) and expense (42) (2) 0 (44)
Total expense and other (income) 7,271 (98) 61 7,235
Pre-tax income 6,956 180 (121) 7,015
Pre-tax income margin 24.0% 0.6 pts. (0.4) pts. 24.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,698 $ 10 $ (47) $ 1,661
Effective tax rate 24.4% (0.5) pts. (0.3) pts. 23.7%
Net income $ 5,257 $ 170 $ (74) $ 5,354
Net income margin 18.1% 0.6 pts. (0.3) pts. 18.5%
Diluted earnings per share $ 4.18 $0.14 $(0.06) $ 4.25
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion
44 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Prior Year in Review Snapshot
In 2010, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the
by improved revenue performance, continued margin expansion,
company’s financial performance in 2010 as compared to 2009.
solid cash generation and record levels of net income and earnings
The 2010 and 2009 segment results and performance have been
per share. The financial performance continued to be driven by
reclassified to reflect operating earnings, consistent with the
the strength of the company’s global model and the results of the
company’s current management and measurement system as
strategic transformation of the business.
described on page 18. For a detailed discussion of prior year
For the year, the company delivered $11.52 in diluted earnings
performance, see the 2010 Annual Report.
per share, an increase of 15.1 percent year to year, and $11.67 in
diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share, an increase of
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts) 16.4 percent year to year. As reported, this was the eighth consecutive
Yr.-to-Yr.
year of double-digit earnings per share growth. In 2007, the company
Percent/
Margin developed a road map for growth with an earnings per share objective
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
for 2010 of $10 to $11 per share as reported. With its performance
Revenue $ 99,870 $ 95,758 4.3%*
in 2010, the company exceeded the low end of its objective by $1.52
Gross profit margin 46.1% 45.7% 0.3 pts.
per share and the high end by $0.52 per share. The resilience of the
Total expense and other income $ 26,291 $ 25,647 2.5% business model enabled the company to exceed its objective even
Total expense and other while managing through the severe global recession.
income-to-revenue ratio 26.3% 26.8% (0.5) pts.
Total revenue for 2010 increased 4.3 percent (3 percent adjusted
Income before income taxes $ 19,723 $ 18,138 8.7% for currency) compared to 2009; excluding the divested Product
Provision for income taxes 4,890 4,713 3.8% Lifecycle Management (PLM) operations, total revenue increased
Net income $ 14,833 $ 13,425 10.5% 4.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). Revenue from the
Net income margin 14.9% 14.0% 0.8 pts. growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for
Earnings per share of common stock currency) with performance led by the BRIC countries of Brazil,
Assuming dilution $ 11.52 $ 10.01 15.1% Russia, India and China which increased 18 percent, adjusted for
currency. Within the growth markets, 40 countries grew revenue
Weighted-average shares outstanding
at a double-digit rate at constant currency in 2010 compared to
Assuming dilution 1,287.4 1,341.4 (4.0)%
the prior year. Segment performance was driven by Systems and
Assets** $113,452 $109,022 4.1%
Technology which increased 11.0 percent year to year (11 percent
Liabilities** $ 90,279 $ 86,267 4.7%
adjusted for currency) and Software which increased 5.1 percent
Equity** $ 23,172 $ 22,755 1.8%
(5 percent adjusted for currency). Software revenue, excluding PLM,
* 3.3 percent adjusted for currency. grew 8.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). Within Software,
** At December 31. performance was led by key branded middleware which increased
10.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
prior year. Systems and Technology revenue growth was driven by
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
new product introductions and very strong performance in the
earnings for 2010 and 2009.
growth markets which increased 20 percent (19 percent adjusted
for currency).
($ in millions except per share amounts)
The gross profit margin increased 0.3 points versus 2009 to
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent 46.1 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin increased
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
0.5 points to 46.1 percent. The margin improvement reflected the
Net income as reported $14,833 $13,425 10.5% improved business mix, operating leverage and the continued
Non-operating adjustments success of the company’s productivity initiatives. This was the
(net of tax)
seventh consecutive year of improvement in the gross profit margin.
Acquisition-related charges 443 357 24.1 In 2010, the company continued to invest for innovation and
Non-operating retirement-related growth. These investments supported the introduction of the new
costs/(income) (253) (330) (23.5)
System z mainframe and POWER7 products and the success in the
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $15,023 $13,452 11.7% performance of the growth markets. The company also invested
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $6 billion to acquire 17 companies, adding significant new capabilities
earnings per share $ 11.67 $ 10.03 16.4%
to support its growth initiatives.
* See page 54 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 47 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 45
Total expense and other income increased 2.5 percent in 2010 Diluted earnings per share improved 15.1 percent reflecting the
versus 2009. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other income strong growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock
increased 2.3 percent in 2010 versus 2009. The year-to-year drivers repurchase program. In 2010, the company repurchased approximately
for both categories were approximately: 118 million shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share
of $11.52 increased $1.51 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP)
• Base expense (2) points diluted earnings per share of $11.67 increased $1.64 versus 2009
• C urrency* 1 point driven by the following factors:
• A cquisitions** 3 points
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. • Revenue increase at actual rates $0.43
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. • Margin expansion $0.74
• Common stock repurchases $0.47
Pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the pre-tax margin was
19.7 percent, an increase of 0.8 points versus 2009. Net income Workforce rebalancing charges were recorded in the first quarter
increased 10.5 percent reflecting an improvement in the tax rate. of 2009 and 2010. The PLM and Geodis divestiture transactions
The effective tax rate was 24.8 percent compared with 26.0 percent were recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of
in the prior year. Net income margin improved 0.8 points to 14.9 percent. 2009, respectively. These transactions impacted the year-to-year
Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income increased 9.6 percent and segment results for 2010 compared to 2009. Workforce rebalancing
the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 19.9 percent, an charges were incurred in every segment while the PLM transaction
increase of 1.0 points versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) gain was recorded in Software and the Geodis transaction gain was
earnings increased 11.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) recorded in the following segments: Global Technology Services
earnings margin of 15.0 percent increased 1.0 points versus the prior ($81 million), Global Business Services ($46 million), Software
year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.4 percent ($106 million) and Systems and Technology ($64 million). In the
versus 25.8 percent in 2009. following segment analysis and in the Global Financing analysis
on pages 63 and 64, each segment’s pre-tax income and pre-tax
margin for 2010 and 2009 are presented on an as-reported basis
and on a basis normalized for these transactions in both years to
provide a better perspective of the underlying operational performance
of the segments.

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion
46 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2010 and 2009 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an
arm’s length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2010* 2009* Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $38,201 $37,347 2.3% 0.7%
Gross margin 34.5% 34.8% (0.3) pts.
Global Business Services 18,223 17,653 3.2% 1.6%
Gross margin 28.0% 27.8% 0.3 pts.
Software 22,485 21,396 5.1% 4.8%
Gross margin 87.9% 86.7% 1.2 pts.
Systems and Technology 17,973 16,190 11.0% 11.1%
Gross margin 38.1% 37.5% 0.7 pts.
Global Financing 2,238 2,302 (2.8)% (4.3)%
Gross margin 51.3% 47.5% 3.8 pts.
Other 750 869 (13.7)% (13.8)%
Gross margin (8.6)% 17.5% (26.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $99,870 $95,758 4.3% 3.3%
Total consolidated gross profit $46,014 $43,785 5.1%
Total consolidated gross margin 46.1% 45.7% 0.3 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangibles assets 260 204 27.5%
Acquisition-related charges 0 — NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) (204) (259) (21.4)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $46,070 $43,730 5.4%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 46.1% 45.7% 0.5 pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 49 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 47
Global Services Services backlog at actual currency rates was $142 billion at
The Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, delivered combined December 31, 2010, an increase of $5 billion ($4 billion adjusted for
revenue of $56,424 million, an increase of 2.6 percent (1 percent currency) compared to the December 31, 2009 level. Backlog for
adjusted for currency) in 2010 when compared to 2009. Services the outsourcing businesses at actual currency rates was estimated
revenue performance at constant currency improved over the course to be $97 billion at December 31, 2010, an increase of $3 billion
of 2010 led by the transaction businesses. In the first and second ($1 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2009. The
quarter, revenue, adjusted for currency, decreased 2 percent Global Services segments delivered a combined pre-tax profit of
and increased 1 percent, respectively, versus the prior year periods. $8,044 million in 2010, a growth of 0.8 percent versus 2009 with a
In the third and fourth quarters, revenue increased 2 percent, pre-tax margin of 13.7 percent, down 0.2 points year to year.
at constant currency, in each period. The estimated Global
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $56,424 $55,000 2.6% 1.0%
Global Technology Services $38,201 $37,347 2.3% 0.7%
Outsourcing 22,241 21,620 2.9 1.1
Integrated Technology Services 8,714 8,771 (0.6) (1.8)
Maintenance 7,250 6,956 4.2 2.6
Global Business Services $18,223 $17,653 3.2% 1.6%
Global Technology Services revenue of $38,201 million increased ($ in millions)
2.3 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
The rate of year-to-year revenue growth, adjusted for currency, Margin
demonstrated an improving trend over the second half of 2010. For the year ended December 31: 2010* 2009* Change
In the first half, revenue, adjusted for currency, was flat versus the Global Services
prior year, and in the second half, revenue increased 1 percent, at Global Technology Services
constant currency, compared to the prior year period. GTS Outsourcing External gross profit $13,194 $13,014 1.4%
revenue increased 2.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in External gross profit margin 34.5% 34.8% (0.3) pts.
2010 with fairly consistent year-to-year growth, adjusted for currency, Pre-tax income $ 5,499 $ 5,482 0.3%
throughout the year. Revenue growth was led by performance in the Pre-tax margin 13.9% 14.2% (0.2) pts.
growth markets, up 18.4 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency),
Pre-tax income—normalized** $ 5,771 $ 5,516 4.6%
as the outsourcing offerings help clients build out their IT infrastructures.
Pre-tax margin—normalized 14.6% 14.2% 0.4 pts.
Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue decreased 0.6 percent
Global Business Services
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. ITS revenue
External gross profit $ 5,106 $ 4,902 4.2%
performance, adjusted for currency, improved over the course of 2010
External gross profit margin 28.0% 27.8% 0.3 pts.
and the growth markets had good year-to-year growth, up 8 percent
at constant currency, throughout 2010. Maintenance revenue increased Pre-tax income $ 2,546 $ 2,501 1.8%
4.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2009 with Pre-tax margin 13.4% 13.5% (0.1) pts.
consistent performance, at constant currency, throughout the year. Pre-tax income—normalized+ $ 2,674 $ 2,577 3.7%
Global Business Services revenue increased 3.2 percent Pre-tax margin—normalized 14.1% 13.9% 0.2 pts.
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 and delivered growth
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
in outsourcing and in the transactional businesses: consulting ** Excludes $273 million and $115 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
and systems integration. Revenue growth was strongest in North quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and ($81) million related to the Geodis gain
in the first quarter of 2009.
America, up 8.5 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and was
+ Excludes $128 million and $123 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
broad based across the industry sectors with Financial Services, quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and ($46) million related to the Geodis gain
Distribution, Industrial, Public and General Business each delivering in the first quarter of 2009.
growth on a constant currency basis. GBS had good performance
in its growth initiatives in 2010, with revenue and transactional
signings growth in the growth markets and revenue growth of over
35 percent in business analytics. GBS added over 4,000 consultants
in 2010 and had over 7,800 dedicated consultants in its business
analytics practice at the end of 2010.

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion
48 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit margin declined 0.3 points to 34.5 percent in 2010. GBS gross profit increased 4.2 percent in 2010, in line with
Segment pre-tax profit increased to $5,499 million with a pre-tax revenue growth. Gross profit margin of 28.0 percent increased
margin of 13.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax 0.3 points year to year. Segment pre-tax profit improved 1.8 percent
income in 2010 increased 4.6 percent and margin expanded 0.4 points to $2,546 million with a pre-tax margin decline of 0.1 points year over
to 14.6 percent reflecting the benefits from workforce rebalancing year. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in 2010 increased
and an improved revenue growth trend. 3.7 percent with a pre-tax margin of 14.1 percent, an increase of
0.2 points compared to 2009. Throughout 2010, GBS improved
utilization and delivery excellence, while continuing to invest in globally
integrated capabilities and skills to support growth initiatives.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change Currency
Software external revenue $22,485 $21,396 5.1% 4.8%
Middleware $18,444 $17,125 7.7% 7.5%
Key Branded Middleware 13,876 12,524 10.8 10.7
WebSphere 20.8 20.6
Information Management 8.6 8.3
Lotus (2.3) (2.1)
Tivoli 15.0 15.1
Rational 4.8 4.8
Other middleware 4,568 4,602 (0.7) (1.2)
Operating systems 2,282 2,163 5.5 4.9
Other 1,759 2,108 (16.6) (17.0)
Software revenue of $22,485 million increased 5.1 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Business Integration
(5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to 2009. Adjusting software, which includes the ILOG, Sterling Commerce and Lombardi
for the divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 8.1 percent (8 percent acquisitions, delivered strong revenue growth in 2010, up 33.6 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2010. Software revenue growth continued (33 percent adjusted for currency).
to be led by the key branded middleware products with strong Information Management revenue increased 8.6 percent
performance in the areas of business commerce, business analytics, (8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus the prior year
storage management and business integration. Overall, the Software with revenue growth in both Information Management solutions
business performed well in 2010, delivering over $9 billion in segment and infrastructure offerings. The software business continued to
pre-tax profit, an increase of 12 percent as reported versus 2009. expand its Information Management capabilities through strategic
In addition, the company continued to invest in additional capabilities acquisitions, as the company completed the acquisitions of Netezza,
for the software business through both organic investments and the OpenPages, PSS Systems, Clarity Systems and Initiate Systems.
completion of 13 acquisitions in 2010. Tivoli revenue increased 15.0 percent (15 percent adjusted for
Key branded middleware revenue increased 10.8 percent currency) in 2010 when compared to 2009, with revenue growth in
(11 percent adjusted for currency) and gained market share again in each element of the Integrated Service management strategy—
2010 as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware Systems management, Security and Storage management. Tivoli
market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing provides clients an integrated approach to service management.
branded middleware which accounted for 62 percent of total software Rational revenue increased 4.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for
revenue in 2010, an increase of 3 points from 2009. Adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009.
currency, growth in 2010 was led by growth in WebSphere and Tivoli. Operating systems revenue increased 5.5 percent (5 percent
The Software business continued to benefit from the company’s adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by Power
growth initiatives, with business analytics revenue up year over year. Systems and System x related products.
WebSphere revenue increased 20.8 percent (21 percent adjusted Other software revenue decreased 16.6 percent (17 percent
for currency) in 2010 with strong performance throughout the year. adjusted for currency) due primarily to the divestiture of the PLM
Application Servers software had revenue growth of 12.0 percent operations in the first quarter of 2010.

===== PAGE 51 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 49
($ in millions) Software gross profit of $19,774 million in 2010 increased 6.6 percent
Yr.-to-Yr. versus 2009, driven primarily by the year-to-year growth in software
Percent/
Margin revenue. The improvement in the gross profit margin was primarily
For the year ended December 31: 2010* 2009* Change driven by the divestiture of the lower gross margin PLM revenue.
Software The Software segment delivered $9,466 million of pre-tax profit in
External gross profit $19,774 $18,553 6.6% 2010, an increase of $1,147 million, or 13.8 percent, versus 2009. The
External gross profit margin 87.9% 86.7% 1.2 pts. segment pre-tax profit margin expanded 2.7 points to 37.2 percent.
Pre-tax income $ 9,466 $ 8,319 13.8% On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income increased 9.0 percent
Pre-tax margin 37.2% 34.6% 2.7 pts. and segment pre-tax margin expanded 1.1 points to 35.3 percent.
Pre-tax income-normalized** $ 8,972 $ 8,229 9.0%
Pre-tax margin—normalized 35.3% 34.2% 1.1 pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
** Excludes $98 million and $17 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in
the first quarter of 2010 and $(106) million related to the Geodis gain in the first quarter
of 2009.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $17,973 $16,190 11.0% 11.1%
System z 16.4% 17.7%
Power Systems (8.4) (8.5)
System x 27.5 26.8
Storage 7.6 8.1
Retail Store Solutions 22.4 23.2
Total Systems 9.5 9.6
Microelectronics OEM 24.8 24.7
Systems and Technology revenue increased 11.0 percent (11 percent Power Systems revenue decreased 8.4 percent (9 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. Revenue performance adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. Revenue increased
was driven by double-digit growth in System z, System x, Micro- in the fourth quarter 1.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency)
electronics OEM, Storage disk products and Retail Store Solutions. as the company benefited from new POWER7 products which were
Systems and Technology had very strong performance in the growth introduced late in the third quarter. Although revenue declined in
markets, which grew 20 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency), 2010, Power Systems gained share and continued to be the market
driven by the BRIC countries which increased 29 percent (28 percent share leader. The decrease in revenue was primarily driven by high-
adjusted for currency). The company gained share in high-end servers, end servers which declined 26 percent (27 percent adjusted
while total servers and storage held share. for currency), partially offset by increases in midrange systems of
System z revenue increased 16.4 percent (18 percent adjusted 7 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and blades 7 percent
for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The increase in revenue was driven (7 percent adjusted for currency). The company had over 1,000
by the new mainframe product introduced in the third quarter and competitive unit displacements in 2010, which drove approximately
strong performance in both the growth markets and major markets. $1 billion of business. Approximately 60 percent of these wins came
MIPS (millions of instructions per second) shipments increased from Oracle/Sun UNIX installed accounts and 30 percent from Hewlett-
22 percent in 2010 versus 2009. This performance reflected the Packard installed accounts. In addition, the company also drove x86
value and innovation System z delivers to the company’s clients. The consolidations to Power Systems, with over 100 competitive wins.
new z Enterprise 196 server delivers 40 percent more performance
than the prior generation mainframe, driven by the world’s fastest
processor which operates at more than 5 gigahertz.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion
50 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
System x revenue increased 27.5 percent (27 percent adjusted ($ in millions)
for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. In the growth markets, revenue Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
increased 30 percent versus the prior year. High-end System x revenue Margin
increased 22 percent (21 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 For the year ended December 31: 2010* 2009* Change
versus 2009, while total server revenue increased 27 percent Systems and Technology
(27 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. System x External gross profit $6,856 $6,069 13.0%
blades revenue increased 20 percent (20 percent adjusted for External gross profit margin 38.1% 37.5% 0.7 pts.
currency) versus the prior year. Pre-tax income $1,456 $1,298 12.1%
Storage revenue increased 7.6 percent (8 percent adjusted for Pre-tax margin 7.8% 7.6% 0.2 pts.
currency) in 2010 versus the prior year. In the growth markets, storage Pre-tax income—normalized** $1,513 $1,238 22.2%
revenue grew 21 percent year over year (21 percent adjusted for
Pre-tax margin—normalized 8.1% 7.2% 0.8 pts.
currency). Total disk revenue increased 13 percent (14 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The increase was driven * Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
** Excludes $57 million and $4 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
by strength in enterprise disk products which increased 16.4 percent
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and $(64) million related to the Geodis gain
(17 percent adjusted for currency) led by XIV and DS8000. Through in the first quarter of 2009.
December 2010, XIV added over 975 new customers since the
The increase in external gross profit for 2010 versus 2009 was due
acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2007. Tape revenue declined
to improved operating leverage driven by higher revenue.
6 percent in 2010 versus 2009.
Overall gross margin increased 0.7 points in 2010 versus the prior
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 24.8 percent (25 percent
year. The increase was primarily driven by improved margins in Micro-
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The company had strong
electronics (1.6 points), System x (0.8 points) and Storage (0.3 points),
revenue growth from its OEM customers in networking, game
partially offset by a decline due to revenue mix (0.9 points) and lower
consoles and wireless communications.
margins in Power Systems (0.6 points) and System z (0.5 points).
Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 22.4 percent (23 percent
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased 22.2 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009 as the company extended
in 2010 on a normalized basis when compared to the prior year.
its leadership position as a point of sale provider.
Pre-tax margin increased 0.8 points in 2010 on a normalized basis
versus 2009.
Global Financing
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
segment results.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change Currency
Total revenue $99,870 $95,758 4.3% 3.3%
Geographies $97,060 $93,477 3.8% 2.8%
Americas 42,044 40,184 4.6 3.5
Europe/Middle East/Africa 31,866 32,583 (2.2) 0.8
Asia Pacific 23,150 20,710 11.8 4.7
Major markets 1.1% 1.0%
Growth markets 16.0% 10.9%
BRIC countries 22.8% 18.4%
Total geographic revenue increased 3.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) to $97,060 million in 2010 when compared to 2009, with
constant currency growth in each of the geographic areas and markets. Overall performance was driven by the growth markets.

===== PAGE 53 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 51
Revenue from the major markets increased 1.1 percent (1 percent Total Expense and Other Income
adjusted for currency) and was led by growth in the U.S., the U.K.
($ in millions)
and France. Performance in the major markets improved in the Yr.-to-Yr.
second half of 2010. The major markets grew 0.3 percent (declined Percent/
Margin
1 percent adjusted for currency) in the first half and increased For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
1.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the second half. Total consolidated expense
Revenue from the growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent and other (income) $26,291 $25,647 2.5%
adjusted for currency). The growth markets performance, adjusted Non-operating adjustments
for currency, outpaced the more established major markets by Amortization of acquired
10 points in 2010 and geographic revenue contribution increased to intangible assets (253) (285) (11.3)
21 percent, 2 points higher versus 2009. The combined revenue in Acquisition-related charges (46) (9) NM
the BRIC countries, which represented approximately 40 percent of Non-operating retirement-related
the growth markets in 2010, increased 22.8 percent (18 percent (costs)/income 210 250 (15.9)
adjusted for currency) with growth in each of the four countries Total operating (non-GAAP)
and strong growth in China and Russia. The company continued to expense and other (income) $26,202 $25,603 2.3%
make investments in these markets to drive market expansion Total consolidated
and infrastructure development. The growth markets performance expense-to-revenue ratio 26.3% 26.8% (0.5) pts.
overall was broad based with double-digit growth at constant Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 26.2% 26.7% (0.5) pts.
currency in a total of 40 growth market countries.
Americas revenue increased 4.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for NM—Not meaningful
currency) in 2010. Within the major market countries, the U.S. increased
2.7 percent and Canada increased 10.4 percent (flat adjusted for Total expense and other (income) increased 2.5 percent in 2010
currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets increased compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense
15.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) led by Brazil with and other (income) increased 2.3 percent in 2010 versus 2009. The
growth of 20.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency). key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and other
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 2.2 percent (income) for both expense presentations were approximately:
(increased 1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to
• Acquisitions* 3 points
2009. In the major market countries, revenue increased in the U.K.
• Currency** 1 point
4.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency), while revenue declined
• Base expense (2) points
in Spain 5.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency), Germany
7.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and Italy 8.7 percent * Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
(4 percent adjusted for currency). In France, revenue declined 1.8 percent ** Reflects impacts of tranlation and hedging programs.
as reported, but increased 4 percent at constant currency. Russia
The company’s expense-to-revenue ratio improved in both presentations
revenue increased 49.0 percent (48 percent adjusted for currency).
in 2010 versus 2009. The increase in total expense and other income
Asia Pacific revenue increased 11.8 percent (5 percent adjusted
was primarily driven by the company’s acquisitions and the effects
for currency) year over year. Asia Pacific growth market countries
of currency.
increased 18.3 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by
Base expense improved approximately 2 points in both
growth in China and India. China revenue increased 23.4 percent
presentations in 2010 when compared to the prior year. The company
(23 percent adjusted for currency) and India revenue increased
has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency and driving
19.2 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue
productivity across the business. Savings from productivity initiatives
increased 5.0 percent as reported but declined 2 percent adjusted
result in improved profitability and enables continued investments
for currency in 2010 compared to the prior year.
in innovation and key growth initiatives.
OEM revenue of $2,811 million in 2010 increased 23.3 percent
Examples of the company’s investments in 2010 include:
(23 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2009 driven by
growth in the Microelectronics OEM business.
• Industry sales skills to support Smarter Planet
• Sales capabilities for business analytics, including
the establishment of eight analytics solution centers
• Development, sales and marketing to support new high-end
technology solutions in mainframes and POWER7
• Sales resources and sales enablement to drive growth
market performance
• Acquisition of 17 companies adding significant capabilities
For additional information regarding total expense and other income,
see the following analyses by category.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion
52 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
Selling, general and administrative Other (income) and expense
expense Foreign currency transaction
Selling, general and losses/(gains) $ 303 $ (1) NM
administrative—other $18,585 $17,872 4.0% (Gains)/losses on
Advertising and promotional expense 1,337 1,255 6.6 derivative instruments (239) (12) NM
Workforce rebalancing charges 641 474 35.3 Interest income (92) (94) (2.3)%
Retirement-related costs 494 503 (1.7) Net (gains)/losses from securities
and investment assets 31 112 (72.1)
Amortization of acquired
intangibles assets 253 285 (11.3) Other (790) (357) 121.2
Stock-based compensation 488 417 16.9 Total consolidated other
Bad debt expense 40 147 (72.5) (income) and expense $(787) $(351) 124.5%
Non-operating adjustment
Total consolidated selling, general
and administrative expense $21,837 $20,952 4.2% Acquisition-related charges (4) (1) 277.4
Non-operating adjustments Operating (non-GAAP) other
Amortization of acquired (income) and expense $(791) $(352) 125.0%
intangible assets (253) (285) (11.3)
NM—Not meaningful
Acquisition-related charges (41) (8) NM
Non-operating retirement-related Other (income) and expense was income of $787 million in 2010, an
(costs)/income 84 127 (33.8) increase in income of $436 million year to year. The increase in
Operating (non-GAAP) income was primarily driven by several key factors reflected in Other
selling, general and in the table above: the net gain from the PLM transaction in the first
administrative expense $21,628 $20,787 4.0%
quarter of 2010 ($591 million); a net gain associated with the disposition
NM—Not meaningful of a joint venture in third quarter of 2010 ($57 million) versus a gain
from the divestiture of the core logistics operations to Geodis in the
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense increased first quarter of 2009 ($298 million); and a provision for losses related
4.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. to a joint venture investment ($119 million) recorded in the second
Overall, the increase was driven by acquisition-related spending quarter of 2009. In addition, foreign currency rate volatility drove higher
(3 points) and currency impacts (1 point), while base expense was foreign currency transaction losses ($304 million) and increased gains
essentially flat. Workforce reductions expense increased $167 million on derivative instruments ($227 million). Operating (non-GAAP) other
due primarily to actions taken in the first quarter of 2010, with the (income) and expense reflected increased income of $439 million in
majority of the spending in Europe and Asia Pacific. Bad debt expense 2010 compared to 2009 driven by the same factors.
decreased $107 million reflecting the improved credit environment.
The allowance for credit losses coverage rate at December 31, 2010 Research, Development and Engineering
was 1.8 percent, a decrease of 20 basis points from year-end 2009.
($ in millions)
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense increased 4.0 percent
Yr.-to-Yr.
(3 percent adjusted for currency) primarily driven by the same factors. Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
Total consolidated research,
development and engineering $6,026 $5,820 3.5%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income 126 123 2.6
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
development and engineering $6,152 $5,943 3.5%
The company continued to invest in research and development,
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities
and to extend its technology leadership. Total research, development
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 3.5 percent in 2010
versus 2009, primarily driven by acquisitions (up 2 points) and

===== PAGE 55 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 53
currency impacts (up 1 point). RD&E investments represented Financial Position
6.0 percent of total revenue in 2010, compared to 6.1 percent in 2009. Key drivers in the company’s balance sheet and total cash flows in
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased 3.5 percent in 2010 2010 compared to 2009 are highlighted below.
compared to the prior year driven by the same factors. Total assets increased $4,430 million ($3,609 million adjusted
for currency) from December 31, 2009, driven by:
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
• Increased goodwill ($4,946 million) and intangible assets
($ in millions)
($975 million) driven by 2010 acquisitions;
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent • Higher level of total receivables ($1,337 million) and increased
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change
total other assets ($679 million); partially offset by
Sales and other transfers of
• Decreases in cash and cash equivalents ($1,522 million)
intellectual property $ 203 $ 228 (10.8)%
and marketable securities ($800 million); and
Licensing/royalty-based fees 312 370 (15.6)
• Lower total deferred taxes ($1,140 million).
Custom development income 638 579 10.3
Total $1,154 $1,177 (1.9)% Total liabilities increased $4,012 million ($3,673 million adjusted for
currency) from December 31, 2009 driven by:
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing of • Higher total debt ($2,525 million);
divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the • Increase in deferred income ($839 million); and an
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no • Increase in compensation and benefits ($523 million).
significant individual IP transactions in 2010 or 2009.
Total equity of $23,172 million increased $418 million from the prior
Interest Expense year-end balance as a result of:
($ in millions)
• Higher retained earnings ($11,632 million);
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent • Increase in common stock ($3,608 million);
For the year ended December 31: 2010 2009 Change • Increase in foreign currency translation adjustments
Interest expense ($643 million); and an
Total $368 $402 (8.5)% • Increase in net unrealized gains on hedge of cash flow
derivatives ($385 million); partially offset by an
The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower average
• Increase in treasury stock ($14,918 million); and
interest rates in 2010 versus 2009, partially offset by higher average
• Decrease in retirement-related items ($992 million).
debt balances in 2010 versus 2009. Total debt at December 31, 2010
was $28.6 billion; an increase of $2.5 billion from the prior year-end The company generated $19,549 million in cash flow from operations,
position. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the a decrease of $1,224 million, compared to 2009, primarily driven by
Consolidated Statement of Earnings if the related external borrowings a decrease in cash from total receivables ($2,620 million), partially
are to support the Global Financing external business. Overall interest offset by the increase in net income ($1,408 million). Net cash used
expense for 2010 was $923 million, a decrease of $185 million in investing activities of $8,507 million was $1,778 million higher than
versus 2009. 2009, primarily due to increased acquisitions ($4,728 million),
decreased cash from divestitures ($345 million) and increased net
Income Taxes capital spending ($299 million), partially offset by the year-to-year
The effective tax rate for 2010 was 24.8 percent, compared with net impacts related to marketable securities and other investments
26.0 percent in 2009. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2010 ($3,753 million).
was 24.4 percent compared to 25.8 percent in 2009. The 1.2 point Net cash used in financing activities of $12,429 million was
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven $2,271 million lower versus 2009, primarily due to the net benefit
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax income and incentives from debt ($9,812 million) and an increase in cash from other
(2.5 points), the increased utilization of foreign tax credits (4.1 points) common stock transactions ($722 million), partially offset by higher
and the completion in 2010 of the U.S. federal income tax examination common stock repurchases ($7,946 million).
for the years 2006 and 2007 including the associated reserve
redeterminations (6.4 points). These benefits were partially offset by
tax charges related to certain intercompany payments made by foreign
subsidiaries (6.6 points), the tax impact of certain business restructuring
transactions (2.7 points) and the tax costs associated with the
intercompany licensing of certain intellectual property (2.9 points).
The remaining items were individually insignificant.

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion
54 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2010: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $46,014 $ 260 $ (204) $46,070
Gross profit margin 46.1% 0.3 pts. (0.2) pts. 46.1%
SG&A $21,837 $(294) $ 84 $21,628
RD&E 6,026 0 126 6,152
Other (income) and expense (787) (4) 0 (791)
Total expense and other (income) 26,291 (298) 210 26,202
Pre-tax income 19,723 558 (414) 19,867
Pre-tax income margin 19.7% 0.6 pts. (0.4) pts. 19.9%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,890 $ 116 $ (162) $ 4,844
Effective tax rate 24.8% (0.1) pts. (0.3) pts. 24.4%
Net income $14,833 $ 443 $ (253) $15,023
Net income margin 14.9% 0.4 pts. (0.3) pts. 15.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 11.52 $0.34 $(0.20) $ 11.67
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
related related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2009: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $43,785 $ 204 $ (259) $43,730
Gross profit margin 45.7% 0.2 pts. (0.3) pts. 45.7%
SG&A $20,952 $(293) $ 127 $20,787
RD&E 5,820 0 123 5,943
Other (income) and expense (351) (1) 0 (352)
Total expense and other (income) 25,647 (294) 250 25,603
Pre-tax income 18,138 498 (509) 18,126
Pre-tax income margin 18.9% 0.5 pts. (0.5) pts. 18.9%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,713 $ 141 $ (179) $ 4,675
Effective tax rate 26.0% 0.1pts. (0.3) pts. 25.8%
Net income $13,425 $ 357 $ (330) $13,452
Net income margin 14.0% 0.4 pts. (0.3) pts. 14.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 10.01 $0.27 $(0.25) $ 10.03
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 57 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 55
Other Information not expected, even if new signings and base growth were flat in
2012, then 70 percent of the 3 percent would generate 2 points of
Looking Forward
revenue growth in total Services. The company demonstrated in
In 2011, the company delivered revenue of $106.9 billion, a year-to-
2011 that it could deliver double-digit pre-tax income growth on that
year increase of 7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), net
revenue base and expects in 2012 to execute a similar strategy
income of $15.9 billion, up 6.9 percent and earnings per share of
to drive for double-digit profit growth again in the Services
$13.06, an increase of 13.4 percent compared to 2010. Operating
business. The Systems and Technology business will face a tough
(non-GAAP) earnings per share was $13.44, an increase of 15.2 percent
comparison in the first half of 2012 driven primarily by the System z
versus the prior year. The 2011 results put the company well on track
mainframe product cycle performance in the first half of 2011. With
to its 2015 operating earnings per share road map objective.
new product announcements expected in 2012, by the second half
The company measures the success of its business model over
of the year, the company expects Systems and Technology to return
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s
to mid single-digit revenue growth and double-digit profit growth.
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective
Within its EPS expectation for 2012, the company expects profit
of optimizing long-term performance.
growth to be slightly skewed—one to two points—in the second
In May 2010, the company met with investors and introduced a
half of the year compared to the first half. This differentiation is driven
new road map for earnings per share in 2015. The objective of the
by the expectations for the Systems and Technology business
new road map for growth is to achieve at least $20 of operating
discussed above. Overall, the company’s expectation for 2012
(non-GAAP) earnings per diluted share in 2015. Consistent with
is consistent with its business model: revenue growth, margin
the prior road map, the company has identified the major drivers
expansion driven by a mix to software and continued productivity
of financial performance: revenue growth, margin expansion and
and prudent use of cash to drive investments, acquisitions and share
common stock share repurchase. The revenue growth will come
repurchase. The company will continue to improve its portfolio
from a combination of base revenue growth, a shift to faster
through acquisitions and divestitures and will continue to invest in
growing businesses and from acquisitions closed between 2010
market opportunities and drive productivity. The company will
and 2015. The contribution from margin expansion will be driven
continue to rebalance its workforce to opportunities and skills aligned
by the mix of higher margin businesses and enterprise productivity.
with its key investments and hire resources to drive growth initiatives.
The company will also continue to return value to its shareholders,
The company expects a higher level of workforce rebalancing
with approximately $50 billion of share repurchase and $20 billion
charges in 2012, similar to the amount incurred in 2010. The company
of dividends expected during the road map period. Overall, the
expects to offset this expense within net income consistent with its
company expects fairly balanced contribution from revenue growth,
earnings expectation for 2012.
margin expansion and share repurchase.
The economy could impact the credit quality of the company’s
Looking forward, the company expects continued opportunity
receivables, and therefore the allowance for credit losses. The
in the growth markets and in the higher value solutions, including
company will continue to apply its rigorous credit policies and analysis,
business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud computing, where the
and will also continue to monitor the current economic environment,
company believes its enterprise clients will continue to focus. The
particularly in Europe. At December 31, 2011, total receivables in
company is confident in its ability to continue to leverage its business
Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece and Spain were approximately $2.6
model to expand margin, grow profit, generate cash and return value
billion, net of allowances, and represented approximately 7 percent of
to shareholders. In January 2012, the company disclosed that it is
total net trade and financing accounts receivables. In the fourth quarter
expecting GAAP earnings of at least $14.16 and operating (non-
of 2011, the company increased its allowance for credit losses and will
GAAP) earnings of at least $14.85 per diluted share for the full year
continue to monitor potential exposures in these countries in
2012. The operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation
conjunction with the application of its credit policies.
excludes acquisition-related charges of $0.43 per share and non-
The company expects 2012 pre-tax retirement-related plan
operating retirement-related costs of $0.26 per share. This
cost to be approximately $2.3 billion, an increase of approximately
expectation results in an increase year to year of 8 percent in GAAP
$500 million compared to 2011. This estimate reflects current pension
earnings per share and an increase of 10 percent year to year in
plan assumptions at December 31, 2011. Within total retirement-
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share which keeps the company
related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan cost is expected
on track to its 2015 objective.
to be approximately $1.9 billion, approximately flat versus 2011.
From a segment perspective, the Software business delivered
Non-operating retirement-related plan cost is expected to be
excellent results in 2011 and goes into 2012 with momentum and a
approximately $0.4 billion versus income of $0.1 billion in 2011.
strong set of opportunities. The company’s acquisitions in both 2010
See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 121 to 135 for
and in 2011 performed well in 2011 and contributed to the Software
additional information.
business performance. The company expects the Software business
Effective January 1, 2012, the company will implement a new
to generate double-digit pre-tax income growth in 2012. Within Global
accounting standard issued by the Financial Accounting Standards
Services, the company expects approximately 3 percent revenue
Board which amends existing guidance and disclosure for fair value
growth from the backlog and this would represent approximately
measurements. The company has evaluated the new guidance and
70 percent of the services revenue for the full year. The balance of
does not expect a material impact on the consolidated financial results.
the revenue would come from new signings and base growth. While
See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on page 87 for additional information.

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion
56 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $16.1 billion presentation on page 73 and highlights causes and events underlying
and $20.8 billion per year over the past five years. The company sources and uses of cash in that format on page 36. For purposes
provides for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining of running its business, the company manages, monitors and analyzes
an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, a cash flows in a different format.
committed global credit facility and other committed and uncommitted Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the
lines of credit worldwide. The following table provides a summary of company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evaluate
the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2007 strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and need
through 2011. to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term under
GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow
amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The company
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the
($ in billions)
change in Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures,
2011 2010 2009 2008 2007
including the investment in software. As discussed on page 24, a
Net cash from
key objective of the Global Financing business is to generate strong
operating activities $19.8 $19.5 $20.8 $18.8 $16.1
returns on equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a
Cash and short-term
financing business. Accordingly, management considers Global
marketable securities $11.9 $11.7 $14.0 $12.9 $16.1
Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working
Committed global
credit facilities $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securities operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by the
at December 31, 2011 appear in the following table and remain company as free cash flow.
unchanged from December 31, 2010. The company’s debt securities From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in
do not contain any acceleration clauses which could change the 2011, free cash flow was $16.6 billion, an increase of $0.3 billion
scheduled maturities of the obligation. In addition, the company does compared to 2010; excluding the impact of higher net income tax
not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its debt covenants or payments driven by audit settlements in 2011, compared to the prior
documentation, which would allow the holders to declare an event year, free cash flow would have increased year to year by approximately
of default and seek to accelerate payments thereunder in the event $1.1 billion, which approximates the company’s net income growth
of a change in credit rating. The company’s contractual agreements for 2011.
governing derivative instruments contain standard market clauses Over the past five years, the company generated over $74 billion
which can trigger the termination of the agreement if the company’s in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested over
credit rating were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2011, $16 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $81 billion to
the fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position was shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. The amount
$531 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is subject of prospective returns to shareholders in the form of dividends and
to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on the level of the share repurchases will vary based upon several factors including
company’s outstanding instruments and market conditions. The each year’s operating results, capital expenditure requirements,
company has no other contractual arrangements that, in the event research and development investments and acquisitions, as well as
of a change in credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect the factors discussed below.
on its financial position or liquidity. The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2011, the Board of
Moody’s Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock dividend
Standard Investors Fitch
from $0.65 to $0.75 per share.
& Poor’s Service Ratings
Senior long-term debt A+ Aa3 A+
Commercial paper A-1 Prime-1 F1

===== PAGE 59 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 57
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 19.8 $ 19.5 $20.8 $ 18.8 $ 16.1
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables (0.8) (0.7) 1.9 (0.0) (1.3)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Global Financing receivables 20.7 20.3 18.9 18.8 17.4
Capital expenditures, net (4.1) (4.0) (3.7) (4.5) (5.0)
Free cash flow 16.6 16.3 15.1 14.3 12.4
Acquisitions (1.8) (5.9) (1.2) (6.3) (1.0)
Divestitures 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.1 0.3
Share repurchase (15.0) (15.4) (7.4) (10.6) (18.8)
Dividends (3.5) (3.2) (2.9) (2.6) (2.1)
Non-Global Financing debt 1.7 2.3 (4.7) (3.2) 10.9
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and Global Financing debt) 2.3 3.5 1.7 5.0 3.8
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities $ 0.3 $ (2.3) $ 1.1 $ (3.2) $ 5.5
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in operating its current domestic operations and obligations, including investing
results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. The
adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding requirements company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, and,
during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the in those circumstances where the company has additional cash
timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such an adverse requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity options
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more available. These options include the ability to borrow funds at
completely described in note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” reasonable interest rates, utilizing its committed global credit facility,
on pages 112 to 114. With respect to pension funding, in 2011, the repatriating certain foreign earnings and calling intercompany loans
company contributed $798 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit that are in place with certain foreign subsidiaries.
plans, versus $865 million in 2010. As highlighted in the Contractual The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
Obligations table on page 58, the company expects to make legally income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely
mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and
approximately $3.9 billion in the next five years. The 2012 contributions accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made
are currently expected to be approximately $800 million. Financial on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company
market performance and/or further weakening in the European periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that
sovereign debt credit environment in 2012 could increase the legally it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the
mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested
require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. The earnings is not practicable. While the company currently does not
company is not quantifying any further impact from pension funding have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign subsidiaries, if
because it is not possible to predict future movements in the capital these funds are needed for operations and obligations in the U.S.,
markets or pension plan funding regulations. the company could elect to repatriate these funds which could result
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in 2006, in a reassessment of the company’s policy and increased tax expense.
and, among other things, increases the funding requirements for certain
U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after December 31, 2007. No
mandatory contribution is required for the U.S. defined benefit plan
in 2012 as of December 31, 2011.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion
58 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual Payments Due In
Payment Stream 2012 2013-14 2015-16 After 2016
Long-term debt obligations $26,616 $4,292 $ 9,217 $3,185 $ 9,921
Interest on long-term debt obligations 10,585 1,128 1,711 1,362 6,384
Capital (finance) lease obligations 86 19 41 21 5
Operating lease obligations 5,631 1,562 2,324 1,132 613
Purchase obligations 2,207 1,368 586 201 52
Other long-term liabilities
Minimum pension funding (mandated)* 3,900 800 1,500 1,600 —
Executive compensation 1,440 89 194 214 944
Long-term termination benefits 1,374 132 163 141 938
Tax reserves** 3,728 138 — — —
Other 1,250 64 88 86 1,011
Total $56,817 $9,592 $15,824 $7,942 $19,868
* Represents future pension contributions that are mandated by local regulations or statute, all associated with non-U.S. qualified defined benefit and multi-employer pension
plans. See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 121 to 135 for additional information on the non-U.S. plans’ investment strategies and expected contributions and for
information regarding the company’s total underfunded pension plans of $19,232 million at December 31, 2011. As the funded status on the plans will vary, obligations for mandated
minimum pension payments after 2016 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $138 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the next
12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress
of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months.
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above excluding Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the amounts From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. arrangements as defined by the SEC Financial Reporting Release
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods 67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis
or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any of about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con tractual
the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the company Obligations.”
would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or (3) the At December 31, 2011, the company had no off-balance sheet
company must make specified minimum payments even if it does arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
not take delivery of the contracted products or services (take-or-pay). current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial
If the obligation to purchase goods or services is noncancelable, the condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity,
entire value of the contract is included in the table above. If the capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for
obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur a penalty if the company’s contractual obligations and note M, “Contingencies
canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a purchase and Commitments,” on pages 114 and 115, for detailed information
obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay about the company’s guarantees, financial commitments and
contracts are also included in the table as they represent the portion indemnification arrangements. The company does not have retained
of each contract that is a firm commitment. interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a portion
of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or service from Critical Accounting Estimates
a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in
The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates
order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not specify
and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly
fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, the
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and
company does not consider them to be purchase obligations.
assumptions discussed in this section are those that the company
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the
considers to be the most critical to its financial statements. An
effective interest rate at December 31, 2011, plus the interest rate
accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of
spread associated with that debt, if any.
the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity
and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range
of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to the
company’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed

===== PAGE 61 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 59
the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such
the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The that management changes its expected long-term return on plan
company’s significant accounting policies are described in note A, assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in the
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 86. expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption will have
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that information an estimated increase or decrease, respectively, of $253 million
is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides material on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/
information to investors. The amounts used to assess sensitivity cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 2011
(e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users of the and assuming no contributions are made in 2012).
Annual Report to understand a general direction cause and effect The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required,
of changes in the estimates and do not represent management’s by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results that
predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should be noted differ from the estimates may result in more or less future company
that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and estimates funding into the pension plans than is planned by management.
require regular review and adjustment. Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s pension plans
in other countries worldwide will vary depending upon the status of
Pension Assumptions each respective plan.
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measurement
of the benefit obligation to employees and net periodic pension Revenue Recognition
(cost/income) requires the use of certain assumptions, including, Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related to
among others, estimates of discount rates and expected return the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the company
on plan assets. to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the (gain)/ with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant
loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting,
pension cost/(income) calculation (see page 127 for information including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element
regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the projected benefit arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting.
obligation (PBO). As presented on page 127, the company decreased Other significant judgments include determining whether IBM or a
the discount rate assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and whether
(PPP), a U.S.-based defined benefit plan, by 80 basis points to separate contracts are considered part of one arrangement.
4.20 percent on December 31, 2011. This change will increase pre- Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability
tax cost and expense recognized in 2012 by an estimated $250 million. to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. The
If the discount rate assumption for the PPP increased by 80 basis company considers various factors, including a review of specific
points on December 31, 2011, pre-tax cost and expense recognized transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical
in 2012 would have decreased by an estimated $265 million. Changes experience and market and economic conditions when calculating
in the discount rate assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each
may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates
plan assets. Each 25 basis point increase or decrease in the were changed by 10 percent in 2011, net income would have been
discount rate will cause a corresponding decrease or increase, impacted by $85 million (excluding Global Financing receivables
respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based reserves discussed on page 65).
upon December 31, 2011 data. The PPP’s PBO (after the decrease
in discount rate presented on page 127) and plan assets as of Costs to Complete Service Contracts
December 31, 2011 are presented on page 125. The company enters into numerous service contracts through its
The expected long-term return on plan assets is used in GTS and GBS businesses. During the contractual period, revenue,
calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. See page 128 cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate
for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the
assets assumption. Expected returns on plan assets are calculated company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of
based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract
changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of
period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The company performs
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on plan ongoing profitability analyses of its services contracts in order to
assets and expected return on plan assets are recognized as determine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors
a component of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized in reviewed by the company to estimate the future costs to complete
net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives of the employees each contract are future labor costs, future product costs and
in the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds based expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded
upon the obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were
accounting standards. approximately $52 million and $23 million at December 31, 2011 and
2010, respectively.

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion
60 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Income Taxes Valuation of Goodwill
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and whenever
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determining events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of
the consolidated provision for income taxes. goodwill may not be recoverable. In the fourth quarter of 2011, the
During the ordinary course of business, there are many company early adopted new Financial Accounting Standards Board
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination guidance that simplifies how an entity tests goodwill for impairment.
is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based It provides an option to first assess qualitative factors to determine
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s is less than its carrying amount.
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review reporting units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events
by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals for tax and circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units,
liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its assessment the company assesses individual factors such as:
of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax
law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may • A significant adverse change in legal factors
involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the or the business climate
extent that new information becomes available which causes the • An adverse action or assessment by a regulator
company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing • Unanticipated competition
tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax • A loss of key personnel
expense in the period in which such determination is made. • A more-likely-than-not expectation that a reporting
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the or otherwise disposed of
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine
evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results,
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill
estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax
impairment test. Under the new guidance, this quantitative test
planning strategies. In the event that the company changes its
is required only if the company concludes that it is more likely than
determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be
not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount.
realized, the company will adjust its valuation allowance with a
After performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis
corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which
during the fourth quarter of 2011, the company determined it was
such determination is made.
not necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period-
to-period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring Loss Contingencies
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. significant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. If
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered
decreases by 1 percent of income before income taxes, consolidated probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the company
net income would have improved/decreased by $210 million in 2011. accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is
required in both the determination of probability and the determination
as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of
Valuation of Assets
uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on
The application of business combination and impairment accounting
the best information available at the time. As additional information
requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The
becomes available, the company reassesses the potential liability
acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires
related to its pending claims and litigation and may revise its
the company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities
estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities
assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree to properly
could have a material impact on the company’s results of operations
allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are
and financial position.
depreciated and amortized from goodwill. Impairment testing for
assets, other than goodwill, requires the allocation of cash flows to
those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A
are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require description of the methods used by management to estimate the
the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur. Accounting Policies,” on pages 85 and 86. Factors that could result

===== PAGE 63 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 61
in actual receivable losses that are materially different from the estim- based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The
ated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash
change in the economic health of a particular client that represents management purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the
a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio. volatility of currency impacts on the company’s financial results.
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global Financing’s U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period.
segment pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect
before income taxes would be higher or lower by an estimated adjustments based upon a simple constant currency mathematical
$35 million (using 2011 data), depending upon whether the actual translation of local currency results using the comparable prior
collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates. period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant currency
methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this information
Residual Value does not incorporate any operational actions that management may
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. Based on the currency
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates rate movements in 2011, total revenue increased 7.1 percent as
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as operating reported and 3.4 percent at constant currency versus 2010. On a
or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of leased pre-tax income basis, these translation impacts offset by the net
equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market impact of hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum
for new and used equipment and obtaining forward-looking product (assuming no pricing or sourcing actions) increase of approximately
information such as marketing plans and technological innovations. $600 million in 2011. The same mathematical exercise resulted in a
Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed and “other than decrease of approximately $225 million in 2010. The company views
temporary” declines in estimated future residual values are recognized these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported
upon identification. Anticipated increases in future residual values financial results. Considering the operational responses mentioned
are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. Factors that above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of
could cause actual results to materially differ from the estimates hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts
include significant changes in the used-equipment market brought on any particular period, but the company believes it could be
on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations and any substantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive
resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment. pressure in the marketplace.
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s segment dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income before translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally,
income taxes for 2011 would have been lower by an estimated the company manages currency risk in these entities by linking prices
$104 million. If the actual residual value recovery is higher than and contracts to U.S. dollars. The company continues to monitor
management’s estimates, the increase in income will be realized at the economic conditions in Venezuela. On December 30, 2010, the
the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. official rate for essential goods was eliminated, with no change to
the SITME rate. The SITME rate remained constant throughout 2011.
Future gains or losses from devaluation of the SITME rate are not
Currency Rate Fluctuations
expected to have a material impact given the size of the company’s
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S.
operations in Venezuela (less than 1 percent of total 2010 and
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position.
2011 revenue).
At December 31, 2011, currency changes resulted in assets and
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer
Market Risk
dollars than at year-end 2010. The company uses financial hedging
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing In the normal course of business, the financial position of the
transactions and other foreign currency-based transactions. Further company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the
discussion of currency and hedging appears in note D, “Financial market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements
Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100. on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and The company regularly assesses these risks and has established
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pricing policies and business practices to protect against the adverse effects
offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of the of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the company
advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position does not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
competitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, contains
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. an element of market risk from changes in interest and currency
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency- rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through the use of a

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion
62 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as explained in Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100. At December 31, 2011, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against foreign
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result in an
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of
may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other financial $1,303 million as compared with an increase of $546 million at
instruments. December 31, 2010. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar against
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result
analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash equivalents, in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments
marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial of $1,303 million compared with a decrease of $546 million at
financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long- December 31, 2010. The change in impact from 2010 to 2011 was
term and short-term debt and all derivative financial instruments. comprised of: assets ($341 million), debt ($211 million) and derivatives
The company’s derivative financial instruments generally include ($205 million).
interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts.
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the Financing Risks
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in
See the “Description of Business” on page 24 for a discussion of the
interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-
financing risks associated with the Global Financing business and
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign
management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that
Cybersecurity
are attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount
rates used for the present value computations were selected While neither a business segment nor a worldwide organization, the
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates in company’s approach on cybersecurity demonstrates its ability to
effect at December 31, 2011 and 2010. The differences in this adapt to a changing environment, as well as the depth and breadth
comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with of its global capabilities. IBM has leveraged its extensive knowledge
each type of risk. and experience on cybersecurity matters to help its customers. The
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not necessarily company has a suite of software solutions that showcase IBM’s
represent the actual changes in fair value that the company would broad capabilities in identity and access management, data security,
incur under normal market conditions because, due to practical application security, network security and endpoint security. IBM’s
limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor are software solutions include a security intelligence dashboard that
held constant. In addition, the results of the model are constrained can collect information on customer IT security events and provide
by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from the detailed information to customers about potential threats and security
analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing or posture. The company’s services businesses offer professional
hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items solutions for security from assessment to deployment. In addition,
include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and the company offers managed and outsourced security solutions
direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and from multiple security operations centers around the world. Finally,
the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, security is embedded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure
reported changes in the values of some of the financial instruments engineering processes and by critical functions (encryption, access
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched with control, etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those instruments From an enterprise perspective, IBM has implemented a multi-
are designed to finance or hedge. faceted approach involving people, tools, and processes to identify
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2011, and and address cybersecurity risks. The company has established
2010, are as follows: policies and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s
infrastructure and data are managed, which help protect IBM and
Interest Rate Risk client data. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online
At December 31, 2011, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest education, Web articles and other awareness initiatives to enable
rates with all other variables held constant would result in a decrease its workforce to be knowledgeable about cybersecurity threats and
in the fair market value of the company’s financial instruments of their responsibilities to identify and mitigate these risks. IBM performs
$310 million as compared with a decrease of $341 million at ongoing assessments regarding its technical controls and its
December 31, 2010. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest methods for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The
rates with all other variables held constant would result in an increase company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to
in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $290 million defend against cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices,
as compared to an increase of $315 million at December 31, 2010. data centers, and applications.
Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s
financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s
debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.

===== PAGE 65 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 63
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011-10 2010-09
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 433,362 426,751 399,409 1.5% 6.8%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 7,523 9,334 11,421 (19.4) (18.3)
Complementary 25,500 27,784 26,946 (8.2) 3.1
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in over Results of Operations
170 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the higher
($ in millions)
value segments of enterprise computing. The company continually
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* 2009*
assesses its resource needs with the objective of balancing its
External revenue $2,102 $2,238 $2,302
workforce globally to improve the company’s global reach and
Internal revenue 2,092 1,842 1,774
competitiveness. In 2011, total employees at IBM and its wholly owned
Total revenue 4,195 4,080 4,076
subsidiaries increased more than 6,500 compared to the prior year.
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent Cost 1,467 1,474 1,555
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited Gross profit $2,728 $2,606 $2,520
term employment arrangements to meet specific business needs Gross profit margin 65.0% 63.9% 61.8%
in a flexible and cost-effective manner. Pre-tax income $2,011 $1,956 $1,724
After-tax income** $1,338 $1,292 $1,132
Global Financing Return on equity** 40.7% 41.1% 34.2%
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a * Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
** See page 67 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation.
stand-alone entity.
In 2011, as the global economy continued to face a challenging
Total revenue in 2011 increased $115 million versus 2010 as a result of:
credit environment, the Global Financing business remained focused
on its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s • An increase in internal revenue of 13.6 percent primarily
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing increased driven by an increase in used equipment sales revenue
total revenue by 2.8 percent and improved total gross margin by (up 19.7 percent to $1,528 million); partially offset by
1.2 points, while the pre-tax income margin was essentially flat year • A decline in external revenue of 6.1 percent (9 percent
to year. Total pre-tax income of $2,011 million increased 2.8 percent adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in used equipment
compared to 2010. sales revenue (down 25.5 percent to $490 million), partially
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact offset by an increase in financing revenue (up 2.0 percent to
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results $1,612 million).
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact Global
Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both financing The increase in external financing revenue was due to higher average
revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations, which asset balance and an increase in remarketing lease revenue.
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like business, Global Financing gross profit increased 4.7 percent compared
are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales and services to 2010 due to higher used equipment sales and financing gross
volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates. Participation profit. Gross margin increased 1.2 points primarily due to a higher
rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their transactions used equipment sales margin.
through Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or
financing through a third party.

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion
64 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2010 increased $4 million versus 2009 as a result of: Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
• An increase in internal revenue of 3.8 percent driven by
an increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 7.0 percent ($ in millions)
to $1,277 million), partially offset by a decrease in financing At December 31: 2011 2010
revenue (down 2.6 percent to $565 million); offset by Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,308 $ 1,353
• A decline in external revenue of 2.8 percent (4 percent Net investment in sales-type
adjusted for currency), due to a decrease in financing revenue and direct financing leases 9,209 9,370
(down 7.9 percent to $1,580 million), partially offset by an Equipment under operating leases
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 12.1 percent External clients (a) 1,567 1,827
to $659 million). Internal clients (b)(c) 219 500
Client loans 11,363 10,630
The decreases in external and internal financing revenue were due
Total client financing assets 22,358 22,326
to lower average asset balances and lower asset yields.
Commercial financing receivables 7,130 6,819
Global Financing gross profit increased 3.4 percent compared to
Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c) 4,586 4,204
2009 primarily due to higher used equipment sales gross profit. Gross
margin increased 2.0 points primarily due to a higher financing margin. Other receivables 334 321
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 2.8 percent in 2011 Other assets 712 790
versus 2010, following an increase of 13.5 percent in 2010 versus Total assets $36,427 $35,813
2009. The increase in 2011 was driven by the increase in gross profit Intercompany payables (b) $ 6,213 $ 6,717
of $122 million, partially offset by increases in financing receivables Debt (d) 23,332 22,823
provisions of $51 million and SG&A expenses of $13 million. Other liabilities 3,633 3,016
Normalizing for $2 million of workforce rebalancing charges in 2011
Total liabilities 33,178 32,557
and 2010, respectively, pre-tax income increased 2.8 percent versus
Total equity 3,249 3,256
2010. The increase in 2010 was primarily driven by a decrease in
Total liabilities and equity $36,427 $35,813
financing receivables provisions of $152 million and the increase in
gross profit of $85 million. The increase in financing receivables (a) Includes intercompany mark up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products purchased
from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s consolidated
provisions in 2011 was primarily due to the current economic
results.
environment in Europe. The overall allowance for credit losses (b) Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore
coverage rate is 1.3 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2010. does not appear on page 72.
The decrease in return on equity from 2010 to 2011 was driven (c) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the
value in the table using Global Financing debt.
by a higher average equity balance, and the increase in return on
(d) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt.
equity from 2009 to 2010 was driven by higher after-tax income and A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business,
or related to intercompany mark up embedded in the Global Financing assets. See
a lower average equity balance.
table on page 67.
Sources and Uses of Funds
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but
also include non-IBM equipment, software and services to meet
IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are
primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for systems
products as well as loans for systems, software and services with
terms generally from one to seven years. Global Financing’s client
loans are primarily for software and services and are unsecured.
These loans are subjected to additional credit analysis to evaluate
the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are
taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include
covenants to protect against credit deterioration during the life of
the obligation. Client financing also includes internal activity as
described on page 24.

===== PAGE 67 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 65
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of Allowance for Credit Losses
IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory financing ($ in millions)
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days. Allowance Additions/ December 31,
These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and are also January 1, 2011 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2011
subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate the $401 $(87 ) $42 $(7 ) $350
associated risk. * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during the
At December 31, 2011, substantially all financing assets are IT period.
** Primarily represents translation adjustments.
related assets, and approximately 63 percent of the external portfolio
is with investment grade clients with no direct exposure to consumers
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved
or mortgage assets.
decreased from 1.5 percent at December 31, 2010 to 1.3 percent at
December 31, 2011 primarily due to the disposition of receivables
Originations
previously reserved, and the increase in gross financing receivables.
The following are total external financing and internal lease financing
Specific reserves decreased 25.9 percent from $305 million at
originations.
December 31, 2010 to $226 million at December 31, 2011. Unallocated
reserves increased 29.2 percent from $96 million at December 31, 2010,
($ in millions) to $124 million at December 31, 2011. Global Financing’s bad debt
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 expense was an increase of $42 million for 2011, compared to
Client financing a decrease of $9 million for 2010. The year-to-year increase was
External $14,390 $12,632 $11,760 primarily attributed to the current economic environment in Europe.
Internal — 116 755
Commercial financing 35,282 32,366 27,126 Residual Value
Total $49,673 $45,113 $39,641 Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately
In 2011, new financing originations exceeded cash collections for project future equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing
both client and commercial financing. This resulted in a net increase has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under
in total financing assets from December 31, 2010. The increase in lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing
originations in both 2011 versus 2010 and 2010 versus 2009 was due continually monitors projections of future equipment values and
to improving external volumes in both client and commercial financing. compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio.
Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed under a loan See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 86 for the
facility and is not considered originations. company’s accounting policy for residual values.
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2011 was primarily deployed Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by
to pay the intercompany payables and dividends to IBM. selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current clients.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced from equipment
The following table presents external financing receivables excluding returned at the end of a lease, represented 48.1 percent of Global
residual values, and the allowance for credit losses. Financing’s revenue in 2011 and 47.4 percent in 2010. The gross
margins on these sales were 54.8 percent and 52.8 percent in 2011
($ in millions) and 2010, respectively. The increase was primarily driven by an
At December 31: 2011 2010 increase in the internal sales margin.
Gross financing receivables $27,366 $26,565
Specific allowance for credit losses 226 305
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 124 96
Total allowance for credit losses 350 401
Net financing receivables $27,016 $26,164
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.3% 1.5%

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion
66 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a lease
at December 31, 2010 and 2011. In addition, the table presents the as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating lease. The
residual value as a percentage of the related original amount financed aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees for sales-type
and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value assigned to leases were $821 million and $714 million for the financing transactions
equipment on lease at December 31, 2011 is expected to be originated during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010,
returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed residual respectively. In 2011, the residual value guarantee program resulted
value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guarantees of in the company recognizing approximately $532 million of revenue
the future value of the equipment to be returned at end of lease. that would otherwise have been recognized in future periods as
While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are also operating lease revenue. If the company had chosen to not participate
obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees in a residual value guarantee program in 2011 and prior years, the
are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by accounting 2011 impact would be substantially mitigated by the effect of prior-
standards in the determination of lease classifications for the covered year asset values being recognized as operating lease revenue in
equipment and provide protection against risk of loss arising from the current year. The associated aggregate guaranteed future values
declines in equipment values for these assets. at the scheduled end of lease was $43 million for the financing
transactions originated during 2011 and 2010, respectively. The cost
of guarantees was $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2011
and $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2010.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2011 Balance
2015 and
2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 871 $ 745 $177 $194 $241 $132
Operating leases 328 296 121 97 64 14
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 1,199 $ 1,041 $298 $291 $305 $146
Related original amount financed $20,412 $18,635
Percentage 5.9% 5.6%
Debt Global Financing provides funding predominantly for the company’s
external clients assets, as well as for assets under contract by other
At December 31: 2011 2010 IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures Global
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.2x 7.0x Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense
relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to Operations” on pages 63 and 64 and in note T, “Segment Infor-
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans mation,” on pages 135 to 139.
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on page
the company to substantially match the term and currency underlying 70, however, the external debt-related interest expense supporting
the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. Both Global Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified
assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing Balance Sheet from cost of financing to interest expense.
on page 64.

===== PAGE 69 =====
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 67
The following table provides additional information on total company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes internal loans and
leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The company believes these
assets should be appropriately leveraged in line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2011 December 31, 2010
Global Financing Segment $23,332 $22,823
Debt to support external clients $20,051 $19,583
Debt to support internal clients 3,281 3,240
Non-Global Financing Segments 7,987 5,801
Debt supporting operations 11,269 9,041
Intercompany activity (3,281) (3,240)
Total company debt $31,320 $28,624
Liquidity and Capital Resources Looking Forward
Global Financing is a segment of the company and therefore, is Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and funding
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access to capacity which enables the company to be well positioned in the
capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was primarily current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new financing
deployed to pay intercompany payables and dividends to the volumes are primarily IBM products and services financed to the
company in order to maintain an appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. company’s clients and business partners, and substantially all financing
assets are IT related assets which provide a stable base of business
Return on Equity for future growth. Global Financing’s offerings are competitive and
available to clients as a result of the company’s borrowing cost and
($ in millions)
access to the capital markets. Overall, Global Financing’s originations
At December 31: 2011 2010*
will be dependent upon the demand for IT products and services
Numerator
as well as client participation rates.
Global Financing after-tax income (a)** $1,338 $1,292
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
Denominator
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted
Average Global Financing equity (b)+ $3,286 $3,145 period where IBM could not access the capital markets would likely
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b) 40.7% 41.1% lead to a slowdown in originations.
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency
** Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s fluctuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit.
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a The company’s interest rate risk management policy, however,
consolidated basis.
+ Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters. combined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate
gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provision
for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply rigorous
credit policies in both the origination of new business and the
evaluation of the existing portfolio.
As discussed on pages 65 and 66, Global Financing has
historically been able to manage residual value risk both through
insight into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its
remarketing business.
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the
key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with product
and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent management of
the business going forward, even during periods of uncertainty with
respect to the global economy.

===== PAGE 70 =====
Report of Management
68 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial information Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management. The adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
of America, applying certain estimates and judgments as required. reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines of in the United States of America.
responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
systems and control procedures. An important element of the control those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to correct transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
deficiencies as they are identified. (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the
channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest ethical assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could
These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distributed have a material effect on the financial statements.
to employees throughout the world, and re-emphasized through Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
internal programs to assure that they are understood and followed. reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted procedures may deteriorate.
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
Oversight Board (United States). internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is responsible of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
for recommending to the Board the independent registered public Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the
accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically as of December 31, 2011.
and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm,
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM management,
to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and financial
reporting matters.
Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 28, 2012
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer,
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
February 28, 2012

===== PAGE 71 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 69
To the Stockholders and Board of the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating
Directors of International Business the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on
Machines Corporation: the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial Statem ents procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We
appearing on pages 70 through 139 present fairly, in all material believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
respects, the financial position of International Business Machines A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2011 and 2010 designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2011 in conformity for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
as of December 31, 2011, based on criteria established in Internal and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
Sponsoring Organ izations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
The Company’s management is responsible for these financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting
statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal being made only in accordance with authorizations of management
control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
appearing on page 68. Our responsibility is to express opinions on use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a
these financial statements and on the Company’s internal control material effect on the financial statements.
over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. We conducted Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was procedures may deteriorate.
maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial statements
included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting
principles used and significant estimates made by management,
and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an New York, New York
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing February 28, 2012

===== PAGE 72 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
70 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2011 2010 2009
Revenue
Services $ 60,721 $56,868 $55,128
Sales 44,063 40,736 38,300
Financing 2,132 2,267 2,331
Total revenue 106,916 99,870 95,758
Cost
Services 40,740 38,383 37,146
Sales 14,973 14,374 13,606
Financing 1,065 1,100 1,220
Total cost 56,778 53,857 51,973
Gross profit 50,138 46,014 43,785
Expense and other income
Selling, general and administrative 23,594 21,837 20,952
Research, development and engineering O 6,258 6,026 5,820
Intellectual property and custom development income (1,108) (1,154) (1,177)
Other (income) and expense (20) (787) (351)
Interest expense D&J 411 368 402
Total expense and other income 29,135 26,291 25,647
Income before income taxes 21,003 19,723 18,138
Provision for income taxes N 5,148 4,890 4,713
Net income $ 15,855 $14,833 $13,425
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution P $ 13.06 $ 11.52 $ 10.01
Basic P $ 13.25 $ 11.69 $ 10.12
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388 1,341,352,754
Basic 1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202 1,327,157,410
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 73 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 71
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2011 2010 2009
Net income $15,855 $14,833 $13,425
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax:
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (693) 712 1,675
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (14) 70 118
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (231) 0 64
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 8 —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (241) 78 182
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (266) 371 (718)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 511 203 (94)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges 245 573 (812)
Retirement-related benefit plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) (28) 28 375
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (5,463) (2,728) 1,433
Curtailments and settlements 11 10 (125)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (157) (183) (162)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,847 1,249 1,105
Total retirement-related benefit plans (3,790) (1,624) 2,626
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L (4,479) (260) 3,671
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income L 1,339 348 (656)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L (3,142) 87 3,015
Total comprehensive income $12,713 $14,920 $16,440
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 74 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
72 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2011 2010
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 11,922 $ 10,661
Marketable securities D 0 990
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $256 in 2011 and $324 in 2010) 11,179 10,834
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $311 in 2011 and $342 in 2010) F 16,901 16,257
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $11 in 2011 and $10 in 2010) 1,481 1,134
Inventories E 2,595 2,450
Deferred taxes N 1,601 1,564
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 5,249 4,226
Total current assets 50,928 48,116
Property, plant and equipment G 40,124 40,289
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 26,241 26,193
Property, plant and equipment—net G 13,883 14,096
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $38 in 2011 and $58 in 2010) F 10,776 10,548
Prepaid pension assets S 2,843 3,068
Deferred taxes N 3,503 3,220
Goodwill I 26,213 25,136
Intangible assets—net I 3,392 3,488
Investments and sundry assets H 4,895 5,778
Total assets $ 116,433 $113,452
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 3,313 $ 4,216
Short-term debt D&J 8,463 6,778
Accounts payable 8,517 7,804
Compensation and benefits 5,099 5,028
Deferred income 12,197 11,580
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,535 5,156
Total current liabilities 42,123 40,562
Long-term debt D&J 22,857 21,846
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations S 18,374 15,978
Deferred income 3,847 3,666
Other liabilities K 8,996 8,226
Total liabilities 96,197 90,279
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 48,129 45,418
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2011—2,182,469,838; 2010—2,161,800,054)
Retained earnings 104,857 92,532
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2011—1,019,287,274; 2010—933,806,510) (110,963) (96,161)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (21,885) (18,743)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 20,138 23,046
Noncontrolling interests A 97 126
Total equity 20,236 23,172
Total liabilities and equity $ 116,433 $113,452
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 75 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 73
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 15,855 $ 14,833 $ 13,425
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 3,589 3,657 3,773
Amortization of intangibles 1,226 1,174 1,221
Stock-based compensation 697 629 558
Deferred taxes 1,212 1,294 1,773
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (342) (801) (395)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) (1,279) (489) 2,131
Retirement related (1,371) (1,963) (2,465)
Inventories (163) 92 263
Other assets/other liabilities (28) 949 319
Accounts payable 451 174 170
Net cash provided by operating activities 19,846 19,549 20,773
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (4,108) (4,185) (3,447)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 608 770 330
Investment in software (559) (569) (630)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (1,594) (6,129) (5,604)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 3,345 7,877 3,599
Non-operating finance receivables—net (291) (405) (184)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (1,811) (5,922) (1,194)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 14 55 400
Net cash used in investing activities (4,396) (8,507) (6,729)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 9,996 8,055 6,683
Payments to settle debt (8,947) (6,522) (13,495)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 1,321 817 (651)
Common stock repurchases (15,046) (15,375) (7,429)
Common stock transactions—other 2,453 3,774 3,052
Cash dividends paid (3,473) (3,177) (2,860)
Net cash used in financing activities (13,696) (12,429) (14,700)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (493) (135) 98
Net change in cash and cash equivalents 1,262 (1,522) (558)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 10,661 12,183 12,741
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 11,922 $ 10,661 $ 12,183
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 4,168 $ 3,238 $ 1,567
Interest paid on debt $ 956 $ 951 $ 1,240
Capital lease obligations $ 39 $ 30 $ 15
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 76 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
74 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2009
Equity, January 1, 2009 $39,129 $70,353 $(74,171) $(21,845) $13,465 $119 $13,584
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 13,425 13,425 13,425
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 3,015 3,015 3,015
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $16,440 $16,440
Cash dividends declared—common stock (2,860) (2,860) (2,860)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (30,034,808 shares) 3,011 3,011 3,011
Purchases (1,550,846 shares) and
sales (6,408,265 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (19) 462 443 443
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (68,650,727 shares) (7,534) (7,534) (7,534)
Changes in other equity (330) (330) (330)
Changes in noncontrolling interests (1) (1)
Equity, December 31, 2009 $41,810 $80,900 $(81,243) $(18,830) $22,637 $118 $22,755
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2010
Equity, January 1, 2010 $41,810 $80,900 $(81,243) $(18,830) $ 22,637 $118 $ 22,755
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 14,833 14,833 14,833
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 87 87 87
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 14,920 $ 14,920
Cash dividends declared—common stock (3,177) (3,177) (3,177)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (34,783,386 shares) 3,579 3,579 3,579
Purchases (2,334,932 shares) and
sales (7,929,318 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (24) 501 477 477
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (117,721,650 shares) (15,419) (15,419) (15,419)
Changes in other equity 28 28 28
Changes in noncontrolling interests 8 8
Equity, December 31, 2010 $45,418 $92,532 $(96,161) $(18,743) $ 23,046 $126 $ 23,172
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 77 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 75
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2011
Equity, January 1, 2011 $45,418 $ 92,532 $ (96,161) $(18,743) $ 23,046 $126 $ 23,172
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 15,855 15,855 15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,142) (3,142) (3,142)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,713 $ 12,713
Cash dividends declared—common stock (3,473) (3,473) (3,473)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (20,669,785 shares) 2,394 2,394 2,394
Purchases (1,717,246 shares) and
sales (4,920,198 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (56) 231 175 175
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (88,683,716 shares) (15,034) (15,034) (15,034)
Changes in other equity 317 317 317
Changes in noncontrolling interests (29) (29)
Equity, December 31, 2011 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
76 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note A. Revenue
Significant Accounting Policies The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable
Basis of Presentation and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement,
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot notes delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and
of the International Business Machines Corpor ation (IBM or the collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until
company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting products have been shipped or services have been provided to the
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied.
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
This is annotated where applicable. The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers,
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $6 million, $9 million resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when the
and $5 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 reseller has economic substance apart from the company, credit risk,
and 2009, respectively, are included in the Consolidated Statement title and risk of loss to the inventory, the fee to the company is not
of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. Additionally, contingent upon resale or payment by the end user, the company
changes to noncontrolling interests in the Consolidated Statement has no further obligations related to bringing about resale or delivery
of Changes in Equity were $(29) million, $8 million and $(1) million and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, stock
rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See
Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves”
Principles of Consolidation
included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K). Revenue
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM
is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably and reliably
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally majority owned.
determined. The company bases its estimates on historical results
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported
taking into consideration the type of client, the type of transaction
in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Net
and the specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under
income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is
cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense only
reported as described above in the Consolidated Statement of
if the company receives from the client an identifiable benefit sufficiently
Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included
separable from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably
in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in
and reliably estimated. If the company does not receive an identifiable
business entities in which the company does not have control, but
benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value
has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and
can be reasonably estimated, such payments are recorded as a
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and the
reduction of revenue.
company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in other
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
(income) and expense. The accounting policy for other investments
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
in equity securities is described on page 85 within “Marketable
between the client and the vendor and gross when the company
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are
is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered to
primarily accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany
determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client,
or has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the
Use of Estimates company adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service,
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, has
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes
and other comprehensive income/(loss) that are reported in the assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclosures. concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In addition
These estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific
current events, historical experience, actions that the company may revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements
undertake in the future and on various other assumptions that are and for each major category of revenue.
believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. As a result, actual
results may be different from these estimates. See “Critical Accounting
Estimates” on pages 58 to 61 for a discussion of the company’s
critical accounting estimates.

===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 77
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements Services
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist The company’s primary services offerings include information
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on the technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing,
needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any combination application management services, consulting and systems integration,
of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For example, a technology infrastructure and system maintenance, Web hosting
client may purchase a server that includes operating system software. and the design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s
In addition, the arrangement may include post-contract support for specifications (design and build). These services are provided on
the software and a contract for post-warranty maintenance service a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-
for the hardware. These types of arrangements can also include price per measure of output contract and the contract terms range
financing provided by the company. These arrangements consist of from less than one year to over 10 years.
multiple deliverables, with the hardware and software delivered in Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
one reporting period and the software support and hardware contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided using
maintenance services delivered across multiple reporting periods. either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line basis
In another example, a client may outsource the running of its data- over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the amount
center operations to the company on a long-term, multiple-year of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered in the period.
basis and periodically purchase servers and/or software products Revenue from application management services, technology
from the company to upgrade or expand its facility. The outsourcing infrastructure and system maintenance and Web hosting contracts
services are provided on a continuous basis across multiple is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
reporting periods and the hardware and software products are Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that a deliverable in hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject to specific guidance related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with such specific is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
guidance. Examples of such arrangements may include leased Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recognized
hardware which is subject to specific leasing guidance or software under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under the POC
which is subject to specific software revenue recognition guidance method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs incurred
(see “Software” on page 78) on whether and/or how to separate to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill
multiple-deliverable arrangements into separate units of accounting the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original estimates
(separability) and how to allocate the arrangement consideration of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward completion, revisions
among those separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other to the estimates are made. These revisions may result in increases
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple-deliverable are reflected in income in the period in which the circumstances
arrangement is separated into more than one unit of accounting if that gave rise to the revision become known by management.
the following criteria are met: The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone to determine whether the latest estimates of revenue, costs and
basis; and profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially method service contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
in the control of the company. In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to
recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as
of $7,363 million and $7,195 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recognized
respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the earlier of when
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the
such criteria are met or when the last undelivered element is delivered.
services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of
If these criteria are met for each element and there is a relative selling
$2,166 million and $2,244 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
price for all units of accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement
respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in
consideration is allocated to the separate units of accounting based
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
on each unit’s relative selling price. The following revenue policies
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
are then applied to each unit of accounting, as applicable.
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, smarter planet
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months.
and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue recognition policies
for multiple deliverable arrangements and for each major category
of revenue depending on the type of offering which can be comprised
of services, hardware and/or software.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
78 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hardware If any one of these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of system for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being
servers, storage solutions, retail store systems and the sale of recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the
semiconductors. The company also offers installation services for earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered
its more complex products. element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recognized and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an
when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no unfulfilled arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the
company obligations that affect the client’s final acceptance of the separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE of
arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties and remaining obligations fair value. There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE of
that are inconsequential or perfunctory are accrued when the fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the
corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue from rentals and delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used to
operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term allocate the arrangement consideration. Under the residual method,
of the rental or lease. the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals
the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair
Software value of the undelivered elements.
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have a
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue recognition stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
license software is recognized on a subscription basis over the multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software
period that the client is entitled to use the license. Revenue from deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the relative
subscription and support, which includes unspecified upgrades on selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using
a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of
over the period such items are delivered. In multiple-deliverable selling price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the company
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental to cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the
the products or services as a whole (software multiple-deliverable deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliverable,
arrangements), software and software-related elements are BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
accounted for in accordance with software revenue recognition
guidance. Software-related elements include software products Financing
and services for which a software deliverable is essential to its Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing
functionality. Tangible products containing software components leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the
and non-software components that function together to deliver the effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on
tangible product’s essential functionality are not within the scope of a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted for based
on other applicable revenue recognition guidance. Best Estimate of Selling Price
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met: VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish
• The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined
on the undelivered element(s); based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold separately.
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair When the company is unable to establish selling price using
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrangement
based on the price charged when the deliverable is sold consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at
separately by the company on a regular basis and not which the company would transact a sale if the product or service
as part of the multiple-deliverable arrangement; and were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the company
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, and therefore
of the earnings process for that element(s). has established VSOE for its products and services offerings, the
company uses BESP to determine the relative selling price for a
product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement on an
infrequent basis. An example of when BESP would be used is when
the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does
not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling
the new product on a stand-alone basis.

===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 79
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $65 million
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, and $78 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that value of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and is
includes review and approval by the company’s management. In estimated at December 31, 2011 to be $25 million in 2012, $18 million
addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its in 2013, $16 million in 2014, $5 million in 2015 and $1 million thereafter.
products and services, in addition to BESP. In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, the
terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse the company
Services Costs for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamortized
deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized in the
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs
delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred by the
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred.
company to transition the services.
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method are
deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date, Software Costs
as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of
contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research,
phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subsequently development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to
amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been
to the installation of systems and processes and are amortized on established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized
a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, not to exceed amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging
the term of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated with up to three years. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure
outsourcing contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a straight- that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future
line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged
contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter of the to software cost as incurred.
useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to
in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing purchase or to create and implement internal-use software programs,
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis including software coding, installation, testing and certain data
as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit not to conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
exceed the term of the contract. The company performs periodic line basis over periods up to two years and are recorded in selling,
reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition general and administrative expense. See note I, “Intangible Assets
and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated Including Goodwill,” on pages 105 and 106.
minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to the
unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted cash flows Product Warranties
are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, a loss is recognized.
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,589 million
generally range up to three years, with the majority being either one
and $2,614 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to the
Amortization expense of deferred services transition and setup
deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related
costs is estimated at December 31, 2011 to be $844 million in 2012,
deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard to
$652 million in 2013, $477 million in 2014, $314 million in 2015 and
the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience and
$302 million thereafter.
applies this estimate to the revenue stream for products under
warranty. Estimated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue
recognized in the current period are charged to cost of revenue.
The warranty liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly
reflects the remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures
over the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made
when actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs
from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended
warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
80 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts is Advertising and Promotional Expense
recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a The company expenses advertising and promotional costs when
straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes in the company’s incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are
deferred income for extended warranty contracts and warranty recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period
liability for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred.
expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media,
Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables: agency and promotional expense, was $1,373 million, $1,337 million
and $1,255 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and is
Standard Warranty Liability recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
2011 2010 Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed
Balance at January 1 $ 375 $ 316
as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished
Current period accruals 435 407
product after technological feasibility has been established are
Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience 18 69
capitalized as an intangible asset. See “Software Costs” on page 79.
Charges incurred (420) (418)
Balance at December 31 $ 407 $ 375
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income) property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets
and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties
($ in millions)
2011 2010 are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based sales
Balance at January 1 $ 670 $ 665 and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees involve transfers
in which the company earns the income over time, or the amount of
Revenue deferred for new extended
warranty contracts 314 329 income is not fixed or determinable until the licensee sells future
Amortization of deferred revenue (330) (301) related products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s revenue).
Sales and other transfers typically include transfers of IP whereby
Other* (19) (22)
the company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee received is
Balance at December 31 $ 636 $ 670
fixed or determinable at the transfer date. The company also enters
Current portion $ 301 $ 315
into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from
Noncurrent portion 335 355
these arrangements is recorded only to the extent cash is received.
Balance at December 31 $ 636 $ 670
Furthermore, the company earns income from certain custom
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments. development projects for strategic technology partners and specific
clients. The company records the income from these projects when
Shipping and Handling the fee is realized or realizable and earned, is not refundable and
is not dependent upon the success of the project.
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than
Expense and Other Income
from Global Financing external business transactions), gains and
Selling, General and Administrative
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain real
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products
estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses,
and services are classified as selling expense and include such items
gains and losses from the sale of businesses and amounts related
as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and travel. General
to accretion of asset retirement obligations.
and administrative expense includes such items as compensation,
office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and office rental. In
addition, general and administrative expense includes other operating
items such as an allowance for credit losses, workforce rebalancing
accruals for contractually obligated payments to employees terminated
in the ongoing course of business, acquisition costs related to
business combinations, amortization of certain intangible assets
and environmental remediation costs.

===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 81
Business Combinations and Environmental
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are
The company accounts for business combinations using the preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will
the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill represents the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental
including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for
primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired
assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as an identifiable Asset Retirement Obligations
intangible asset. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated
amortized over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology
with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are initially
is recorded in cost, and amortization of all other intangible assets is
recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs are
recorded in SG&A expense. See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,”
capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets
on pages 89 to 93 and note I, “Intangible Assets Including Goodwill,”
by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are
on pages 105 and 106, for additional information. Acquisition-related
subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets.
costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation and other costs,
Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-
are expensed in the periods in which the costs are incurred. The
period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of
results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the
time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the
Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Impairment
Defined Benefit Pension and
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, written down to
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans
fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values.
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
Goodwill is tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for impairment, or
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
sooner when circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, using
Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference
a qualitative analysis at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is the
between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at
operating segment, or a business, which is one level below that
December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension
operating segment (the “component” level) if discrete financial
plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO),
information is prepared and regularly reviewed by management at
which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected
the segment level. Components are aggregated as a single reporting
to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already
unit if they have similar economic characteristics.
rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the
nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is
Depreciation and Amortization the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated represents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: of plan assets represents the current market value of cumulative
buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land company and participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust
improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by
2 to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans,
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after technological with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets,
feasibility has been established are amortized over periods ranging are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension
up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software are amortized postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
on a straight-line basis over periods up to 2 years. (See “Software The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-
Costs” on page 79 for additional information). Other intangible assets retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value
are amortized over periods between 1 and 7 years. of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of
plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
82 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit Stock-Based Compensation
cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan based awards granted to employees. The company measures stock-
assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the estimated
previously recognized as a component of other comprehensive fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a straight-line
income/(loss) and amortization of the net transition asset remaining basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee requisite
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss). Service cost service period. The company estimates the fair value of stock
represents the actuarial present value of participant benefits earned options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The company also
in the current year. Interest cost represents the time value of money grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including
cost associated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), and Performance Share
changes in the employee base, plan amendments and changes in Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that
actuarial assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests,
and the corresponding change in other comprehensive income/ typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards
(loss). The result of these events is amortized as a component of is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s
net periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. All
of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts stock-based compensation cost is recorded in cost, SG&A, and
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded in employees’ respective function.
cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result
based on the employees’ respective function. in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory tax rate
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Differences
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a component between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting
of other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Statement of purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax
Comprehensive Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/ return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the tax deduction
(credits) are subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consolidated Statement
cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction
of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result and no additional paid-in capital exists from previous awards). See
of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 118 to 121 for
result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) additional information.
represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service
granted in plan amendments.
Income Taxes
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized
plans and use participant-specific information such as compensation,
for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are recognized
age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, including
for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by
estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan assets, rate of
applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allowances are
compensation increases, interest crediting rates and mortality rates.
recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will
more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation
Defined Contribution Plans
allowance, management considers all available evidence for each
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is recorded jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future
when the employee renders service to the company, essentially taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
coinciding with the cash contributions to the plans. The charge is When the company changes its determination as to the amount of
recorded in cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is
of Earnings based on the employees’ respective function. adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the
period in which such determination is made.
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the company’s
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review
by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the
largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of
being realized upon settlement. The current portion of tax liabilities
is included in taxes and the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is

===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 83
included in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company
Position. To the extent that new information becomes available which designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a
causes the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy recognized financial asset or liability or of an unrecognized firm
of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign
income tax expense in the period in which such determination is currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of a forecasted
made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for transaction or the cash flows to be received or paid related to a
potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense. recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge attributable
to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge of a long-term
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign operation. In addition,
the company may enter into derivative contracts that economically
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local
hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge accounting does not
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars at
apply or the company elects not to apply hedge accounting. In these
year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in
cases, there exists a natural hedging relationship in which changes
other comprehensive income. Income and expense items are translated
in the fair value of the derivative, which are recognized currently in
at weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
net income, act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-
of the underlying hedged item(s).
monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approximate exchange
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of the
rates prevailing when the company acquired the assets or liabilities.
underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each period.
All other assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than
For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments are
U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange rates with the
recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of financing
transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) and expense.
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency
Cost of sales and depreciation are translated at historical exchange
risk associated with recorded financial assets or liabilities, derivative
rates. All other income and expense items are translated at the
fair value adjustments are recognized in other (income) and expense
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. These
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value
translation gains and losses are included in net income for the period
of a derivative that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded,
in which exchange rates change.
net of applicable taxes, in other comprehensive income, in the
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. When net
Derivative Financial Instruments
income is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the derivative
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid expenses that is deferred in equity is released to net income and reported
and other current assets, investments and sundry assets, other in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and
accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. Classification of expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
each derivative as current or noncurrent is based upon whether the nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net
maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months. To investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis.
qualify for hedge accounting, the company requires that the instruments The effective portion of changes in the fair value of net investment
be effective in reducing the risk exposure that they are designated hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial instruments
to hedge. For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge designation designated as net investment hedges are recorded as foreign
criteria also require that it be probable that the underlying transaction currency translation adjustments in other comprehensive income.
will occur. Instruments that meet established accounting criteria are Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging
formally designated as hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded
derivative is expected to be highly effective at offsetting changes in in interest expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge
fair value or cash flows of the underlying exposure both at inception ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are
of the hedging relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of included in net income each period until the instrument matures.
assessing hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffectiveness When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or
is formally documented at hedge inception. The company assesses liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as
hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffectiveness at least required under other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that
quarterly throughout the designated hedge period. are not designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of
derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value of
the underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge period
(collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income each
period and are reported in other (income) and expense. When a
cash flow hedging relationship is discontinued, the net gain or loss
in accumulated other comprehensive income must generally remain

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
84 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) in the Consolidated When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
Statement of Changes in Equity until the item that was hedged affects prices to measure the fair value and classifies such items within
earnings. However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based
will not occur by the end of the originally specified time period or upon internally developed models that use current market-based
within an additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss or independently sourced market parameters such as interest rates
in accumulated other comprehensive income must be reclassified and currency rates. Items valued using internally generated models
into earnings immediately. The company reports cash flows arising are classified according to the lowest level input or value driver that
from derivative financial instruments designated as fair value or is significant to the valuation.
cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of cash flows The determination of fair value considers various factors including
from the underlying hedged items that these derivatives are hedging. interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial
Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives designated instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses
as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows from a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate
operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. with the duration of the instrument.
Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the company
and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base valuations”
flows from investing activities. For currency swaps designated as calculated using the methodologies described below for several
hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included in the parameters that market participants would consider in determining
company’s debt risk management program as addressed in note D, fair value:
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100), cash flows directly
associated with the settlement of the principal element of these • Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to
swaps are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financial instru ments, taking into account the actual credit risk
financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. of a counterparty as observed in the credit default swap
market to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
Financial Instruments
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the company
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied
uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based on market
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but
conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. Refer to
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 93 to 96 for further
in the credit default swap market.
information. All methods of assessing fair value result in a general
approximation of value, and such value may never actually be realized. As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived by a discounted
cash flow model using observable market inputs such as known
Fair Value Measurement notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and forward exchange
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be rates as well as discount rates. These inputs relate to liquid, heavily
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly traded currencies with active markets which are available for the
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. full term of the derivative.
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy: basis. These assets include equity method investments that are
recognized at fair value at the end of the period to the extent that
• Level 1—Quoted prices in active markets that are they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain
unadjusted and accessible at the measurement date assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be
for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities; subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets
• Level 2—Quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities include public cost method investments that are deemed to be other-
in markets that are not active, quoted prices for similar than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than-temporary
assets and liabilities in active markets or financial instruments impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured using a
for which significant inputs are observable, either directly model described above.
or indirectly; and Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible
• Level 3—Prices or valuations that require inputs that are financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value,
both significant to the fair value measurement and on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not permitted
unobservable, including the company’s own assumptions to be accounted for at fair value under other accounting standards.
in determining fair value. This election is irrevocable. The company does not apply the fair
value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such
data is available without undue cost and effort.

===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 85
Cash Equivalents Allowance for Credit Losses
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a
the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents. product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables
Marketable Securities is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated based
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be
on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and any specific,
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are
known troubled accounts.
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, Financing Receivables
recorded in other comprehensive income/(loss). The realized gains Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing
and losses for available-for-sale securities are included in other leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with lease
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets recorded
Realized gains and losses are calculated based on the specific at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The company
identification method. determines its allowances for credit losses on financing receivables
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in market based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan
value has occurred, the company considers the duration that, and receivables (see note F, “Financing Receivables,” on pages 101 to
extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below its cost, the 104). The company further segments the portfolio via two classes:
financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer or underlying major markets and growth markets.
collateral of a security; and the company’s intent and ability to retain When calculating the allowances, the company considers its
the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair value. ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment
Other-than-temporary declines in fair value from amortized cost for and by considering the current fair market value of any other collateral.
available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company intends The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. The allowance
to sell or would more-likely-than-not be required to sell before the for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales and customer
expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are charged to other loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital
(income) and expense in the period in which the loss occurs. For lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that
debt securities that the company has no intent to sell and believes the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are
that it more-likely-than-not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows:
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing
other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized
receivables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily
in other comprehensive income/(loss). The credit loss component
consists of an analysis based upon current information available
recognized in other (income) and expense is identified as the amount
about the customer, such as financial statements, news reports,
of the principal cash flows not expected to be received over the
published credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as
remaining term of the debt security as projected using the company’s
well as the current economic environment, collateral net of
cash flow projections.
repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans that are
collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of
Inventories
the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and
lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale of calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss.
inventories are reflected in net cash from operating activities in the For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. records a specific reserve.

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
86 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated Common Stock
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Treasury
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury stock
term, characteristics (lease/loan), and loss history. Factors that could is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a weighted-
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different from the average basis.
estimated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant
change in the economic health of a particular customer that represents
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio.
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method.
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common
Other Credit Related Policies
stock and participating securities according to dividends and
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has
dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights in
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual
undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or
dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common
nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other accounts for
shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is
which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all amounts
computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of
due according to original terms of the lease or loan agreement. Income
common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares
recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive
are first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. Any cash
potential common shares include outstanding stock options, stock
received in excess of principal payments outstanding is recognized
awards and convertible notes. See note P, “Earnings Per Share of
as interest income. Receivables may be removed from non-accrual
Common Stock,” on page 117 for additional information.
status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances.
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance Note B.
when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable is Accounting Changes
confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance.
New Standards to be Implemented
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when
In May 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the
issued amended guidance and disclosure requirements for fair
original billing date.
value measurements. These amendments are not expected to have
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all financing a material impact on the consolidated financial results. These
receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment on a changes were effective January 1, 2012 on a prospective basis.
quarterly basis. The company considers any loan with an individually
evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of Standards Implemented
impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status as In September 2011, the FASB issued additional disclosure requirements
appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services and for entities which participate in multi-employer pension plans. The
are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate purpose of the new disclosures is to provide financial statement
the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are taken users with information about an employer’s level of participation in
to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include covenants to these plans and the financial health of significant plans. The new
protect against credit deterioration during the life of the obligation. disclosures are effective for the full year 2011 financial statements.
The company does not participate in any material multi-employer
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets plans. There was no impact in the consolidated financial results as
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the the changes relate only to additional disclosures.
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at In September 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance that
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses the simplified how entities test goodwill for impairment. After an
realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated increases assessment of certain qualitative factors, if it is determined to be
in specific future residual values are not recognized before realization more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than
through remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific future its carrying amount, entities must perform the quantitative analysis
residual values that are considered to be other-than-temporary are of the goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test(s)
recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as an become optional. The guidance was effective January 1, 2012 with
adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and direct- early adoption permitted. The company elected to adopt this
financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net investment guidance for the 2011 goodwill impairment test performed in the
and is recognized as a loss charged to financing income in the period fourth quarter. There was no impact in the consolidated financial
in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjustment to results.
unearned income to reduce future-period financing income.

===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 87
In June 2011, the FASB issued amended disclosure requirements For activity during a reporting period, the disclosures were required
for the presentation of other comprehensive income (OCI) and to be included in all interim and annual periods after January 1, 2011.
accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). OCI is comprised In January 2011, the FASB temporarily deferred the disclosures
of costs, expenses, gains and losses that are included in comprehensive regarding troubled debt restructurings which were included in the
income but excluded from net income, and AOCI comprises the disclosure requirements of this amendment. In April 2011, the FASB
aggregated balances of OCI in equity. The amended guidance issued additional guidance and clarifications to help creditors in
eliminated the option to present period changes (OCI) as part of determining whether a creditor has granted a concession, and
the Statement of Changes in Equity. Under the amended guidance, whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficulties for purposes
all period changes (OCI) are to be presented either in a single of determining whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled debt
continuous statement of comprehensive income, or in two separate restructuring. The new guidance and the previously deferred disclosures
but consecutive financial statements. Only summary totals are to be became effective July 1, 2011 applied retrospectively to January 1, 2011.
included in the AOCI section of the Statement of Changes in Equity. Prospective application was required for any new impairments
In December 2011, the FASB deferred the requirement to present identified as a result of this guidance. These changes did not have
reclassifications from AOCI on the face of the Consolidated Statement a material impact in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
of Earnings. The changes were effective January 1, 2012 with early In January 2010, the FASB issued additional disclosure
adoption permitted. The company elected to early adopt the two- requirements for fair value measurements. According to the guidance,
statement approach effective with its full year 2011 financial statements. the fair value hierarchy disclosures should be disaggregated by
There was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the class of assets and liabilities. A class is often a subset of assets or
amendments related only to changes in financial statement presentation. liabilities within a line item in the statement of financial position. In
See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 110 and 112 for tax impacts addition, significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 of the fair value
related to individual items of OCI and a detailed presentation of the hierarchy are required to be disclosed. These additional requirements
components of AOCI included in the Statement of Changes in Equity. became effective January 1, 2010 for quarterly and annual reporting.
In December 2010, the FASB issued amended guidance to clarify These amendments did not have an impact in the consolidated
the acquisition date that should be used for reporting pro-forma financial results as this guidance relates only to additional disclosures.
financial information for business combinations. If comparative Certain disclosure requirements relating to fair value measurements
financial statements are presented, the pro-forma revenue and using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) were deferred until
earnings of the combined entity for the comparable prior reporting January 1, 2011. These additional requirements did not have an
period should be reported as though the acquisition date for all impact in the consolidated financial results as they related only to
business combinations that occurred during the current year had additional disclosures.
been completed as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual In October 2009, the FASB issued amended revenue recognition
reporting period. The amendments in this guidance became effective guidance for arrangements with multiple deliverables. The new
prospectively for business combinations for which the acquisition guidance requires the use of management’s best estimate of selling
date was on or after January 1, 2011. There was no impact in the price (BESP) for the deliverables in an arrangement when VSOE,
consolidated financial results as the amendments relate only to vendor objective evidence (VOE) or TPE of the selling price is not
additional disclosures. In addition, the company had no acquisitions available. In addition, excluding specific software revenue recognition
which required pro-forma financial information. guidance, the residual method of allocating arrangement consideration
In December 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the guidance is no longer permitted, and an entity is required to allocate arrangement
on goodwill impairment testing. The amendments modify step 1 of consideration using the relative selling price method. In accordance
the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero or negative with the guidance, the company elected to early adopt its provisions
carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is required to as of January 1, 2010 on a prospective basis for all new or materially
perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more likely than modified arrangements entered into on or after that date. The adoption
not that a goodwill impairment exists. In making that determination, of this guidance did not have a material impact in the Consolidated
an entity should consider whether there are any adverse qualitative Financial Statements.
factors indicating that impairment may exist. The amendments were Also, in October 2009, the FASB issued guidance which
effective January 1, 2011 and did not have an impact in the Consolidated amended the scope of existing software revenue recognition
Financial Statements. guidance. Tangible products containing software components and
In July 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the disclosure non-software components that function together to deliver the
requirements about the credit quality of financing receivables and tangible product’s essential functionality are no longer within the
the allowance for credit losses. The purpose of the additional scope of software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted
disclosures is to enable users of financial statements to better for based on other applicable revenue recognition guidance. In
understand the nature of credit risk inherent in an entity’s portfolio addition, the amendments require that hardware components of a
of financing receivables and how that risk is analyzed. For end-of- tangible product containing software components are always
period balances, the new disclosures were required to be made in excluded from the software revenue recognition guidance. This
all interim and annual periods ending on or after December 15, 2010. guidance had to be adopted in the same period that the company

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
88 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
adopted the amended guidance for arrangements with multiple In May 2009, the FASB issued guidelines on subsequent event
deliverables described in the preceding paragraph. Therefore, the accounting which sets forth: 1) the period after the balance sheet date
company elected to early adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2010 during which management of a reporting entity should evaluate events
on a prospective basis for all new or materially modified arrangements or transactions that may occur for potential recognition or disclosure
entered into on or after that date. The adoption of this guidance did in the financial statements; 2) the circumstances under which an entity
not have a material impact in the Consolidated Financial Statements. should recognize events or transactions occurring after the balance
For transactions entered into prior to January 1, 2010, the company sheet date in its financial statements; and 3) the disclosures that an
recognized revenue based on established revenue recognition entity should make about events or transactions that occurred after
guidance as it related to the elements within the arrangement. For the balance sheet date. These guidelines were effective for interim
the vast majority of the company’s arrangements involving multiple and annual periods ending after June 15, 2009, and the company
deliverables, the fee from the arrangement was allocated to each adopted them in the quarter ended June 30, 2009. In February 2010,
respective element based on its relative fair value, using VSOE. In the guidance was amended to remove the requirement to disclose
the limited circumstances when the company was not able to the date through which subsequent events were evaluated. There
determine VSOE for all of the elements of the arrangement, but was was no impact in the consolidated financial results.
able to obtain VSOE for any undelivered elements, revenue was On January 1, 2009, the company adopted the revised FASB
allocated using the residual method. Under the residual method, guidance regarding business combinations which was required to
the amount of revenue allocated to delivered elements equaled be applied to business combinations on a prospective basis. The
the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate fair value revised guidance required that the acquisition method of accounting
of any undelivered elements, and no revenue was recognized until be applied to a broader set of business combinations, amended
all elements without VSOE had been delivered. If VSOE of any the definition of a business combination, provided a definition of a
undelivered items did not exist, revenue from the entire arrangement business, required an acquirer to recognize an acquired business
was initially deferred and recognized at the earlier of: (i) delivery of at its fair value at the acquisition date, and required the assets and
those elements for which VSOE did not exist or (ii) when VSOE was liabilities assumed in a business combination to be measured and
established. The residual method and recognition of revenue on a recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date (with limited
ratable basis were generally used in circumstances where VSOE, exceptions). There was no impact upon adoption and the effects of
as applicable, was unavailable. this guidance depend on the nature and significance of business
In June 2009, the FASB issued amendments to the accounting combinations occurring after the effective date.
rules for variable interest entities (VIEs). The new guidance eliminates In April 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to the revised
the quantitative approach previously required for determining the business combination guidance regarding the accounting for assets
primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity and requires ongoing acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination that arise
qualitative reassessments of whether an enterprise is the primary from contingencies. The requirements of this amended guidance carry
beneficiary. The company adopted these amendments for the interim forward without significant revision the guidance on contingencies
and annual reporting periods beginning on January 1, 2010. The which existed prior to January 1, 2009. Assets acquired and liabilities
adoption of these amendments did not have a material impact in assumed in a business combination that arise from contingencies
the Consolidated Financial Statements. are recognized at fair value if fair value can be reasonably estimated.
In September 2009, the FASB issued amended guidance If fair value cannot be reasonably estimated, the asset or liability
concerning fair value measurements of investments in certain entities would generally be recognized in accordance with the Accounting
that calculate net asset value per share (or its equivalent). If fair value Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 450 on contingencies. There
is not readily determinable, the amended guidance permits, as a was no impact upon adoption.
practical expedient, a reporting entity to measure the fair value of
an investment using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent)
provided by the investee without further adjustment. In accordance
with the guidance, the company adopted these amendments for the
year ended December 31, 2009. There was no material impact in
the Consolidated Financial Statements.

===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 89
Note C. These acquisitions were completed as follows: in the second
Acquisitions/Divestitures quarter, TRIRIGA, Inc. (TRIRIGA); and in the fourth quarter, i2,
Algorithmics, Inc. (Algorithmics), Q1 Labs and Curam Software Ltd.
Acquisitions (Curam Software). TRIRIGA was integrated into the Software
2011 and Global Business Services (GBS) segments upon acquisition.
In 2011, the company completed five acquisitions of privately held All other acquisitions were integrated into the Software segment
companies at an aggregate cost of $1,849 million. upon acquisition. All acquisitions reflected 100 percent ownership
of the acquired companies.
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2011.
2011 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Total
Life (in Years) Acquisitions
Current assets $ 251
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 88
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,291
Completed technology 7 320
Client relationships 7 222
Patents/trademarks 1 to 7 17
Total assets acquired 2,190
Current liabilities (191)
Noncurrent liabilities (150)
Total liabilities assumed (341)
Total purchase price $1,849
N/A—Not applicable
TRIRIGA is a provider of facility and real estate management software Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions as reflected in
solutions, which help clients make strategic decisions regarding the table above, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions are reported
space usage, evaluate alternative real estate initiatives, generate in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of acquired cash
higher returns from capital projects and assess environmental impact and cash equivalents. The overall weighted-average life of the
investments. The acquisition adds advanced real estate intelligence indentified intangible assets acquired is 6.9 years. These identified
to the company’s smarter buildings initiative. i2 expands the company’s intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over
big data analytics software for smarter cities by helping both public their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,291 million has been assigned to
and private entities in government, law enforcement, retail, insurance the Software ($1,277 million) and GBS ($14 million) segments. It is
and other industries access and analyze information they need to expected that approximately 25 percent of the goodwill will be
address crime, fraud and security threats. Algorithmics provides deductible for tax purposes.
software and services for improved business insights at financial
and insurance institutions to assess risk and address regulatory
challenges. Q1 Labs is a provider of security intelligence software
and will accelerate efforts to help clients more intelligently secure
their enterprises by applying analytics to correlate information from
key security domains and creating security dashboards for their
organizations. Curam Software is a provider of software and services
which help governments improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
accessibility of social programs for smarter cities.

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
90 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On January 9, 2012, the company announced it had completed Sterling Commerce—On August 27, 2010, the company completed
the acquisition of Platform Computing, a privately held company the acquisition of 100 percent of Sterling Commerce, a wholly owned
headquartered in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Platform Computing subsidiary of AT&T, Inc., for cash consideration of $1,415 million.
is a global leader in cluster and grid management software for Sterling Commerce will expand the company’s ability to help clients
distributed computing environments. At the date of issuance of the accelerate their interactions with customers, partners and suppliers
financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete through dynamic business networks using either on-premise or cloud
for the Platform Computing acquisition. delivery models. Sterling Commerce was integrated into the Software
On January 11, 2012, the company announced it had completed segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on
the acquisition of Green Hat, a privately held company jointly head- page 91, was entirely assigned to the Software segment. It is expected
quartered in London, England and Wilmington, Delaware. Green Hat that none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The
helps customers improve the quality of software application by overall weighted average useful life of the identified intangible assets
enabling developers to leverage cloud computing technologies to acquired is 6.9 years.
conduct testing on a software application prior to its delivery. At the
date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed
accounting was not complete for the Green Hat acquisition acquisitions of 10 privately held companies and one publicly held
On February 1, 2012, the company completed the acquisition of company: in the first quarter, Lombardi Software, Inc. (Lombardi),
Emptoris Inc., a privately held company based in Burlington, Intelliden Inc. and Initiate Systems, Inc.; in the second quarter, Cast
Massachusetts. Emptoris is a leading provider of cloud and Iron Systems; in the third quarter, BigFix, Inc., Coremetrics and
on-premise analytics software that brings more intelligence to Datacap; and in the fourth quarter, Unica Corporation (Unica), a
procurement and supply chain operations with spend, supplier and publicly held company, PSS Systems, OpenPages, Inc. (OpenPages)
contract management for Smarter Commerce. At the date of issuance and Clarity Systems. Global Technology Services (GTS) completed
of the financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not an acquisition in the first quarter: the core operating assets of Wilshire
completed for the Emptoris acquisition. Credit Corporation (Wilshire). GBS also completed an acquisition in
On February 10, 2012, the company completed the acquisition the first quarter: National Interest Security Company, LLC, a privately
of Worklight, a privately held company based in Israel. Worklight is held company. Systems and Technology (STG) completed acquisitions
a leading provider of mobile software for smartphones and tablets of two privately held companies: in the third quarter, Storwize; and
and will become an important part of the company’s mobility strategy. in the fourth quarter, BLADE Network Technologies (BLADE). All
At the date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase acquisitions were for 100 percent of the acquired companies.
accounting was not completed for the Worklight acquisition. Lombardi is a leading provider of business process management
On February 15, 2012, the company announced that it had software and services, and became part of the company’s application
completed the acquisition of DemandTec, a public company based integration software portfolio. Intelliden is a leading provider of
in San Mateo, California. DemandTec delivers cloud-based analytics intelligent network automation software and will extend the network
software that enables businesses to examine different customer management offerings. Initiate is a market leader in data integrity
buying scenarios, both online and in-store. At the date of issuance software for information sharing among healthcare and government
of the financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not organizations. Cast Iron Systems, a leading Software as a Service
completed for the DemandTec acquisition. (SaaS) and cloud application integration provider, enhances the
WebSphere business integration portfolio. BigFix, Inc. is a leading
2010 provider of high-performance enterprise systems and security
In 2010, the company completed 17 acquisitions at an aggregate management solutions that revolutionizes the way IT organizations
cost of $6,538 million. manage and secure their computing infrastructure. Coremetrics, a
leader in Web analytics software, will expand the company’s business
Netezza Corporation (Netezza)—On November 10, 2010, the analytics capabilities by enabling organizations to use cloud
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Netezza, for computing services to develop faster, more targeted marketing
cash consideration of $1,847 million. Netezza will expand the company’s campaigns. Datacap will strengthen the company’s ability to help
business analytics initiatives to help clients gain faster insights into organizations digitize, manage and automate their information assets.
their business information, with increased performance at a lower
cost of ownership. Netezza was integrated into the Software segment
upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on page 91,
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. It is expected that
none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
weighted average useful life of the identified intangible assets
acquired is 6.9 years.

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 91
The table below reflects the purchase price related to the 2010 acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2010.
2010 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Sterling Other
Life (in Years) Netezza Commerce Acquisitions
Current assets $ 218 $ 196 $ 377
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 73 106 209
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,410 1,032 2,312
Completed technology 3 to 7 202 218 493
Client relationships 2 to 7 52 244 293
In-process R&D 5 4 — 17
Patents/trademarks 1 to 7 16 14 27
Total assets acquired 1,975 1,810 3,728
Current liabilities (9) (129) (161)
Noncurrent liabilities (120) (266) (291)
Total liabilities assumed (128) (395) (452)
Total purchase price $1,847 $1,415 $3,277
N/A—Not applicable
Unica, a leading provider of software and services used to automate Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions” as
marketing processes, will expand the company’s ability to help reflected in the table above, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
organizations analyze and predict customer preferences and develop are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of
more targeted marketing campaigns. PSS Systems is a leading acquired cash and cash equivalents. For the “Other Acquisitions,”
provider of legal information governance and information management the overall weighted-average life of the identified intangible assets
software. OpenPages is a leading provider of software that helps acquired is 6.4 years. These identified intangible assets will be
companies more easily identify and manage risk and compliance amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of
activities across the enterprise through a single management system. $2,312 million has been assigned to the Software ($1,653 million),
Clarity Systems delivers financial governance software that enables GTS ($32 million), GBS ($252 million) and STG ($375 million) segments.
organizations to automate the process of collecting, preparing, It is expected that approximately 10 percent of the goodwill will be
certifying and controlling financial statements for electronic filing. deductible for tax purposes.
Wilshire’s mortgage servicing platform will continue the strategic
focus on the mortgage services industry and strengthens the 2009
commitment to deliver mortgage business process outsourcing In 2009, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate
solutions. National Interest Security Company will strengthen the cost of $1,471 million.
ability to deliver advanced analytics and IT solutions to the public
sector. Storwize, a provider of in-line data compression appliance SPSS, Inc. (SPSS)—On October 2, 2009, the company acquired
solutions, will help the company to make it more affordable for clients 100 percent of the outstanding common shares of SPSS for cash
to analyze massive amounts of data in order to provide new insights consideration of $1,177 million. SPSS is a leading global provider of
and business outcomes. BLADE provides server and top-of-rack predictive analytics software and solutions and this acquisition
switches as well as software to virtualize and manage cloud strengthened the company’s business analytics and optimization
computing and other workloads. capabilities. SPSS was integrated into the Software segment upon
acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on the next page,
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. Substantially all of
the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted
average useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired,
excluding goodwill, is 7.0 years.

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
92 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2009 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Life Other
(in Years) SPSS Acquisitions
Current assets $ 397 $ 13
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 20 1
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 748 255
Completed technology 4 to 7 105 39
Client relationships 5 to 7 30 20
Other identifiable assets 1 to 7 36 1
Total assets acquired 1,336 330
Current liabilities (157) (34)
Noncurrent liabilities (2) 0
Total liabilities assumed (160) (35)
Total purchase price $1,177 $295
N/A—Not applicable
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed Divestitures
acquisitions of four privately held companies: in the second quarter, 2011
Outblaze Limited, a messaging software provider, and Exeros, Inc., During the fourth quarter of 2011, the company completed the
a data discovery firm; in the third quarter, security provider Ounce divestiture of the iCluster business to Rocket Software. iCluster,
Labs, Inc.; and in the fourth quarter, Guardium, Inc., a database which was acquired in the Data Mirror acquisition in 2007, was
security company. GTS completed an acquisition in the fourth quarter: part of the Software business. This transaction was not material
RedPill Solutions PTE Limited, a privately held company focused on to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
business analytics. During the second quarter of 2011, the company completed
Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions,” as two divestitures related to subsidiaries of IBM Japan. The impact
reflected in the table above, was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions of these transactions was not material to the Consolidated Financial
were reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of Statements.
acquired cash and cash equivalents. For the “Other Acquisitions,”
the overall weighted-average life of the identified intangible assets 2010
acquired was 6.5 years. With the exception of goodwill, these identified On March 31, 2010, the company completed the sale of its activities
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their associated with the sales and support of Dassault Systemes’
useful lives. Goodwill of $255 million was assigned to the Software (Dassault) product lifecycle management (PLM) software, including
($246 million) and GTS ($10 million) segments. Substantially all of customer contracts and related assets to Dassault. The company
the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes. received net proceeds of $459 million and recognized a net gain
of $591 million on the transaction in the first quarter of 2010. The
gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain
transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement
of Earnings and the net proceeds were reflected in proceeds from
disposition of marketable securities and other investments within
cash flow from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows.

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 93
2009 its core logistics operations to Geodis. The company received
On October 1, 2009, the company completed the divestiture of its proceeds of $365 million and recognized a net gain of $298 million
UniData and UniVerse software products and related tools to Rocket on the transaction in the first quarter of 2009. The gain was net of
Software, a privately held global software development firm. The the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain transaction costs
company recognized gains related to this transaction in the fourth and related real estate charges. As part of this transaction, the
quarter of 2009 and in the fourth quarter of 2010. company outsourced its logistics operations to Geodis which enables
On March 16, 2009, the company completed the sale of certain the company to leverage industry-leading skills and scale and
processes, resources, assets and third-party contracts related to improve the productivity of the company’s supply chain.
Note D.
Financial Instruments
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at
December 31, 2011 and 2010.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $2,082 $— $2,082
Commercial paper — 1,760 — 1,760
Money market funds 1,886 — — 1,886
U.S. government securities — 2,750 — 2,750
Other securities — 8 — 8
Total 1,886 6,600 — 8,486(5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2) 1 7 — 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (2) 69 14 — 83
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts — 783 — 783
Foreign exchange contracts — 510 — 510
Equity contracts — 7 — 7
Total — 1,300 — 1,300 (6)
Total assets $1,956 $7,921 $— $9,877 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 523 $— $ 523
Equity contracts — 8 — 8
Total liabilities $ — $ 531 $— $ 531 (6)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position at December 31, 2011 are $546 million and $754 million, respectively.
(4) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2011 are $365 million and $166 million, respectively.
(5) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(6) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and
liability positions would have been reduced by $324 million each.

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
94 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $2,473 $— $ 2,473
Commercial paper — 2,673 — 2,673
Money market funds 1,532 — — 1,532
Canada government securities — 1,054 — 1,054
U.S. government securities — 44 — 44
U.S. government agency securities — 22 — 22
Other securities — 3 — 3
Total 1,532 6,269 — 7,801(6)
Debt securities—current (2)
Commercial paper — 490 — 490
U.S. government securities — 500 — 500
Other securities — 1 — 1
Total — 990 — 990 (6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 6 — 7
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 445 13 — 458
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 548 — 548
Foreign exchange contracts — 539 — 539
Equity contracts — 12 — 12
Total — 1,099 — 1,099 (7)
Total assets $1,978 $8,377 $— $10,355 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $1,003 $— $ 1,003
Equity contracts — 3 — 3
Total liabilities $ — $1,006 $— $ 1,006 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) R eported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2010 are $511 million and $588 million, respectively.
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2010 are $871 million and $135 million, respectively.
(6) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and
liability positions would have been reduced by $475 million each.
There were no significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010.

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 95
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value Long-Term Debt
Short-Term Receivables and Payables Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted market
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt are price is not available, an expected present value technique that uses
financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate fair value. rates currently available to the company for debt with similar terms
and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value. The carrying
Loans and Long-Term Receivables amount of long-term debt is $22,857 million and $21,846 million
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using current and the estimated fair value is $27,383 million and $24,006 million
interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar credit at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, 2011 and
2010, the difference between the carrying amount and estimated fair
value for loans and long-term receivables was immaterial.
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value which is not materially
different from carrying value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent
debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered available-for-sale and re corde d at fair value in the Consolidated Statement
of Finan cial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2011: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
Other securities $ 7 $ 1 $— $ 8
Total $ 7 $ 1 $— $ 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $58 $27 $ (2 ) $83
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2010: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
Other securities $ 6 $ 1 $(0 ) $ 7
Total $ 6 $ 1 $(0 ) $ 7
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $194 $264 $(0 ) $458
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
96 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 2011, As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is
the company believes that unrealized losses on debt and marketable exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will
equity securities are temporary and do not represent an other-than- fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the counterparty
temporary impairment. credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering into contracts
Sales of debt and marketable equity securities during the period with carefully selected major financial institutions based upon their
were as follows: credit ratings and other factors. The company’s established policies
and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions
($ in millions) include reviewing and establishing limits for credit exposure and
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 continually assessing the creditworthiness of counterparties. The
Proceeds $405 $16 $ 24 right of set-off that exists under certain of these arrangements
Gross realized gains (before taxes) 232 6 3 enables the legal entities of the company subject to the arrangement
to net amounts due to and from the counterparty reducing the
Gross realized losses (before taxes) (0) (0) (40)
maximum loss from credit risk in the event of counterparty default.
The after-tax net unrealized holding gains/(losses) on available-for- The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements
sale debt and marketable equity securities that have been included with most of its major counterparties. These arrangements require
in other comprehensive income/(loss) for the period and the after tax the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. Treasury securities)
net (gains)/losses reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive when the derivative fair values exceed contractually established
income/(loss) to net income were as follows: thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed or can vary based on
credit default swap pricing or credit ratings received from the major
credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 under these collateralized arrangements that were in a liability position
Net unrealized gains/(losses) at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $131 million and $363 million,
arising during the period $ (7) $51 respectively, for which no collateral was posted at December 31, 2011.
Net unrealized (gains)/losses The company posted collateral of $9 million at December 31, 2010.
reclassified to net income* (143) (0) Full collateralization of these agreements would be required in the
event that the company’s credit rating falls below investment grade
* Includes writedowns of $0.3 million and $3.6 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively.
or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, as
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale debt applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral security arrangements.
securities are less than one year at December 31 , 2011. The aggregate fair value of derivative instruments in net asset
positions as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $1,300 million and
Derivative Financial Instruments $1,099 million, respectively. This amount represents the maximum
exposure to loss at the reporting date as a result of the counterparties
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is
failing to perform as contracted. This exposure was reduced by
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the normal
$324 million and $475 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
course of business, the company is exposed to the impact of interest
respectively, of liabilities included in master netting arrangements
rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a lesser extent
with those counterparties. Additionally, at December 31, 2011 and
equity and commodity price changes and client credit risk. The
2010, this exposure was reduced by $466 million and $88 million
company limits these risks by following established risk management
of collateral, respectively, received by the company.
policies and procedures, including the use of derivatives, and, where
The company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities
cost effective, financing with debt in the currencies in which assets
in master netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or
are denominated. For interest rate exposures, derivatives are used
payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral
to better align rate movements between the interest rates associated
against the fair values of the related derivative instruments. No
with the company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest
amount was recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2011
rates associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used
for the right to reclaim cash collateral. At December 31, 2010,
to manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures,
$9 million was recognized in other receivables for the right to reclaim
derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising
cash collateral. The amount recognized in accounts payable for
from foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
the obligation to return cash collateral totaled $466 million and
$88 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The company
restricts the use of cash collateral received to rehypothecation, and
therefore reports it in prepaid expenses and other current assets
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. No amount
was rehypothecated at December 31, 2011. At December 31, 2010,
$9 million was rehypothecated.

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 97
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the Foreign Exchange Risk
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries
exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company (Net Investment)
with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as the portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign
derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon maturity which subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused
is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the underlying by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional
hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss potential on an currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S.
ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these hedging dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign
relationships by de-designating the derivative instrument in order to exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At
manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as accounting December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount of derivative
hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset the changes instruments designated as net investment hedges was $5.0 billion
in the fair value of the de-designated instruments from the date of and $1.9 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining
de-designation until maturity. maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts, approximately 0.4 years for both periods.
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps, In addition, at December 31, 2010, the company had liabilities of
depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a $221 million, representing the fair value of derivative instruments that
party to leveraged derivative instruments. were previously designated in qualifying net investment hedging
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized relationships, but were de-designated prior to December 31, 2010;
by underlying risk, follows. this amount matured in 2011. The notional amount of these
instruments at December 31, 2010 was $1.6 billion, including original
Interest Rate Risk and offsetting transactions. No instruments were outstanding at
December 31, 2011.
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally
to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-effective Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the underlying The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional
assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce overall interest currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments
cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to convert specific fixed- for royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S.
rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., fair value hedges) subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these
and to convert specific variable-rate debt issuances into fixed-rate foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the currency
debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December 31, 2011 and 2010, markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange forward
the total notional amount of the company’s interest rate swaps was contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward contracts are
$5.9 billion and $7.1 billion, respectively. The weighted-average accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2011 and over which the company is hedging its exposure to the variability in
December 31, 2010 was approximately 5.5 and 5.7 years, respectively. future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the
total notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow
hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $10.9 billion
Forecasted Debt Issuance
and $11.3 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average remaining
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
maturity of 0.7 years and 0.8 years, respectively.
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
At December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, in connection
starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest payments
with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions,
related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps are accounted
the company recorded net gains of $88 million and net losses
for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have any derivative
of $147 million (before taxes), respectively, in other comprehensive
instruments relating to this program outstanding at December 31,
income/(loss). Within these amounts $191 million of gains and
2011 and 2010.
$249 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be reclassified
At December 31, 2011 and 2010, net losses of approximately
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting
$5 million and $13 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded
economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.
in other comprehensive income/(loss) in connection with cash flow
hedges of the company’s borrowings. Within these amounts $6 million
and $8 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be reclassified
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting
economic impact against the underlying transactions.

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
98 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not
as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
the company hedges its exposure to the variability in future cash including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the
flows is approximately three years. At December 31, 2011, no exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
instruments relating to this program remained outstanding. At derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market
December 31, 2010, the total notional amount of cross-currency indices or the total return on the company’s common stock. They
swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported
denominated debt was $0.2 billion. in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
At December 31, 2010, net losses of approximately $1 million At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount of derivative
(before taxes) were recorded in other comprehensive income/(loss) instruments in economic hedges of these compensation obligations
in connection with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings. was $1.0 billion for each year.
No amount remains in accumulated other comprehensive income
at December 31, 2011.
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed
Asset/Liability Management
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of
of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to
these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants
company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010.
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay
the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The
amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes credit
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than
default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. These
one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of
derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are recorded
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are
at fair value with gains and losses reported in other (income) and
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company
of Earnings. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount
did not have any derivative instruments relating to this program
of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign currency
outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010.
exposure was $13.6 billion and $13.0 billion, respectively.

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 99
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the derivative and non-derivative instrument related risk management activity as of
December 31, 2011 and 2010 as well as for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Balance
Sheet Sheet
At December 31: Classification 2011 2010 Classification 2011 2010
Designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Interest rate contracts current assets $ 50 $ 33 and liabilities $ — $ —
Investments and
sundry assets 733 514 Other liabilities — —
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets 407 224 and liabilities 273 498
Investments and Other
sundry assets — 22 liabilities 155 135
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $1,190 $ 794 derivative liabilities $ 428 $ 633
Not designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets $ 82 $ 242 and liabilities $ 84 $ 370
Investments and Other
sundry assets 21 51 liabilities 11 —
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Equity contracts current assets 7 12 and liabilities 8 3
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $ 110 $ 305 derivative liabilities $ 103 $ 373
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ — $ 823
Long-term debt N/A N/A 1,884 1,746
Total $1,300 $1,099 $2,415 $3,576
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
100 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings Recognized Attributable to Risk
Line Item on Derivatives(1) Being Hedged(2)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $271 $241 $(172) $(117) $ (70) $344
Interest expense 205 160 (97) (89) (46) 193
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments (1)
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense 352 299 (128) N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 42 105 177 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Warrants and expense 10 — — N/A N/A N/A
Total $880 $805 $(219) $(206) $(116) $537
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated
Statement of Ineffectiveness and
Effective Portion Earnings Effective Portion Amounts Excluded from
Recognized in OCI Line Item Reclassified from AOCI Effectiveness Testing(3)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ (0) Interest expense $ (8) $ (8) $ (13) $ — $— $—
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts (266) 371 (718) and expense (247) (54) 143 (3) (4) (3)
Cost of sales (182) (92) (49) — — —
SG&A expense (74) (49) 14 — — —
Instruments in net investment hedges(4)
Foreign exchange contracts 45 178 (162) Interest expense 0 0 — (9) (3) 1
Total $(221) $549 $(880) $(511) $(203) $ 94 $(12) $ (7) $ (2)
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under
these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated
hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, there Note E.
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings representing Inventories
hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of hedge
effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an underlying ($ in millions)
exposure that did not or was not expected to occur (for cash flow At December 31: 2011 2010
hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course of business. Finished goods $ 589 $ 432
Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 83 Work in process and raw materials 2,007 2,018
and 84 for additional information on the company’s use of derivative Total $2,595 $2,450
financial instruments.

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 101
Note F. Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables
Financing Receivables financing contracts are priced independently at competitive market
rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms of these
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allowances separate financing agreements.
for credit losses, including residual values. The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as
collateral for non-recourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged
($ in millions) as collateral for borrowings were $324 million and $302 million at
At December 31: 2011 2010 December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. These borrowings are
Current included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 106 to 108.
Net investment in sales-type The company did not have any financing receivables held for
and direct financing leases $ 3,765 $ 3,945 sale as of December 31, 2011 and 2010.
Commercial financing receivables 7,095 6,777
Client loan receivables 5,195 4,718 Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Installment payment receivables 846 816
The following table presents financing receivables on a gross basis
Total $16,901 $16,257
excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual value, by
Noncurrent portfolio segment and by class, excluding current commercial
Net investment in sales-type financing receivables and other miscellaneous financing receivables.
and direct financing leases $ 5,406 $ 5,384
The company determines its allowance for credit losses based on
Commercial financing receivables 34 43 two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables
Client loan receivables 4,925 4,734 and further segments the portfolio via two classes: major markets
Installment payment receivables 410 388 and growth markets.
Total $10,776 $10,548
($ in millions)
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates Major Growth
At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets Total
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms ranging
Financing receivables
generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-type and
direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual values Lease receivables $ 6,510 $1,921 $ 8,430
of $745 million and $871 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, Loan receivables 9,077 2,552 11,629
respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of $733 million Ending balance $15,587 $4,472 $20,060
and $816 million, and net of the allowance for credit losses of Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,321 $4,370 $19,692
$118 million and $126 million at those dates, respectively. Individually evaluated for impairment $ 266 $ 102 $ 368
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding Allowance for credit losses
at December 31, 2011, expressed as a percentage of the total, are
Beginning balance at
approximately: 2012, 44 percent; 2013, 28 percent; 2014, 18 percent; January 1, 2011
2015, 7 percent; and 2016 and beyond, 3 percent. Lease receivables $ 84 $ 42 $ 126
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit
Loan receivables 150 76 226
losses of $53 million and $58 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
Total $ 234 $ 119 $ 353
respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts receivable
Write-offs (68) (16) (84)
financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and non-IBM products.
Provision 39 5 44
Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable financing
Other (1) (4) (5)
generally range from 30 to 90 days.
Client loan receivables, net of allowance for credit losses Ending balance at
December 31, 2011 $ 203 $ 104 $ 307
of $126 million and $160 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010,
Lease receivables $ 79 $ 40 $ 118
respectively, are loans that are provided by Global Financing primarily
to clients to finance the purchase of software and services. Separate Loan receivables $ 125 $ 64 $ 189
contractual relationships on these financing arrangements are for Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 82 $ 15 $ 96
terms ranging generally from one to seven years. Individually evaluated for impairment $ 122 $ 89 $ 211
Installment payment receivables, net of allowance for credit
losses of $51 million and $56 million at December 31, 2011 and
2010, respectively, are loans that are provided primarily to clients to
finance hardware, software and services ranging generally from one
to three years.

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
102 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Impaired Loans
Major Growth
At December 31, 2010: Markets Markets Total The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated
Financing receivables reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment,
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following table
Lease receivables $ 6,562 $1,983 $ 8,545
presents impaired client loan receivables.
Loan receivables 9,087 1,993 11,080
Ending balance $15,650 $3,975 $19,625
($ in millions)
Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,199 $3,794 $18,993
Recorded Related
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 451 $ 181 $ 632 At December 31, 2011: Investment Allowance
Allowance for credit losses Major markets $110 $ 70
Lease receivables* $ 84 $ 42 $ 126 Growth markets 62 53
Loan receivables* 150 76 226 Total $172 $123
Ending balance at
December 31, 2010 $ 234 $ 119 $ 353 ($ in millions)
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 60 $ 11 $ 71 Recorded Related
At December 31, 2010: Investment Allowance
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 174 $ 108 $ 282
Major markets $196 $119
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. Growth markets 132 68
Total $328 $187
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evaluated
either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually evaluated
receivables, the company determines the expected cash flow for the ($ in millions)
receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the Interest
Income
probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, Average Interest Recognized
the company records a specific reserve. In addition, the company Recorded Income on Cash
At December 31, 2011: Investment Recognized Basis
records an unallocated reserve that is determined by applying a
Major markets $142 $2 $0
reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that have
Growth markets 90 0 0
been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating,
Total $232 $3 $0
probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status Credit Quality Indicators
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing The company’s credit quality indicators which are based on rating
receivables which are on non-accrual status. agency data, publicly available information and information provided
by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the relative level
of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system that
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2011 2010 maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown on the
Major markets $ 46 $ 69 following page. Moody’s does not provide credit ratings to the
company on its customers.
Growth markets 20 33
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each class
Total lease receivables $ 66 $101
of receivables, by credit quality indicator. Receivables with a credit
Major markets $ 75 $141
quality indicator ranging from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment
Growth markets 24 123
grade. All others are considered non-investment grade.
Total loan receivables $ 99 $264
Total receivables $165 $366

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 103
Lease Receivables Lease Receivables*
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets At December 31, 2010: Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 697 $ 139 Aaa – Aa3 $ 794 $ 173
A1 – A3 1,459 306 A1 – A3 1,463 182
Baa1 – Baa3 2,334 654 Baa1 – Baa3 2,494 837
Ba1 – Ba2 1,118 457 Ba1 – Ba2 899 403
Ba3 – B1 534 252 Ba3 – B1 518 242
B2 – B3 260 97 B2 – B3 230 93
Caa – D 108 15 Caa – D 164 54
Total $6,510 $1,921 Total $6,562 $1,983
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Loan Receivables
Loan Receivables*
($ in millions)
Major Growth ($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets Major Growth
At December 31, 2010: Markets Markets
Credit rating
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 971 $ 185
Aaa – Aa3 $1,100 $ 173
A1 – A3 2,034 407
A1 – A3 2,026 183
Baa1 – Baa3 3,255 869
Baa1 – Baa3 3,453 841
Ba1 – Ba2 1,559 607
Ba1 – Ba2 1,245 405
Ba3 – B1 744 335
Ba3 – B1 718 243
B2 – B3 362 129
B2 – B3 318 94
Caa – D 151 20
Caa – D 227 54
Total $9,077 $2,552
Total $9,087 $1,993
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
At December 31, 2011, the industries which made up Global Financing’s
receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (39 percent), Government
(15 percent), Manufacturing (13 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services
(7 percent), Communications (6 percent) and Other (11 percent).
At December 31, 2010, the industries which made up Global
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (36 percent),
Government (16 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail
(9 percent), Services (8 percent), Communications (5 percent) and
Other (12 percent).

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
104 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2011: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 6 $ 6,504 $ 6,510 $ 6
Growth markets 9 1,911 1,921 6
Total lease receivables $16 $ 8,415 $ 8,430 $12
Major markets $23 $ 9,054 $ 9,077 $ 7
Growth markets 22 2,530 2,552 19
Total loan receivables $46 $11,584 $11,629 $26
Total $62 $19,998 $20,060 $38
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2010: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $10 $ 6,552 $ 6,562 $ 5
Growth markets 13 1,970 1,983 5
Total lease receivables $22 $ 8,523 $ 8,545 $10
Major markets $11 $ 9,076 $ 9,087 $ 4
Growth markets 32 1,961 1,993 17
Total loan receivables $43 $11,037 $11,080 $21
Total $65 $19,560 $19,625 $31
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
Troubled Debt Restructurings Note H.
In 2011, the company adopted new FASB guidance that helps Investments and Sundry Assets
creditors determine whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled
debt restructuring. The company assessed all restructurings ($ in millions)
that occurred on or after January 1, 2011 and determined that there At December 31: 2011 2010
were no troubled debt restructurings for the 12 months ended Deferred transition and setup costs
and other deferred arrangements* $1,784 $1,853
December 31, 2011.
Derivatives—noncurrent ** 753 588
Alliance investments
Note G.
Equity method 131 122
Property, Plant and Equipment
Non-equity method 127 531
($ in millions) Prepaid software 233 268
At December 31: 2011 2010 Long-term deposits 307 350
Land and land improvements $ 786 $ 777 Other receivables 208 560
Buildings and building improvements 9,531 9,414 Employee benefit-related 493 409
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 26,843 26,676 Prepaid income taxes 261 434
Plant and other property—gross 37,160 36,867 Other assets 598 663
Less: Accumulated depreciation 24,703 24,435 Total $4,895 $5,778
Plant and other property—net 12,457 12,432 * Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to
Rental machines 2,964 3,422 Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,”
on pages 76 to 86 for additional information.
Less: Accumulated depreciation 1,538 1,758
** See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 through 100 for the fair value of all
Rental machines—net 1,426 1,665 derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Total—net $13,883 $14,096

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 105
Note I. The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $96 million
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill during the year ended December 31, 2011, primarily due to amortization,
partially offset by intangible asset additions. No impairment of
Intangible Assets intangible assets was recorded in any of the periods presented.
Total amortization was $1,226 million and $1,174 million for the
The following table details the company’s intangible asset balances
years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The aggregate
by major asset class.
intangible amortization expense for acquired intangibles (excluding
capitalized software) was $634 million and $517 million for the years
($ in millions)
ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. In addition, in 2011
Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying the company retired $1,133 million of fully amortized intangible assets,
At December 31, 2011: Amount Amortization Amount
impacting both the gross carrying amount and accumulated
Intangible asset class amortization for this amount.
Capitalized software $1,478 $ (678) $ 799 The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
Client relationships 1,751 (715) 1,035 relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated
Completed technology 2,156 (745) 1,411 Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at
In-process R&D 22 (1) 21 December 31, 2011:
Patents/trademarks 207 (88) 119
Other* 29 (22) 7 ($ in millions)
Capitalized Acquired
Total $5,642 $(2,250) $3,392
Software Intangibles Total
2012 $480 $634 $1,113
2013 250 590 840
($ in millions)
Gross Net 2014 70 446 516
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2010: Amount Amortization Amount 2015 — 340 340
Intangible asset class 2016 — 303 303
Capitalized software $1,558 $ (726) $ 831
Client relationships 1,709 (647) 1,062
Completed technology 2,111 (688) 1,422
In-process R&D 21 (0) 21
Patents/trademarks 211 (71) 140
Other* 39 (28) 11
Total $5,649 $(2,161) $3,488
* O ther intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems.

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
106 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2011 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2011
Global Business Services $ 4,329 $ 14 $ (0) $(10) $ (20) $ 4,313
Global Technology Services 2,704 — (1) (2) (55) 2,646
Software 16,963 1,277 10 (2) (127) 18,121
Systems and Technology 1,139 — (6) — (0) 1,133
Total $25,136 $1,291 $ 2 $(13) $(203) $26,213
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2010 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2010
Global Business Services $ 4,042 $ 252 $ 0 $— $ 35 $ 4,329
Global Technology Services 2,777 32 (1) — (104) 2,704
Software 12,605 4,095 (52) — 315 16,963
Systems and Technology 766 375 (1) — (1) 1,139
Total $20,190 $4,754 $(54) $— $ 245 $25,136
Purchase price adjustments recorded in the 2011 and 2010 were related Note J.
to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, 2010 Borrowings
or 2009, respectively, and were still subject to the measurement
period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date Short-Term Debt
or when information becomes available. There were no goodwill
impairment losses recorded in 2011 or 2010, and the company has ($ in millions)
At December 31: 2011 2010
no accumulated impairment losses.
Commercial paper $2,300 $1,144
Short-term loans 1,859 1,617
Long-term debt—current maturities 4,306 4,017
Total $8,463 $6,778
The weighted-average interest rates for commercial paper at
December 31, 2011 and 2010 were 0.1 percent and 0.2 percent,
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term
loans was 1.2 percent and 1.1 percent at December 31, 2011 and
2010, respectively.

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 107
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2011 2010
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2011):
3.72% 2012 – 2013 $ 8,615* $ 6,326
1.02% 2014 – 2015 2,414* 5,019
4.94% 2016 –2020 8,600 6,359
2.90% 2021 500 —
7.00% 2025 600 600
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.875% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 187 187
5.60% 2039 1,545 1,545
7.00% 2045 27 27
7.125% 2096 322 322
24,192 21 ,766
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2011, in parentheses):
Euros (6.6%) 2012 – 2016 1,037 1 ,897
Japanese yen (0.8%) 2013 – 2014 1,123 1,162
Swiss francs (3.8%) 2012 – 2020 173 540
Other (5.1%) 2012 – 2014 177 240
26,702 25,606
Less: net unamortized discount 533 531
Add: fair value adjustment** 994 788
27,161 25,863
Less: current maturities 4,306 4,017
Total $22,857 $21,846
* $1.6 billion in debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance subsidiary of the company, is included in 2012-2015.
Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.
** The portion of the company’s fixed rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the
debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2011 2010
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $18,547 4.38% $14,446 5.29%
Floating-rate debt* 8,614 1.54% 11,417 1.23%
Total $27,161 $25,863
* Includes $5,898 million in 2011 and $7,078 million in 2010 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D,
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100.)

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
108 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt outstanding The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and
at December 31, 2011, are as follows: warranties, covenants, events of default, and indemnification
provisions. The company believes that circumstances that might give
($ in millions) rise to breach of these covenants or an event of default, as specified
Total in the Credit Agreement, are remote. As of December 31, 2011, there
2012 $ 4,311 were no borrowings by the company, or its subsidiaries, under the
2013 5,495 Credit Agreement.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
2014 3,763
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest
2015 197
rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary
2016 3,009
from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
2017 and beyond 9,926
Total $26,702
Note K.
Other Liabilities
Interest on Debt
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 At December 31: 2011 2010
Cost of financing $553 $555 $ 706 Income tax reserves $3,989 $3,486
Interest expense 402 365 404 Executive compensation accruals 1,388 1,302
Net investment derivative activity 9 3 (1) Disability benefits 835 739
Interest capitalized 9 5 13 Derivatives liabilities 166 135
Total interest paid and accrued $973 $928 $1,122 Special actions 347 399
Workforce reductions 366 406
Refer to the related discussion on page 137 in note T, “Seg ment Deferred taxes 549 378
Inform ation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing Environmental accruals 249 249
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100
Noncurrent warranty accruals 163 130
for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in
Asset retirement obligations 166 161
the company’s debt risk management program.
Other 777 841
Total $8,996 $8,226
Lines of Credit
In 2011 the company renewed its five-year, $10 billion Credit Agreement In response to changing business needs, the company periodically
(the “Credit Agreement”), which now expires on November 10, 2016. takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost
The total expense recorded by the company related to this facility competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent contractually
was $5.0 million in 2011, $6.2 million in 2010 and $6.3 million in 2009. obligated future payments associated with these activities are
The Credit Agreement permits the company and its Subsidiary reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the previous table.
Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings In addition, the company executed certain special actions as
of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the follows: (1) the second quarter of 2005 associated with Global
company. The company may also, upon the agreement of either Services, primarily in Europe, (2) the fourth quarter of 2002 associated
existing lenders, or of the additional banks not currently party to with the acquisition of the PricewaterhouseCoopers consulting
the Credit Agreement, increase the commitments under the Credit business, (3) the second quarter of 2002 associated with the
Agreement up to an additional $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms Microelectronics Division and the rebalancing of the company’s
of the Credit Agreement, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers workforce and leased space resources, (4) the 2002 actions
may borrow, prepay and reborrow amounts under the Credit associated with the hard disk drive business for reductions in
Agreement at any time during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates workforce, manufacturing capacity and space, (5) the actions taken
on borrowings under the Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing in 1999, and (6) the actions that were executed prior to 1994.
market interest rates, as further described in the Credit Agreement.

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 109
The table below provides a roll forward of the current and noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. The current liabilities
presented in the table are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(in millions)
Liability Liability
as of as of
January 1, Other December 31,
2011 Payments Adjustments* 2011
Current
Workforce $ 45 $(46) $ 34 $ 33
Space 8 (8) 4 4
Total current $ 53 $(53) $ 38 $ 38
Noncurrent
Workforce $395 $ 0 $(51) $344
Space 4 0 (1) 3
Total noncurrent $399 $ 0 $(52) $347
* The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, foreign currency translation adjustments and interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees As of December 31, 2011, the company was unable to estimate
who are no longer working for the company who were granted annual the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain
payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. Depending asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily
on the individual country’s legal requirements, these required related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject
payments will continue until the former employee begins receiving to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-
pension benefits or passes away. The space accruals are for ongoing encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate only if it
obligations to pay rent for vacant space that could not be sublet or performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. Because
space that was sublet at rates lower than the committed lease these conditional obligations have indeterminate settlement dates,
arrangement. The length of these obligations varies by lease with the company could not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair
the longest extending through 2014. values. The company will continue to assess its ability to estimate
The company employs extensive internal environmental protection fair values at each future reporting date. The related liability will be
programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company also recognized once sufficient additional information becomes available.
participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a number The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts
of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned facilities classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure for all Position were $187 million and $176 million at December 31, 2011
environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts have and 2010, respectively.
been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are not
probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO
environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect
actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $262 million at
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Estimated environmental
costs are not expected to materially affect the consolidated financial
position or consolidated results of the company’s operations in future
periods. However, estimates of future costs are subject to change
due to protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental
remediation regulations.

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
110 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note L. Other Stock Transactions
Equity Activity The company issued the following shares of common stock as part
of its stock-based compensation plans and employee stock purchase
plan: 20,669,785 shares in 2011, 34,783,386 shares in 2010 and
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 shares
30,034,808 shares in 2009.The company issued 4,920,198 treasury
of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
shares in 2011, 7,929,318 treasury shares in 2010 and 6,408,265 treasury
1,163,182,565 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2011 and
shares in 2009, as a result of exercises of stock options by employees
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par
of certain acquired businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also,
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2011.
as part of the company’s stock-based compensation plans, 1,717,246
common shares at a cost of $289 million, 2,334,932 common shares
Stock Repurchases
at a cost of $297 million and 1,550,846 common shares at a cost of
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM $161 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, were remitted by
common stock. The company repurchased 88,683,716 common employees to the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax
shares at a cost of $15,034 million, 117,721,650 common shares at withholding requirements. These amounts are included in the
a cost of $15,419 million and 68,650,727 common shares at a cost treasury stock balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
of $7,534 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. These amounts Position and the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
reflect transactions executed through December 31 of each year.
Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may differ due to
varying settlement dates for these transactions. At December 31, 2011,
$8,660 million of Board common stock repurchase authorization
was still available. The company plans to purchase shares on the open
market or in private transactions from time to time, depending on
market conditions.

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 111
Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2011: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (693) $ (18) $ (711)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (231) 88 (143)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (241) $ 91 $ (150)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (266) $ 105 $ (162)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 511 (182) 329
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 245 $ (77) $ 167
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (28) $ 7 $ (22)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (5,463) 1,897 (3,566)
Curtailments and settlements 11 (3) 7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (157) 62 (94)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,847 (619) 1,227
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(3,790) $1,343 $(2,448)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(4,479) $1,339 $(3,142)
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2010: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 712 $ (69) $ 643
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 70 $ (24) $ 46
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 0 (0) (0)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 8 (3) 5
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 78 $ (27) $ 51
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 371 $ (120) $ 251
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 203 (68) 134
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 573 $ (188) $ 385
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 28 $ (8) $ 20
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,728) 1,016 (1,712)
Curtailments and settlements 10 (3) 7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (183) 67 (116)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,249 (441) 808
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(1,624) $ 632 $ (992)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (260) $ 348 $ 87

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
112 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2009: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments $1,675 $ 57 $1,732
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 118 $ (47) $ 72
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 64 (24) 39
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 182 $ (71) $ 111
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (718) $ 224 $ (493)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (94) 32 (63)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (812) $ 256 $ (556)
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 375 $(146) $ 229
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 1,433 (439) 994
Curtailments and settlements (125) 33 (93)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (162) 55 (107)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,105 (402) 704
Total retirement-related benefit plans $2,626 $(898) $1,727
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $3,671 $(656) $3,015
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/Losses Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2009 $(481) $1,836 $(20,297) $ 113 $(18,830)
Change for period 385 643 (992) 51 87
December 31, 2010 (96) 2,478 (21,289) 164 $(18,743)
Change for period 167 (711) (2,448) (150) (3,142)
December 31, 2011 $ 71 $1,767 $(23,737) $ 13 $(21,885)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
Note M.
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related
Contingencies and Commitments
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and other
Contingencies benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, product
As a company with a substantial employee population and with liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environmental
clients in more than 170 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff matters. These actions may be commenced by a number of different
or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, parties, including competitors, clients, current or former employees,
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time to government and regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives
time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader of the locations in which the company does business. Some of the
in the information technology industry and, as such, has been and actions to which the company is party may involve particularly
will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and complex technical issues, and some actions may raise novel
associated products and offerings, including claims of copyright and questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these
patent infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. matters arise.
In addition, the company enforces its own IP against infringement, The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit,
through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 113
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of code to Linux. The
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. company has asserted counterclaims, including breach of contract,
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the violation of the Lanham Act, unfair competition, intentional torts,
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of unfair and deceptive trade practices, breach of the General Public
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the company License that governs open source distributions, promissory estoppel
also discloses matters based on its consideration of other matters and copyright infringement. Motions for summary judgment were
and qualitative factors, including the experience of other companies heard in March 2007, and the court has not yet issued its decision.
in the industry, and investor, customer and employee relations On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and
considerations. all proceedings in this case were stayed. On August 25, 2009, the
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware approved the
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time appointment of a Chapter 11 Trustee of SCO. The court in another
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010.
the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the The jury found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to
claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this Note, recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent
the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the
losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling
accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In November 2011, SCO
and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to filed a motion in Federal Court in Utah seeking to reopen the SCO
predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s v. IBM case.
experience that damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are Complaints against IBM were filed with the European Commission
unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not (EC) by Platform Solutions, Inc. in 2007, T3 Technologies, Inc. in 2009
meaningful indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, and TurboHercules SAS in 2010. Each complaint alleged that IBM
the company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number violated European Competition law, primarily by refusing to license
of other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations its patents and trade secrets to the complainants and by refusing
and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status to license its software for use on computer systems made and/or
of the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal sold by complainants. Each complaint has been withdrawn, and in
theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of September 2011, the EC closed these investigations. IBM had been
information important to the matters. The company reviews claims, notified that the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) was investigating
suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions possible antitrust violations by IBM based on the company’s refusal
are made with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and to license certain patents and trade secrets and its refusal to license
disclosing reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually its software for use on systems that IBM believes infringe its
or in the aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement intellectual property rights. In October 2011, the DOJ notified IBM
discussions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews that this investigation has been closed.
by counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter. The company was a defendant in an action filed on April 2, 2009
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas
any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a by ACQIS LLC (Acqis), which alleged that certain IBM products
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, results infringe certain patents relating generally to modular computing
of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of variables, devices. Acqis sought damages and injunctive relief. The trial took
including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; the place in February 2011, and in late February, the jury found in favor
structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of of Acqis and awarded damages in the amount of $9 million. Both
the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in parties submitted post-trial motions. In late December 2011, the
the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and parties entered into a settlement agreement resolving all claims
circumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional between them.
factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, The company was a defendant in an action filed on February 5, 2010
it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia
of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by TecSec, Inc., which alleged that certain IBM products infringe certain
by the resolution of one or more of these matters. patents relating generally to encryption. TecSec sought damages
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters and injunctive relief. The case was set for trial in March 2011. In late
involving the company. February 2011, the court granted IBM’s motion for summary judgment
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 of non-infringement, and final judgment has been entered in favor
in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM). of IBM. TecSec filed an appeal, and in mid-January 2012, the Court
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed judgment in favor of IBM.
is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP rights, On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf
and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, interference of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one
with contract and breach of contract with regard to the company’s another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the modernization

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
114 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
of social service program processing in Indiana. The State terminated alleged in the SEC’s complaint, (ii) prejudgment interest on that
the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and the State is seeking amount of $2.7 million, and (iii) a civil penalty of $2 million. The
damages. IBM believes the State’s claims against it are without merit settlement is subject to court approval.
and is seeking payment of termination amounts specified in the The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after
contract. Trial began in late February 2012 in Marion County, Indiana January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York,
Superior Court. county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The complaints
The company was named as a co-defendant in numerous allege numerous and different causes of action, including for negligence
purported class actions filed on and after March 18, 2011 in federal and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. Plaintiffs in these
and state courts in California in connection with an information cases seek medical monitoring and claim damages in unspecified
technology outsourcing agreement between Health Net, Inc. and amounts for a variety of personal injuries and property damages
IBM. The matters were consolidated in the United States District allegedly arising out of the presence of groundwater contamination
Court for the Eastern District of California, and plaintiffs filed a and vapor intrusion of groundwater contaminants into certain structures
consolidated complaint on July 15, 2011. The consolidated complaint in which plaintiffs reside or resided, or conducted business, allegedly
alleges that the company violated the California Confidentiality of resulting from the release of chemicals into the environment by
Medical Information Act in connection with hard drives that are the company at its former manufacturing and development facility
unaccounted for at one of Health Net’s data centers in California; in Endicott. These complaints also seek punitive damages in an
plaintiffs have been notified by Health Net that certain of their personal unspecified amount. The first trial in these cases is scheduled to
information is believed to be contained on those hard drives. Plaintiffs begin in October 2012.
seek damages, as well as injunctive and declaratory relief. IBM has The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
also received a request for information regarding this matter from the brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the
California Attorney General. On January 12, 2012, the court granted Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
IBM’s motion to dismiss the complaint for lack of standing, and on Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to CERCLA.
February 22, the case against IBM was dismissed. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to participate
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceedings in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership of sites. The
in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the IBM UK company is also conducting environmental investigations, assessments
Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative beneficiaries or remediations at or in the vicinity of several current or former
of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a declaration that operating sites globally pursuant to permits, administrative orders
it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the UK Trust that it or agreements with country, state or local environmental agencies,
was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future accruals for most and is involved in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or
participants and in implementing the company’s new retirement policy. former operating sites.
The trial in the High Court is scheduled to begin in February 2013. The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and
In addition, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 275 individual governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many
actions brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined benefits other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is
plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege constructive involved in various challenges with Brazilian authorities regarding
dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the Employment non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters.
Tribunal in Southampton UK and are currently stayed pending These matters include claims for taxes on the importation of computer
resolution of the above-referenced High Court proceedings. In a software. In November 2008, the company won a significant case in
separate but related proceeding, in March 2011, the Trustee of the the Superior Chamber of the federal administrative tax court in Brazil,
IBM UK Trust was granted leave to initiate a claim before the High and in late July 2009, the company received written confirmation
Court in London against IBM UK and one member of the UK Trust regarding this decision. The total potential amount related to the
membership, seeking an order modifying certain documents and remaining matters for all applicable years is approximately $600 million.
terms relating to retirement provisions in IBM UK’s largest defined The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that this
benefit plan dating back to 1983. The trial of these proceedings is amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability.
scheduled to begin in May 2012.
In March 2011, the company announced that it has agreed to Commitments
settle a civil enforcement action with the SEC relating to activities
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
by employees of IBM Korea, LG IBM, IBM (China) Investment Company
include unused amounts of $4,040 million and $3,415 million at
Limited and IBM Global Services (China) Co., Ltd., during the period
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. A portion of these amounts
from 1998 through 2009, allegedly in violation of the Foreign Corrupt
was available to the company’s business partners to support their
Practices Act of 1977. As part of the settlement, IBM has consented
working capital needs. In addition, the company has committed to
to the entry of a judgment relating to the books and records and
provide future financing to its clients in connection with client purchase
internal control provisions of the securities laws. IBM has also
agreements for approximately $2,567 million and $2,825 million at
agreed to pay a total of $10 million, categorized by the SEC as follows:
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
(i) $5.3 million, representing profits gained as a result of the conduct

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 115
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor to The components of the provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction
disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of requiring are as follows:
the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a description
of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor. ($ in millions)
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect U.S. federal
to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of Current $ 268 $ 190 $ 473
contracts entered into by the company, under which the company
Deferred 909 1,015 1,341
customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless against losses
1,177 1,205 1,814
arising from a breach of representations and covenants related to
U.S. state and local
such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP rights, specified
Current 429 279 120
environmental matters, third-party performance of nonfinancial
Deferred 81 210 185
contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these
circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other 510 489 305
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in the Non-U.S.
particular contract, the procedures of which typically allow the Current 3,239 3,127 2,347
company to challenge the other party’s claims. While typically Deferred 222 69 247
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual maximum 3,461 3,196 2,594
on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these Total provision for income taxes 5,148 4,890 4,713
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim,
Provision for social security,
and in some instances, the company may have recourse against real estate, personal property
third parties for certain payments made by the company. and other taxes 4,289 4,018 3,986
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of Total taxes included in net income $9,437 $8,908 $8,699
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s
and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Historically,
effective tax rate is as follows:
payments made by the company under these agreements have not
had a material effect on the company’s business, financial condition
($ in millions)
or results of operations.
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under
Foreign tax differential (10) (10) (9)
these financial guarantees was $42 million and $48 million at
State and local 2 2 1
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The fair value of the
guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Other (2) (2) (1)
Position is not material. Effective rate 25% 25% 26%
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconciliation
Note N.
above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of foreign
Taxes
subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory
rate, foreign export incentives, U.S. tax impacts of non-U.S. earnings
($ in millions)
repatriation and any net impacts of intercompany transactions. These
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
items also reflect audit settlements or changes in the amount of
Income before income taxes
unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of these items.
U.S. operations $ 9,716 $ 9,140 $ 9,524
In the second quarter of 2011, the company reached agreement
Non-U.S. operations 11,287 10,583 8,614
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) related to the valuation of
Total income before income taxes $21,003 $19,723 $18,138 certain intellectual property within the 2004-2005 and 2006-2007
audit periods. The agreement resolved all open matters for the period
The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as follows: 2004 though 2007 with the IRS. As a result, the company recorded
a benefit to the provision for income taxes of $173 million.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the IRS commenced its audit of the
($ in millions)
company’s U.S. tax returns for the years 2008 through 2010.
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
U.S. operations $2,141 $2,000 $2,427
Non-U.S. operations 3,007 2,890 2,286
Total provision for income taxes $5,148 $4,890 $4,713

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
116 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2011
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate. increased by $282 million in 2011 to $5,575 million. A reconciliation
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits
that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is as follows:
were as follows:
($ in millions)
Deferred Tax Assets 2011 2010 2009
Balance at January 1 $5,293 $4,790 $3,898
($ in millions)
Additions based on tax positions
At December 31: 2011 2010
related to the current year 672 1,054 554
Retirement benefits $ 5,169 $ 4,131
Additions for tax positions
Share-based and other compensation 1,598 1,570 of prior years 379 1,768 634
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 914 948 Reductions for tax positions
Deferred income 834 1,080 of prior years (including impacts
due to a lapse in statute) (538) (1,659) (277)
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 752 758
Settlements (231) (660) (19)
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 608 564
Balance at December 31 $5,575 $5,293 $4,790
Depreciation 474 470
Capitalized research and development 70 291
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
Other 1,409 1,486 and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain
Gross deferred tax assets 11,828 11,298 tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related matters and state
Less: valuation allowance 912 795 issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits
Net deferred tax assets $10,916 $10,503 for tax positions of prior years are primarily related to non-U.S. audits
and to the conclusion of the IRS examination of the company’s
income tax returns for 2004 through 2007, related to the valuation
Deferred Tax Liabilities
of certain intellectual property, as well as impacts due to lapses in
($ in millions) statutes of limitation.
At December 31: 2011 2010 In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of a non-
Leases $2,149 $1,950 U.S. taxing authority with respect to certain foreign tax losses. The
Depreciation 1,421 1,223 tax benefit of these losses, approximately $1,475 million, had been
Goodwill and intangible assets 796 909 included in unrecognized tax benefits within 2010 additions for tax
Retirement benefits 551 338 positions of prior years. The tax benefit of these losses total $1,557
Software development costs 466 638 million as of December 31, 2011. The increase was driven by currency
and has been included in the 2011 additions for tax positions of prior
Other 1,121 1,114
years. In April 2011, the company received notification that the appeal
Gross deferred tax liabilities $6,504 $6,172
had been denied. In June 2011, the company filed a lawsuit chal-
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and lenging this decision. No final determination has been reached on
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $791 million, this matter.
as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $875 million. The liability at December 31, 2011 of $5,575 million can be reduced
Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least two by $485 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with the correlative
years or are available for 10 years or more. effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state income taxes
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2011 principally applies and timing adjustments. The net amount of $5,090 million, if recognized,
to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, in the would favorably affect the company’s effective tax rate. The net
opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire unutilized. amounts at December 31, 2010 and 2009 were $4,849 million and
However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carryforwards $4,213 million, respectively.
are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation allowance Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included
will reduce income tax expense. in income tax expense. During the year ended December 31, 2011, the
company recognized $129 million in interest expense and penalties; in
2010, the company recognized a $15 million benefit in interest expense
and penalties, and in 2009, the company recognized $193 million
in interest expense and penalties. The company has $461 million for
the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2011
and had $374 million accrued at December 31, 2010.

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 117
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably a portion of these earnings to the extent that it does not incur an
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the deferred tax liability,
with certain positions may be reduced. The company expects that if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings is not practicable.
certain foreign and state issues may be concluded in the next
12 months. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits Note O.
at December 31, 2011 could be reduced by $138 million.
Research, Development and Engineering
With limited exception, the company is no longer subject to U.S.
federal, state and local or non-U.S. income tax audits by taxing RD&E expense was $6,258 million in 2011, $6,026 million in 2010
authorities for years through 2007. The years subsequent to 2007 and $5,820 million in 2009.
contain matters that could be subject to differing interpretations of The company incurred expense of $5,990 million, $5,720 million
applicable tax laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/ and $5,523 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, for scientific
or timing of income, deductions and tax credits. Although the research and the application of scientific advances to the development
outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes of new and improved products and their uses, as well as services
that adequate amounts of tax and interest have been provided for and their application. Within these amounts, software-related expense
any adjustments that are expected to result for these years. was $3,097 million, $3,028 million and $2,991 million in 2011, 2010
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $37.9 billion and 2009, respectively.
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31, 2011, Expense for product-related engineering was $267 million,
as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these earnings $306 million and $297 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodically repatriates
Note P.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based:
Basic 1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202 1,327,157,410
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 14,241,131 16,189,053 12,258,864
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 2,575,848 2,377,133 1,936,480
Assuming dilution 1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388 1,341,352,754
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $15,855 $14,833 $13,425
Less—net income applicable to contingently issuable shares 0 0 —
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $15,855 $14,833 $13,425
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 13.06 $ 11.52 $ 10.01
Basic $ 13.25 $ 11.69 $ 10.12
Stock options to purchase 612,272 common shares in 2009 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings
per share because the exercise price of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares for the applicable full
year, and therefore, the effect would have been antidilutive.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
118 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note Q. Contingent rentals are included in the determination of rental
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments expense as accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum
rental commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions and
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was special actions taken through 1994, and in 1999, 2002 and 2005
$1,836 million in 2011, $1,727 million in 2010 and $1,677 million in 2009. (previously reserved), sublease income commitments and capital
Rental expense in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent lease commitments. These amounts reflect activities primarily
increases is recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. related to office space, as well as manufacturing facilities.
($ in millions)
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Beyond 2016
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,562 $1,324 $1,000 $689 $443 $613
Vacant space $ 29 $ 10 $ 9 $ 7 $ 3 $ 1
Sublease income commitments $ 29 $ 14 $ 9 $ 5 $ 4 $ 8
Capital lease commitments $ 19 $ 28 $ 13 $ 14 $ 7 $ 5
Note R. Incentive Awards
Stock-Based Compensation Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen sation
on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over the employee and Management Resources Comm ittee of the Board of Directors
requisite service period. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans principally
on page 82 for additional information. include stock options, restricted stock units, performance share
The following table presents total stock-based compensation units or any combination thereof.
cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under
the company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 2011.
($ in millions) In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previous plans,
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 if and when those awards were canceled, could be reissued under
Cost $ 120 $ 94 $ 94 the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million additional awards
Selling, general and administrative 514 488 417 were considered authorized to be issued under the company’s existing
Research, development Plans as of December 31, 2011. There were 124.8 million unused shares
and engineering 62 48 47 available to be granted under the Plans as of December 31, 2011.
Other (income) and expense* — (1) — Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
Pre-tax stock-based awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The exercise
compensation cost 697 629 558 price of at-the-money stock options is the average of the high and
Income tax benefits (246) (240) (221) low market price on the date of grant. The options approval process
Total stock-based specifies the individual receiving the grant, the number of options or
compensation cost $ 450 $ 389 $ 337 the value of the award, the exercise price or formula for determining the
* Reflects the one-time effects of the sale of the Product Lifecycle Management activities. exercise price and the date of grant. All awards for senior management
are approved by the Committee. All awards for employees other than
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested awards senior management are approved by senior management pursuant to
at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $1,169 million and $1,044 million, a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee, and the
respectively, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted- grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed periodically
average period of approximately three years. with the Committee. Awards that are given as part of annual total
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation compensation for senior management and other employees are
cost at December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. made on specific cycle dates scheduled in advance. With respect
to awards given in connection with promotions or new hires, the
company’s policy requires approval of such awards prior to the grant
date, which is typically the date of the promotion or the date of hire.

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 119
Stock Options assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options include
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend
granted at an exercise price equal to the company stock price on yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual future
the date of grant. These awards, which generally vest 25 percent events or the value ultimately realized by employees who receive equity
per year, are fully vested four years from the date of grant and have awards, and subsequent events are not indicative of the reasonableness
a contractual term of 10 years. of the original estimates of fair value made by the company.
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date During the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the
of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and company did not grant stock options.
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
2011 2010 2009
Weighted Number of Weighted Number of Weighted Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $ 94 39,197,728 $ 98 73,210,457 $102 119,307,170
Options exercised 98 (18,144,309) 101 (33,078,316) 98 (28,100,192)
Options canceled/expired 107 (391,097) 108 (934,413) 127 (17,996,521)
Balance at December 31 $ 90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728 $ 98 73,210,457
Exercisable at December 31 $ 90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728 $ 98 72,217,126
The shares under option at December 31, 2011 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted Average
Weighted Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$61– $85 $ 78 8,079,175 $ 857,827,574 1.3
$86 – $105 97 11,061,890 957,308,722 2.6
$106 and over 106 1,521,257 118,474,466 2.0
$ 90 20,662,322 $1,933,610,763 2.1
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an as a result of employee stock option exercises for the years ended
additional 1.0 million stock-based awards, consisting of stock options December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was approximately $1,786 million,
and restricted stock units, outstanding at December 31, 2011, as a $3,347 million and $2,744 million, respectively. In connection with
result of the company’s assumption of stock-based awards previously these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the company for the
granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-average exercise years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were $412 million,
price of these awards was $59 per share. $351 million and $243 million, respectively.
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
Exercises of Employee Stock Options with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2011 and 2010
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $1,269 million, $1,072 million were approximately 1,019 million and 934 million shares, respectively.
and $639 million, respectively. The total cash received from employees

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
120 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, the company currently grants its employees stock awards. These awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock
Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) or Performance Share Units (PSUs).
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
RSUs
2011 2010 2009
Weighted Weighted Weighted
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $110 11,196,446 $102 13,405,654 $100 12,397,515
RSUs granted 154 5,196,802 122 3,459,303 105 4,432,449
RSUs released 106 (3,508,700) 98 (5,102,951) 99 (2,748,613)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 122 (665,947) 105 (565,560) 101 (675,697)
Balance at December 31 $129 12,218,601 $110 11,196,446 $102 13,405,654
PSUs
2011 2010 2009
Weighted Weighted Weighted
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $111 3,649,288 $107 3,476,737 $102 3,078,694
PSUs granted at target 154 1,055,687 117 1,239,468 101 1,568,129
Additional shares earned above target* 118 230,524 103 463,913 83 396,794
PSUs released 118 (1,189,765) 103 (1,486,484) 83 (1,440,099)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 118 (58,743) 108 (44,346) 111 (126,781)
Balance at December 31** $122 3,686,991 $111 3,649,288 $107 3,476,737
* Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the company’s
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The
to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a company received no cash from employees as a result of employee
one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, 2011,
and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price. 2010 and 2009. In the second quarter of 2011, the company granted
RSUs granted to employees prior to January 1, 2008 are considered equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each to about
participating securities as they receive non-forfeitable dividend 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were made under
equivalents at the same rate as common stock. Any unvested awards the Plans and vest in December 2015.
that contain these rights are included in computing earnings per PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately
share pursuant to the two-class method. For RSUs awarded on or received by the employee depends on the company’s performance
after January 1, 2008, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period.
value of such RSUs is determined and fixed on the grant date based The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, based
on the company’s stock price adjusted for the exclusion of dividend on the company’s stock price, and assumes that performance
equivalents. targets will be achieved. Over the performance period, the number
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at of shares of stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is the same as the period over based upon the probability of achievement of performance targets.
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which The ultimate number of shares issued and the related compensation
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the
the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $803 million, final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value of
$421 million and $467 million, respectively. The total fair value of RSUs PSUs granted at target during the years ended December 31, 2011,
vested and released during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $165 million, $145 million and $159 million,
2010 and 2009 was $373 million, $503 million and $272 million, respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during
respectively. As of December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, there was the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $141 million,
$1,021 million, $865 million and $892 million, respectively, of $153 million and $120 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 121
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal Pension
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred to as the
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were $283 million, $293 million Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as the PPP.
and $156 million, respectively. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions to an
irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of participants
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides
benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
Pur chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first method
purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 5 percent
uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits based
discount off the average market price on the day of purchase through
on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-specific
payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensation. Eligible
factors. The second method is a cash balance formula that calculates
compensation includes any compensation received by the employee
benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual salary, as well as
during the year. The ESPP provides for offering periods during which
an interest crediting rate.
shares may be purchased and continues as long as shares remain
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
available under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion
December 31, 2007 for all participants.
of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
Employees purchased 1.9 million, 2.4 million and 3.2 million shares
Executive Reten tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, which
under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010
is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives based on
and 2009, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by the
average earnings, years of service and age at termination of employment.
company on its common stock also include cash dividends on the
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31,
company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are paid
2007 for all participants.
on full and fractional shares and can be reinvested in the ESPP. The
company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered outstanding
Defined Contribution Plans
and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares for
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to
Approximately 5.4 million, 7.2 million and 9.6 million shares were
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined
available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2011, 2010
contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code.
and 2009, respectively.
Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible
employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions
Note S. up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to
Retirement-Related Benefits January 1, 2005, and up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for
those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employees
receive automatic contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or
Description of Plans
4 percent of eligible compensation based on their eligibility to
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution
participate in the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees receive
plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a supplemental
automatic contributions and matching contributions after the
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension
completion of one year of service. Further, through June 30, 2009,
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical
IBM contributed transition credits to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents.
Plan accounts. The amount of the transition credits was based on a
participant’s age and service as of June 30, 1999.
U.S. Plans The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and
Defined Benefit Pension Plans participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All
IBM Personal Pension Plan contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. There
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pension are no minimum amounts that must be invested in company stock,
benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the IBM and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts out of company
Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) plan stock to another investment choice, other than excessive trading
and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January 1, 2008, rules applicable to such investments.

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
122 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for eligible
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Exec utive U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company established a Future
Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, defined Health Account (FHA) for employees who were more than five years
contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess from retirement eligibility. Employees who were within five years of
401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees retirement eligibility are covered under the company’s prior retiree
who are eligible to participate in the 401(k) Plus Plan and whose health benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or the prior
eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS compensation retiree health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the
limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the Excess 401(k). company for retiree health benefits.
The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide benefits that would be Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are not
provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation eligible for company subsidized nonpension postretirement benefits.
limits did not apply.
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping Non-U.S. Plans
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. Most subsidiaries and branches outside the United States sponsor
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover
in investments which mirror the primary investment options available substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds
under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) are under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities
also eligible to receive company match and automatic contributions under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Benefits
on eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on years
compensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during a
pay limit once they have completed one year of service. Through fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual
June 30, 2009, eligible participants also received transition credits. credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S.
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments
contributions are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement within the various countries.
of Financial Position. In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries sponsor
nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible dependents,
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. retirees. However,
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretirement most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local government-sponsored
benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to eligible U.S. and -administered programs.
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Defined benefit pension plans $(774) $ (949) $(919) $ 734 $ 541 $ 521 $ (40) $ (408) $ (398)
Retention Plan 15 14 13 — — — 15 14 13
Total defined benefit
pension plans (income)/cost $(759) $(935) $(906) $ 734 $ 541 $ 521 $ (25) $ (394) $ (384)
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
and Non-U.S. plans $ 875 $ 882 $ 946 $ 608 $ 527 $ 478 $1,483 $1,409 $1,424
Excess 401(k) 30 20 26 — — — 30 20 26
Total defined contribution plans cost $ 905 $ 902 $ 972 $ 608 $ 527 $ 478 $1,513 $1,430 $1,450
Nonpension postretirement
benefit plans cost $ 269 $ 281 $ 292 $ 76 $ 66 $ 58 $ 345 $ 347 $ 350
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $ 415 $ 248 $ 358 $1,418 $1,134 $1,057 $1,832 $1,382 $1,415

===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 123
The following table presents a summary of the total projected benefit obligation (PBO) for defined benefit pension plans, accumulated
postretirement benefit obligation (APBO) for nonpension postretirement benefit plans (benefit obligations), fair value of plan assets and the
associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $ — $49,663 $ — $ 50,259 $ — $ 596
Underfunded plans
Qualified PPP 52,318 — 51,218 — (1,100) —
Excess PPP 1,462 1,360 — — (1,462) (1,360)
Retention Plan 305 271 — — (305) (271)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 5,273 5,123 38 35 (5,235) (5,088)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $59,358 $ 6,753 $51,256 $ 35 $ (8,102) $ (6,718)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $13,169 $22,625 $16,011 $25,096 $ 2,843 $ 2,471
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 7 8 7 9 0 1
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $13,175 $22,633 $16,018 $25,105 $ 2,843 $ 2,472
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $24,659 $14,507 $19,351 $10,626 $ (5,308) $ (3,881)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 5,033 5,452 — — (5,033) (5,452)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 894 864 105 111 (789) (753)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $30,587 $20,823 $19,456 $10,737 $(11,131) $(10,086)
Total overfunded plans $13,175 $72,296 $16,018 $75,364 $ 2,843 $ 3,068
Total underfunded plans $89,944 $27,576 $70,712 $10,772 $(19,232) $(16,804)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2011, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 96 percent funded compared to the benefit
obligations, with the U.S. qualified PPP 98 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined benefit pension plans
were 89 percent funded.

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
124 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans consists of all
The following tables through page 126 represent financial information plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding defined postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S.
contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. Nonp ension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the Retention
The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans recognized in
Consoli dated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 505 $ 508 $ 585
Interest cost 2,456 2,601 2,682 1,843 1,841 1,898
Expected return on plan assets (4,043) (4,017) (4,009) (2,521) (2,461) (2,534)
Amortization of transition assets — — — (0) (0) (0)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 10 10 10 (162) (174) (126)
Recognized actuarial losses 818 471 411 957 712 624
Curtailments and settlements — 1 — 1 27 (126)
Multi-employer plans/other costs — — — 111 89 200
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (759) $ (935) $ (906) $ 734 $ 541 $ 521
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Service cost $ 33 $ 33 $ 41 $ 11 $ 9 $ 10
Interest cost 236 262 289 67 59 51
Expected return on plan assets — — — (10) (9) (8)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) — (14) (39) (4) (5) (6)
Recognized actuarial losses — — — 13 12 11
Total net periodic cost $269 $281 $292 $ 76 $66 $ 58

===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 125
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2011 2010 2011 2010* 2011 2010 2011 2010
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $51,293 $48,354 $42,584 $41,308 $ 5,123 $ 5,100 $ 872 $ 767
Service cost — — 505 508 33 33 11 9
Interest cost 2,456 2,601 1,843 1,841 236 262 67 59
Plan participants’ contributions — — 53 57 228 235 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net (0) — (48) (75) (0) — (1) 1
Actuarial losses/(gains) 3,551 3,573 812 1,656 244 123 47 32
Benefits paid from trust (3,121) (3,145) (1,995) (1,957) (623) (641) (7) (7)
Direct benefit payments (95) (92) (462) (457) (32) (5) (27) (25)
Foreign exchange impact — — (423) (225) — — (60) 37
Medicare/Government subsidies — — — — 65 16 — —
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — 1 (8) (73) — — — 0
Benefit obligation at December 31 $54,085 $51,293 $42,861 $42,584 $ 5,273 $ 5,123 $ 901 $ 872
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $50,259 $47,269 $35,722 $34,305 $ 35 $ 33 $ 120 $ 104
Actual return on plan assets 4,080 6,135 1,052 2,983 0 0 13 17
Employer contributions — — 728 801 397 408 0 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (27) (10) — (0) (0) (0)
Plan participants’ contributions — — 53 57 228 235 — —
Benefits paid from trust (3,121) (3,145) (1,995) (1,957) (623) (641) (7) (7)
Foreign exchange impact — — (537) (396) — — (15) 6
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 367** (61) — — — —
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 $51,218 $50,259 $35,362 $35,722 $ 38 $ 35 $ 112 $ 120
Funded status at December 31 $ (2,866) $ (1,034) $ (7,499) $ (6,861) $(5,235) $(5,088) $(789) $(752)
Accumulated benefit obligation+ $54,085 $51,293 $42,063 $41,630 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Excludes a defined benefit pension plan in Brazil due to restrictions on the use of plan assets imposed by governmental regulations.
** Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to a 2011 government ruling allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. Beginning June
2011, the assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three year period, with approximately $200 million expected to be returned during 2012. The remaining surplus in Brazil at
December 31, 2011 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
+ R epresents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010
Prepaid pension assets $ 0 $ 596 $ 2,843 $ 2,471 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 1
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits (96) (94) (304) (289) (437) (421) (22) (22)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefit obligations (2,770) (1,536) (10,038) (9,044) (4,798) (4,667) (768) (731)
Funded status—net $(2,866) $(1,034) $ (7,499) $(6,861) $(5,235) $(5,088) $(789) $(752)
The table on page 126 presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in other
comprehensive income/(loss) and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
126 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010 2011 2010
Net loss at January 1 $15,865 $14,880 $17,580 $17,172 $492 $397 $180 $167
Current period loss/(gain) 3,514 1,456 1,696 1,130 241 96 45 24
Curtailments and settlements — — (11) (10) — — — —
Amortization of net loss included
in net periodic (income)/cost (818) (471) (957) (712) — — (13) (12)
Net loss at December 31 $18,561 $15,865 $18,309 $17,580 $734 $492 $211 $180
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 149 $ 159 $ (958) $ (1,104) $ — $ (14) $ (14) $ (19)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — 28 (28) — — (0) (0)
Curtailments and settlements — — — — — — — —
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 162 174 — 14 4 5
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 139 $ 149 $ (768) $ (958) $ — $ — $ (10) $ (14)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ (0) $ (1) $ — $ — $ 1 $ 1
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — (0) (0)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ (0) $ (0) $ — $ — $ 0 $ 1
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $18,701 $16,014 $17,541 $16,621 $734 $492 $202 $167
* S ee note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 110 to 112 for the total change in the accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive
Income for the components of net periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) into net periodic
(income)/cost in 2012.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,343 $1,047 $24 $16
Prior service costs/(credits) 9 (157) — (4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities — (0) — 0
During the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
company paid $16 million, $22 million and $140 million, respectively, Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage premiums periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada, Luxembourg and use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years
the U.K.). Premiums were significantly higher in 2009 due to the of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of
increased level of insolvencies experienced by other companies as which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
a result of the economic crisis in that period. assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
No significant amendments of retirement-related benefit plans mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a
occurred during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010 that minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
had a material effect in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
In 2009, the company approved changes to the United Kingdom
Pension Plan which included ending benefit accruals under this plan
effective April 2011. As a result of this action, the company recorded
a curtailment gain of $124 million which was included in 2009 net
periodic (income)/cost and reduced the PBO by $85 million.

===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 127
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for retirement-
related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31:
Discount rate 5.00% 5.60% 5.75% 4.33% 4.84% 4.89%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets 8.00% 8.00% 8.00% 6.41% 6.56% 6.73%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.37% 2.92% 3.09%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31:
Discount rate 4.20% 5.00% 5.60% 4.28% 4.33% 4.84%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.43% 2.37% 2.92%
* Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2011 2010 2009 2011 2010 2009
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic cost for the year ended December 31:
Discount rate 4.80% 5.40% 5.75% 7.75% 7.92% 7.36%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 9.07% 9.16% 9.19%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31:
Discount rate 3.90% 4.80% 5.40% 7.37% 7.75% 7.92%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/cost
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. and in a decrease in 2011 net periodic income of $171 million, a decrease
certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds in 2010 net periodic income of $40 million and a decrease in 2009
is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from the company’s net periodic income of $70 million. The changes in the discount rate
expected benefit obligation payments are then matched to the yield assumptions resulted in an increase in the PBO of $4,216 million and
curve to derive the discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where $2,943 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes in
well developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used the discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net periodic
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate corporate cost for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 and
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, as resulted in an increase in the APBO of $359 million and $240 million
the benchmark for developing the respective discount rates. at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
128 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets Interest Crediting Rate
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets. interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long- cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting
term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the benefits
strategies as described on page 129. These rates of return are that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based
developed by the company, calculated using an arithmetic average on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury
and are tested for reasonableness against historical returns. The Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
use of expected long-term returns on plan assets may result in For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.3 percent
recognized pension income that is greater or less than the actual for the year ended December 31, 2011, from 1.4 percent for the year
returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over time, however, ended December 31, 2010, resulted in an increase in 2011 net periodic
the expected long-term returns are designed to approximate the income of $4 million. The change in the interest crediting rate to
actual long-term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income 1.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2010, from 2.8 percent
and cost recognition that more closely matches the pattern of the for the year ended December 31, 2009, resulted in an increase in
services provided by the employees. Differences between actual 2010 net periodic income of $62 million. The change in the interest
and expected returns are recognized as a component of net loss or crediting rate to 2.8 percent for the year ended December 31, 2009,
gain in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), which is from 5.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2008, resulted in
amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the an increase in 2009 net periodic income of $151 million.
service lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of plan For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the company
assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically reviews external data and its own historical trends for healthcare
over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. However, the
net periodic (income)/cost. healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect on plan costs
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan which limit the
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent company’s obligation to the participants. The company assumes
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2012 will be 7.5 percent. In
and 2009 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net addition, the company assumes that the same trend rate will decrease
periodic (income)/cost. to 5 percent over the next five years. A one percentage point increase
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company or decrease in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would not
maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely have had a material effect on 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic cost
payments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2011, or the benefit obligations as of December 31, 2011 and 2010.
2010 and 2009, the expected long-term return on plan assets and
the actual return on those assets were not material. Healthcare Legislation
The expected effects of the U.S. healthcare reform legislation enacted
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate in March 2010 were incorporated into the remeasurements of the
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the comp any, U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at December 31, 2011
based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate of and 2010. The impact was insignificant as a result of the terms of
compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants.
pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all
participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on life expectancy
and death rates for different types of participants. Mortality rates are
periodically updated based on actual experience.

===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 129
Plan Assets Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with only a modest
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and measured percentage of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private
at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” market assets consisting of private equities and private real estate
on page 84. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations, these investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As
fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the amounts of December 31, 2011, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,663 million
the company could realize in current market transactions. in commitments for future investments in private markets to be made
over a number of years. These commitments are expected to be
Investment Policies and Strategies funded from plan assets.
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are designed Derivatives are used on a limited basis as an effective means to
to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future achieve investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s
obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations will risk management strategy. The primary reasons for the use of
be settled depends on future events, including the retirement derivatives are fixed income management, including duration, interest
dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obligations rate management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the current manage currency and commodity strategies.
economic environment and other pertinent factors described on Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
pages 126 to 128. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strategy described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted average
balances the requirement to generate returns, using potentially higher target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 37 percent equity securities,
yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to control 51 percent fixed income securities, 3 percent real estate and
risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income 9 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation
securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity decisions made by the company’s management. The table on page
values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to 130 details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types
become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on of investments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concen- percentage allocation to fixed income securities is required. In others,
tration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio the responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a
among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected by
account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences compared
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. As a result, with the strategies previously described. Generally, these non-U.S.
the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 43 percent equity plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their use of derivatives is
securities, 46 percent fixed income securities, 6 percent real estate usually limited to currency hedging, adjusting portfolio durations
and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the and reducing specific market risks. The target allocation for equity
allocation decisions made by the company’s management and is securities decreased from 47 percent to 37 percent in the current
similar to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 130 year, offset by an increase in the target allocation for fixed income
details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types securities and other investments.
of investments in the Qualified PPP portfolio. The company’s defined benefit pension plans include
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and investments in certain European government securities. At
investment professionals who are employees of the company. They December 31, 2011, the U.S. plan held approximately $1 billion
are bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s and the non-U.S. plans held approximately $11 billion in European
management and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among sovereign debt investments, respectively. Investments in government
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing debt securities in Italy, Spain and Ireland were de minimis in the U.S.
security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and plan and represented less than 1 percent of total non-U.S. plan assets.
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies. The plans hold no direct investments in government debt securities
of Greece and Portugal.
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains
a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit
payments.

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
130 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2011.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $13,618 $ 11 $ — $13,629 $6,426 $ — $ — $ 6,427
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 32 1,877 — 1,909 240 7,751 — 7,991
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 15,105 29 15,134 — 8,479 96 8,575
Corporate bonds (e) — 7,387 12 7,398 — 1,409 39 1,447
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 838 45 883 — 36 — 36
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 262 715 246 1,223 72 7,136 — 7,209
Insurance contracts — — — — — 988 — 988
Cash and short-term investments (g) 286 2,390 — 2,675 145 361 — 506
Hedge funds — 1,140 713 1,853 — 417 — 417
Private equity (h) 0 — 4,098 4,098 — — 262 262
Private real estate (h) — — 2,790 2,790 — — 580 580
Derivatives (i) 10 (15) — (6) (2) 866 — 864
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 9 114 — 123
Subtotal 14,207 29,446 7,932 51,586 6,890 27,557 977 35,425
Other (k) — — — (368) — — — (62)
Fair value of plan assets $14,207 $29,446 $7,932 $51,218 $6,890 $27,557 $977 $35,362
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $132 million, representing 0.3 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $35 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $13 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $38 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $112 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair
value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 131
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2010.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $16,407 $ 54 $ — $16,460 $7,903 $ — $ — $ 7,903
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 27 1,829 — 1,856 276 9,252 — 9,527
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 12,743 — 12,743 — 7,574 — 7,574
Corporate bonds — 6,721 — 6,721 — 1,252 11 1,263
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 1,147 56 1,202 — 45 — 45
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(e) 252 662 221 1,136 75 6,993 — 7,068
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,095 — 1,095
Cash and short-term investments (f) 244 2,000 — 2,244 147 254 — 401
Hedge funds — 953 624 1,577 — — — —
Private equity (g) — — 4,251 4,251 — — 176 176
Private real estate (g) — — 2,634 2,634 — — 533 533
Derivatives (h) 31 9 — 40 11 131 — 142
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(i) — — — — — 28 — 28
Subtotal 16,960 26,117 7,786 50,863 8,411 26,623 720 35,755
Other (j) — — — (603) — — — (33)
Fair value of plan assets $16,960 $26,117 $7,786 $50,259 $8,411 $26,623 $720 $35,722
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $122 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $32 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(f) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(g) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(h) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(i) Invests in both equity and fixed income securities.
(j) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $35 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $120 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
132 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2011
and 2010 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2011 $— $— $ 56 $221 $624 $4,251 $2,634 $7,786
Return on assets held at end of year (0) 0 (1) 25 (35) 348 131 468
Return on assets sold during the year 0 (0) (0) — 5 (30) 39 14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 12 5 (16) — (7) (471) (14) (492)
Transfers, net 17 7 6 — 127* — — 157
Balance at December 31, 2011 $29 $12 $ 45 $246 $713 $4,098 $2,790 $7,932
* Due to an increase in the redemption term during 2011, the asset was transferred from Level 2 to Level 3.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
Equity and Asset- Fixed Income
Commingled/ Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
Mutual Funds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2010 $ 26 $37 $192 $587 $3,877 $2,247 $6,964
Return on assets held at end of year 24 3 30 45 829 123 1,054
Return on assets sold during the year (0) 0 — 3 (153) 16 (133)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 139 11 — (11) (302) 248 85
Transfers, net (188)* 4 — — — — (184)
Balance at December 31, 2010 $ — $56 $221 $624 $4,251 $2,634 $7,786
* During the year ended December 31, 2010, the fund hired an independent administrator responsible for valuing the fund. As a result of this action the asset was transferred from
Level 3 to Level 2.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2011
and 2010 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2011 $ — $ 11 $176 $533 $720
Return on assets held at end of year 3 2 30 11 46
Return on assets sold during the year (0) (0) (2) (3) (5)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 100 28 65 44 237
Transfers, net — — (0) 0 0
Foreign exchange impact (7) (2) (7) (6) (22)
Balance at December 31, 2011 $ 96 $39 $262 $580 $977
($ in millions)
Corporate Private Private
Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2010 $ — $ 93 $492 $585
Return on assets held at end of year (0) 14 41 55
Return on assets sold during the year — 3 (3) 0
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 4 69 9 82
Transfers, net 7 (0) — 7
Foreign exchange impact 0 (3) (6) (8)
Balance at December 31, 2010 $11 $176 $533 $720

===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 133
Valuation Techniques Expected Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to Defined Benefit Pension Plans
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valuation It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions
techniques during 2011 and 2010. sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New The company contributed $728 million and $801 million in cash
York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are typically to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $70 million and
valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the administrator $64 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during the
of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The cash
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual cost
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding. These included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated
assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 depending on Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for participants
availability of quoted market prices. in multi-employer plans other than its own employees. As a result,
The fair value of fixed income securities is typically estimated the company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar impact on the company’s financial statements.
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified In 2012, the company is not legally required to make any
as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded. depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. during the year.
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S.
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and raises
assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related benefit
periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine plans. The additional funding requirements by the Act apply to plan
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by
investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation methodology is the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which
applied consistently from period to period. revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price plans may smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months. At
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are December 31, 2011, no mandatory contribution is required for 2012.
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. In 2012, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for example, $800 million, which will be mainly contributed to defined benefit
yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign exchange pension plans in Japan, Switzerland and the U.K. This amount
rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 depending represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial
on availability of quoted market prices. market performance in 2012 could increase the legally mandated
minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly or
daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also
elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount based
on market conditions or other factors.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $362 million and $363 million to the
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended
December 31, 2011 and 2010. These contribution amounts exclude
the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on page 134.

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
134 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments have been
estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2011 and include benefits attributable to
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2012 $ 3,273 $ 98 $ 2,015 $ 348 $ 5,735
2013 3,313 102 1,996 354 5,765
2014 3,353 105 2,000 358 5,816
2015 3,420 108 2,024 368 5,920
2016 3,401 110 2,068 377 5,957
2017–2021 17,261 579 10,767 2,110 30,718
The 2012 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants, as well
as the expected receipt of the company’s share of the Medicare subsidy described below. These payments have been estimated based on
the same assumptions used to measure the plan’s APBO at December 31, 2011.
($ in millions)
Less: IBM
Share of Total
Expected Net Expected Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan Medicare U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Subsidy Payments Payments Payments Payments
2012 $ 492 $(26) $ 466 $ 7 $ 32 $ 505
2013 509 (26) 483 8 36 527
2014 448 (25) 423 9 39 471
2015 432 (23) 409 10 42 461
2016 425 — 425 10 45 480
2017–2021 2,003 — 2,003 63 282 2,348
The 2012 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement subsidy of $96 million to the plan in order to reduce contributions
benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets required by the participants. The company received total subsidies
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current of $36 million and $45 million for prescription drug-related coverage
liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively,
which were utilized to reduce the company contributions to the U.S.
Medicare Prescription Drug Act nonpension postretirement benefit plan.
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement The company has included the impact of its portion of the subsidy
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company is expected to continue in the determination of net periodic cost and APBO for the U.S.
to receive a federal subsidy of approximately $196 million to subsidize nonpension postretirement benefit plan at and for the years ended
the prescription drug coverage provided by the U.S. nonpension December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. The impact of the subsidy
postretirement benefit plan, which is expected to extend until 2015. resulted in a reduction in APBO of $93 million and $107 million at
Approxi mately $100 million of the subsidy will be used by the company December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The impact of the subsidy
to reduce its obligation and cost related to the U.S. nonpension resulted in a reduction in 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic cost of
postretirement benefit plan. The company will contribute the remaining $37 million, $19 million and $28 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 135
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of plan
assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on page 125.
($ in millions)
2011 2010
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $83,777 $70,570 $21,589 $10,627
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 83,184 70,512 21,166 10,576
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 13,169 16,011 72,288 75,355
Note T. Services and Global Business Services recover cost, as well as a
Segment Information reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length value of
providing the services. The Global Services segments enter into
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: arm’s-length leases and loans at prices equivalent to market rates
Global Tech nol ogy Services, Global Business Services, Software, with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of equipment used
Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The segments in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are reviewed
represent components of the company for which separate financial annually, and reset if appropriate.
information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
executive officer in determining how to allocate resources and to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a
evaluate performance. The segments are determined based on result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the
several factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain
technology, delivery channels and similar economic characteristics. marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting,
Information about each segment’s business and the products and Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources and Billing and
services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in the Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
“Description of Business” section on pages 22 to 24, and in “Segment on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear
Details,” on pages 26 through 31 in the Management Discussion. and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, management system; e.g., advertising expense is allocated based
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that is used by on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared expenses,
Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements is primarily which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments.
sourced internally from Systems and Technology and Software. For These expenses are associated with the elimination of internal
providing IT services that are used internally, Global Technology transactions and other miscellaneous items.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
136 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and measurement system
utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior management,
both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments. Effective January 1, 2011, the company transitioned
its management and measurement system to reflect operating earnings in an effort to provide better transparency into the operating results
of the business. As a result, certain acquisition-related charges and non-operating retirement-related costs are not reflected in the segment
results. See the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for additional information regarding this change. Prior year segment
pre-tax income and pre-tax margin have been reclassified to conform to the new management and measurement system.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2011
External revenue $40,879 $19,284 $24,944 $ 18,985 $2,102 $106,194
Internal revenue 1,242 797 3,276 838 2,092 8,246
Total revenue $42,121 $20,081 $28,219 $19,823 $4,195 $114,440
Pre-tax income $ 6,284 $ 3,006 $ 9,970 $ 1,633 $2,011 $ 22,904
Revenue year-to-year change 6.6% 5.6% 10.9% 5.6% 2.8% 7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 14.3% 18.1% 5.3% 12.2% 2.8% 9.5%
Pre-tax income margin 14.9% 15.0% 35.3% 8.2% 47.9% 20.0%
2010
External revenue $38,201 $18,223 $22,485 $ 17,973 $2,238 $ 99,120
Internal revenue 1,313 798 2,950 804 1,842 7,707
Total revenue $39,514 $19,021 $25,436 $18,777 $4,080 $106,827
Pre-tax income* $ 5,499 $ 2,546 $ 9,466 $ 1,456 $1,956 $ 20,923
Revenue year-to-year change 2.0% 2.6% 5.7% 9.8% 0.1% 4.2%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change* 0.3% 1.8% 13.8% 12.1% 13.5% 8.3%
Pre-tax income margin* 13.9% 13.4% 37.2% 7.8% 48.0% 19.6%
2009
External revenue $37,347 $17,653 $21,396 $ 16,190 $2,302 $ 94,889
Internal revenue 1,386 887 2,677 911 1,774 7,635
Total revenue $38,734 $18,540 $24,073 $17,102 $4,076 $102,524
Pre-tax income* $ 5,482 $ 2,501 $ 8,319 $ 1,298 $1,724 $ 19,323
Revenue year-to-year change (5.1)% (10.3)% (3.1)% (15.2)% (8.4)% (7.6)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change* 23.0% (3.4)% 13.9% (8.8)% 7.1% 11.2%
Pre-tax income margin* 14.2% 13.5% 34.6% 7.6% 42.3% 18.8%
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.

===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 137
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
($ in millions) Global Technology Services assets are primarily accounts receivable,
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 plant, property and equipment including the assets associated with
Revenue the outsourcing business, goodwill, acquired intangible assets,
Total reportable segments $114,440 $106,827 $102,524 deferred services arrangement transition costs and maintenance parts
Other revenue and adjustments 722 750 869 inventory. Global Business Services assets are primarily goodwill
and accounts receivable. Software assets are mainly goodwill,
Elimination of internal transactions (8,246) (7,707) (7,635)
acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Systems and
Total IBM consolidated revenue $106,916 $ 99,870 $ 95,758
Technology assets are primarily plant, property and equipment,
manufacturing inventory and accounts receivable. Global Financing
($ in millions) assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets under
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010* 2009* operating leases.
Pre-tax income To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equipment,
Total reportable segments $22,904 $20,923 $19,323 several segments may share plant, property and equipment assets.
Amortization of acquired Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets is
intangible assets (629) (512) (489) assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user segment.
Acquisition-related charges (46) (46) (9) This is consistent with the company’s management system and is
Non-operating retirement- reflected accordingly in the table on page 138. In those cases, there
related (costs)/income 72 414 509 will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax income
Elimination of internal transactions (1,243) (957) (744) and segment assets.
Unallocated corporate amounts** (56) (98) (453) Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
Total IBM consolidated are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be
pre-tax income $21,003 $19,723 $18,138 consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ pre-
tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income reflect
* Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are not specifically
** The 2009 amount included a provision related to a joint venture investment, while
the 2010 amount included an adjustment of that provision as the venture was divested. identified by the management reporting system. Capital expenditures
The 2009 and 2010 amounts included gains related to the divestiture of the printing that are reported by each segment also are consistent with the
business.
landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
Immaterial Items
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense associated
Investment in Equity Alliances with the Global Financing business, including the intercompany
and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses) financing activities discussed on page 24, as well as the income from
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and investment in cash and marketable securities. The explanation of the
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments difference between cost of financing and interest expense for segment
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial presentation versus presentation in the Consolidated Statement of
results of the segments. Earnings is included on page 66 of the Management Discussion.

===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
138 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2011
Assets $15,475 $8,078 $23,926 $7,649 $36,427 $91,557
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,713 83 1,062 737 1,145 4,739
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,838 56 469 1,032 930 4,325
Interest income — — — — 2,139 2,139
Interest expense — — — — 538 538
2010
Assets $15,560 $8,007 $22,625 $7,287 $35,813 $89,292
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,632 75 992 784 1,417 4,900
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,511 52 463 1,163 1,246 4,434
Interest income — — — — 2,116 2,116
Interest expense — — — — 548 548
2009
Assets $16,422 $6,885 $16,894 $6,907 $34,605 $81,714
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,680 87 906 814 1,694 5,181
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,512 45 471 658 1,460 4,145
Interest income — — — — 2,265 2,265
Interest expense — — — — 674 674
* Segment pre-tax income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.

===== PAGE 141 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 139
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Revenue by Classes of
Similar Products or Services
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2011 2010 2009 The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of
Assets products or services within the company’s reportable segments.
Total reportable segments $ 91,557 $ 89,292 $ 81,714 Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services,
Elimination of internal transactions (5,407) (5,515) (5,481) client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software,
Unallocated amounts
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support are
Cash and marketable securities 10,575 10,113 12,688
reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting,
Notes and accounts receivable 3,526 3,762 3,928
education, training and other product-related services are reported
Deferred tax assets 4,865 4,494 5,545
as Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics
Plant, other property
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from
and equipment 2,918 3,067 2,971
the sale of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue
Pension assets 2,837 3,060 2,994
includes circuit and component design services and technology
Other 5,562 5,178 4,665
and manufacturing consulting services. See “Description of the
Total IBM consolidated assets $116,433 $113,452 $109,022 Business,” beginning on page 20 for additional information.
Major Clients ($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s
Global Technology Services
total revenue in 2011, 2010 or 2009.
Services $31,746 $29,367 $28,762
Maintenance 7,515 7,250 6,956
Geographic Information
Systems 1,478 1,409 1,279
The following provides information for those countries that are
Software 140 175 351
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Global Business Services
Services $18,956 $17,858 $17,213
Revenue*
Software 211 236 231
($ in millions)
Systems 118 129 208
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009
Software
United States $ 37,041 $35,581 $34,150
Software $22,921 $20,882 $20,094
Japan 10,968 10,701 10,222
Services 2,022 1,603 1,302
Other countries 58,906 53,589 51,386
Systems and Technology
Total IBM consolidated revenue $106,916 $99,870 $95,758
Servers $12,362 $11,619 $10,627
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
Storage 3,619 3,420 3,177
Microelectronics OEM 1,975 1,938 1,550
Net Plant, Property and Equipment
Retail Store Solutions 753 674 551
($ in millions)
Microelectronics Services 277 321 285
At December 31: 2011 2010 2009
Global Financing
United States $ 6,271 $ 6,134 $ 6,313
Financing $ 1,612 $ 1,580 $ 1,715
Other countries 6,186 6,298 6,142
Used equipment sales 490 659 588
Total $12,457 $12,432 $12,455
Note U.
Subsequent Events
On January 31, 2012, the company announced that the Board of
Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.75 per common share.
The dividend is payable March 10, 2012 to shareholders of record
on February 10, 2012.
On February 1, 2012, the company issued $2.5 billion in fixed rate
bonds as follows: $1.5 billion in 3-year bonds with a 0.55 percent
coupon, and $1.0 billion in 5-year bonds with a 1.25 percent coupon.
On February 3, 2012, the company issued C$500 million in
Canadian 5-year fixed rate bonds with a 2.20 percent coupon.

===== PAGE 142 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
140 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007
Revenue $106,916 $ 99,870 $ 95,758 $103,630 $98,786
Net income $ 15,855 $ 14,833 $ 13,425 $ 12,334 $10,418*
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 16,318 $ 15,023 $ 13,452 $ 12,293 $10,864
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 13.06 $ 11.52 $ 10.01 $ 8.89 $ 7.15
Basic $ 13.25 $ 11.69 $ 10.12 $ 9.02 $ 7.27
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 13.44 $ 11.67 $ 10.03 $ 8.86 $ 7.46
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 3,473 $ 3,177 $ 2,860 $ 2,585 $ 2,147
Per share of common stock 2.90 2.50 2.15 1.90 1.50
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 4,108 $ 4,185 $ 3,447 $ 4,171 $ 4,630
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 71.2% 66.8% 80.4% 48.7% 42.6%
At December 31: 2011 2010 2009 2008 2007
Total assets $116,433 $113,452 $109,022 $109,524 $120,431
Net investment in property, plant and equipment 13,883 14,096 14,165 14,305 15,081
Working capital 8,805 7,554 12,933 6,568 8,867
Total debt 31,320 28,624 26,099 33,926 35,274
Total equity 20,236 23,172 22,755 13,584 28,615
* On December 31, 2002, the company sold its hard disk drive (HDD) business to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). The HDD business was accounted for as a discontinued operation under
generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP) and therefore, the HDD results of operations and cash flows have been removed from the company’s results
of continuing operations and cash flow for 2007. There was no activity in 2008, 2009, 2010 or 2011. The 2007 discontinued net loss was less than $0.5 millon and had no impact
on earnings per share of common stock.
** Refer to page 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the years 2007 through 2010.
Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2011.

===== PAGE 143 =====
Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 141
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2011 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $24,607 $26,666 $26,157 $29,486 $106,916
Gross profit $10,858 $12,385 $12,173 $14,722 $ 50,138
Net income $ 2,863 $ 3,664 $ 3,839 $ 5,490 $ 15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,990 $ 3,777 $ 3,954 $ 5,597 $ 16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 2.31 $ 3.00 $ 3.19 $ 4.62 $ 13.06**
Basic $ 2.34 $ 3.04 $ 3.23 $ 4.68 $ 13.25**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.41 $ 3.09 $ 3.28 $ 4.71 $ 13.44**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.65 $ 0.75 $ 0.75 $ 0.75 $ 2.90
Stock prices+
High $166.05 $172.87 $185.21 $194.56
Low 147.05 162.33 157.54 173.29
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2010 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $22,857 $23,724 $24,271 $29,019 $99,870
Gross profit $ 9,976 $10,809 $11,001 $14,227 $46,014
Net income $ 2,601 $ 3,386 $ 3,589 $ 5,257 $14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,638 $ 3,402 $ 3,628 $ 5,354 $15,023
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 1.97 $ 2.61 $ 2.82 $ 4.18 $ 11.52**
Basic $ 2.00 $ 2.65 $ 2.86 $ 4.24 $ 11.69**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.00 $ 2.62 $ 2.85 $ 4.25 $ 11.67**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.55 $ 0.65 $ 0.65 $ 0.65 $ 2.50
Stock prices+
High $134.14 $132.68 $135.48 $146.92
Low 121.88 122.10 121.86 135.25
* Refer to pages 61 and 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011, pages 72 and 73 of the company’s second-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2011,
page 73 of the company’s third-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on October 25, 2011 and page 43 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP
information for the quarterly data for 2011 and 2010. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2011 and 2010.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
+ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the last two years.

===== PAGE 144 =====
Performance Graphs
142 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Comparison of One-, Five- and Ten-Year Cumulative Total Return for IBM,
S&P 500 Stock Index and S&P Information Technology Index
The following graphs compare the one-, five- and ten-year cumulative Information Technology Index is such an index. IBM is also included
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative in this index.
return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial
that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the required five-year on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons
graph. Under those rules, the second index used for comparison assume that all dividends are reinvested.
may be a published industry or line-of-business index. The S&P
One-Year Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar) (U.S. Dollar)
130 210
190
125
170
120
150
115 130
110
110
90
105
70
100 50
10 11 06 07 08 09 10 11
One-Year
2010 2011
• IBM Common Stock $100.00 $127.42
• S & P 500 Index 100.00 102.11
• S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 102.41
Five-Year
2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
• IBM Common Stock $100.00 $112.84 $89.41 $141.81 $162.07 $206.50
• S & P 500 Index 100.00 105.49 66.46 84.05 96.71 98.75
• S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 116.31 66.13 106.95 117.85 120.69

===== PAGE 145 =====
Performance Graphs
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies 143
Ten-Year
(U.S. Dollar)
200
175
150
125
100
75
50
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11
Ten-Year
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
• IBM Common Stock $100.00 $64.53 $ 77.76 $ 83.35 $ 70.15 $ 84.02 $ 94.81 $75.12 $119.15 $136.17 $173.51
• S & P 500 Index 100.00 77.90 100.24 111.15 116.61 135.03 142.45 89.75 113.50 130.59 133.35
• S & P Information
Technology Index 100.00 62.59 92.14 94.50 95.44 103.47 120.35 68.43 110.66 121.94 124.88

===== PAGE 146 =====
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
144 International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Board of Directors
Alain J.P. Belda Shirley Ann Jackson Samuel J. Palmisano
Managing Director President Chairman of the Board
Warburg Pincus LLC Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute IBM
William R. Brody Andrew N. Liveris Virginia M. Rometty
President Chairman, President and President and Chief Executive Officer
Salk Institute for Biological Studies Chief Executive Officer IBM
The Dow Chemical Company
Kenneth I. Chenault Joan E. Spero
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer W. James McNerney, Jr. Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
American Express Company Chairman, President and Columbia University School of
Chief Executive Officer International and Public Affairs
Michael L. Eskew The Boeing Company
Retired Chairman and Sidney Taurel
Chief Executive Officer James W. Owens Senior Advisor
United Parcel Service, Inc. Retired Chairman and Capital Royalty L.P.
Chief Executive Officer
David N. Farr Caterpillar Inc. Lorenzo H. Zambrano
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Chairman and
Emerson Electric Co. Chief Executive Officer
CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.
Senior Leadership
Rodney C. Adkins Jon C. Iwata Samuel J. Palmisano
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Chairman of the Board
Systems and Technology Group Marketing and Communications
Michael D. Rhodin
Colleen F. Arnold James J. Kavanaugh Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President Vice President and Controller Software Solutions Group
Application Management Services
John E. Kelly III Virginia M. Rometty
James P. Bramante Senior Vice President and Director President and Chief Executive Officer
Senior Vice President Research
Growth Markets Linda S. Sanford
Robert J. LeBlanc Senior Vice President
Michelle H. Browdy Senior Vice President Enterprise Transformation
Vice President, Assistant Middleware Software Group
General Counsel and Secretary Timothy S. Shaughnessy
Mark Loughridge Senior Vice President
Erich Clementi Senior Vice President and GTS Services Delivery
Senior Vice President Chief Financial Officer
Global Technology Services Finance and Enterprise Transformation Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President
Michael E. Daniels J. Randall MacDonald Global Business Services
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
and Group Executive Human Resources Robert C. Weber
Services Senior Vice President
Steven A. Mills Legal and Regulatory Affairs,
Robert F. Del Bene Senior Vice President and General Counsel
Vice President and Treasurer and Group Executive
Software and Systems
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen
Senior Vice President
Sales and Distribution

===== PAGE 147 =====
Stockholder Information
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services Annual Meeting
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
April 24, 2012, at 10 a.m. in the Charleston Area Convention Center,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,
North Charleston, South Carolina.
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Literature for IBM Stockholders
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727. The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports
residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The
should call (781) 575-2694.
10-K report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released
by early May, August and November.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found via the IBM home An audio recording of the 2011 Annual Report will be available for
page on the Internet (http://www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM sight-impaired stockholders in June 2012.
products, services and other activities can also be found via that address.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, its innovative strategies for transforming communities through
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC. global citizenship. The Report Summary is available in printed form
and downloadable at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate
IBM’s website (http://www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of
Responsibility Report is online with downloadable sections
information about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form
at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility.
10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K,
and all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable
General Information
after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and
(http://www.ibm.com/investor). These materials are available free of
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
charge on or through our website.
via the Internet (http://www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, online through the Internet at this site.
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States,
maintains an Internet site (http://www.sec.gov) that contains reports,
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers
that file electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM
stock certificates for safe keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
International Business Machines Corporation
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504 (914) 499-1900
IBM Stock Algorithmics, DS8000, IBM, IBM SmartCloud, ILOG, Initiate Systems,
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Lombardi, Lotus, Netezza, OpenPages, POWER7, Power Systems, Rational,
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States. Smarter Cities, Smarter Commerce, Smarter Planet, Sterling Commerce,
System x, System z, Tivoli, WebSphere, XIV and zEnterprise are trademarks
Stockholder Communications or registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation
Stockholders in the United States and Canada can get quarterly or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Jeopardy! is a registered trademark
financial results, a summary of the Annual Meeting remarks, of Jeopardy Productions, Inc. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus
and voting results from the meeting by calling (800) IBM-7800. Torvalds in the United States, other countries, or both. Oracle is a registered
Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and trademark of Oracle Corporation. UNIX is a registered trademark of the
Puerto Rico should call (402) 573-9861. Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company,
product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-02
Design: VSA Partners, Inc. Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 148 =====
Let’s build a smarter planet.