

===== PAGE 1 =====
2012 IBM Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 1
Dear IBM Investor:
I am pleased to report that in 2012, IBM Margins: IBM’s operating pre-tax income margin rose
for the 10th consecutive year — to 22.2 percent, up 12 points
achieved record operating earnings per
since 2000.
share, record free cash flow and record profit
Cash flow: IBM has consistently generated strong cash
margins, with revenues that were flat at
flow, a key indicator of real business performance. In 2012
constant currency. Operating earnings per our free cash flow was $18.2 billion, a record for IBM and
$12 billion higher than a decade ago. We ended 2012 with
share were up 13 percent, putting us well
$11.1 billion of cash and marketable securities.
on track to our 2015 Road Map objective of
Revenue and income: Our revenue in 2012 was
at least $20 of operating earnings per share.
$104.5 billion, down 2 percent as reported and flat
Importantly, we continued to deliver value at constant currency. We grew operating net income
by 8 percent, to $17.6 billion, our highest ever.
to you, our owners.
This performance is a testament to our strategic position and Investment and return to shareholders: In 2012 we invested
capabilities, the discipline of our management systems, and the $3.7 billion for 11 acquisitions in key areas of software
dedication and expertise of more than 430,000 IBMers around and services; $4.3 billion in net capital expenditures; and
the world. Importantly, it reflects the impact of a distinct choice $6.3 billion in R&D. We were able to return $15.8 billion to
we have made about IBM’s business and technology model. you — $12 billion through share repurchases and $3.8 billion
IBM is an innovation company. Both in what we do through dividends. Last year’s dividend increase was
and in how we do it, we pursue continuous transformation — 13 percent, marking the 17th year in a row in which we
always remixing to higher value in our portfolio and skills, have raised our dividend, and the 97th consecutive year
in the capabilities we deliver to our clients and in our own in which we have paid one.
operations and management practices. Since 2000, we have added $14.6 billion to IBM’s
This is not the only path to success in our industry, operating pre-tax profit base, and increased our pre-tax
and it is not the easiest one. But it is ours. In this letter, I will income 1.7 times, our operating earnings per share
report on our 2012 results, and then put them in context 3.6 times and our free cash flow 1.7 times. Cumulatively,
of our model of continuous transformation. we have generated about $150 billion of free cash flow.
Results in 2012 IBM’s Model: Continuous Transformation
Earnings per share: Diluted operating earnings per share In an industry characterized by a relentless cycle of
in 2012 were $15.25, a new record. This marked 10 straight innovation and commoditization, one model for success
years of double-digit EPS growth. is that of the commodity player — winning through low

===== PAGE 3 =====
2
price, efficiency and economies of scale. Ours is a businesses that no longer fit our strategy. If we had
different choice: the path of innovation, reinvention not done so, we would be a larger company today,
and shift to higher value. but with lower margins and capabilities less essential
to our clients.
We remix to higher value: We do so in our portfolio,
in our organic R&D investment, and through targeted 2012 Performance
acquisitions and divestitures. ($ in billions except per share amounts)
• We remix our research and development: Two decades ago, For the year ended December 31: 2012
70 percent of our researchers were working in materials Operating earnings per share $ 15.25
science, hardware and related technology. Even the Revenue $104.50
one-in-ten working in software were focused on Operating net income $ 17.60
operating systems and compilers. Today, 60 percent Free cash flow $ 18.20
are in fields that support our key growth initiatives, Returned to shareholders $ 15.80
such as the 400 mathematicians developing algorithms
for business analytics, as well as a diverse group of We make markets: We create new markets by category,
specialists that include medical doctors, computational by geography and by client.
biologists, experts in natural language processing, and • We make markets by category: Our software and
weather and climate forecasters. Since the beginning of services businesses today look very different from just
2010, we have spent $19 billion on R&D, and in 2012 a few years ago, offering new solution categories like
IBM earned the most U.S. patents for the 20th straight MobileFirst, Social Business and Smarter Commerce.
year, with a record total of 6,478. In our hardware business, momentum is building for
• We acquire new capabilities: Organizations run into our new PureSystems family, which launched the new
trouble when they look to fulfill a new strategy or provide category of workload-optimized systems. PureSystems
the basis for transformation through acquisitions. We has seen more than 2,300 installations in more than
practice a disciplined approach that asks three questions: 70 countries in just two quarters.
Does it build on or extend a capability IBM already has? • We make markets by geography: We are achieving
Does the company have scalable intellectual property? strong results in the world’s growth markets, working
Can it take advantage of our reach into 170 countries? closely with businesses, institutions and governments
Our balanced formula has built a strong track record since as they seek to modernize their infrastructures and
2000, with more than 140 acquisitions. societies. We opened 144 new branches in these markets
• We divest nonstrategic assets: Always moving to the future in 2012. We also continue remixing to more profitable
isn’t just about what you invent. It also involves opportunities in these countries, through Smarter Planet
choices about when to move on. Over the past decade solutions such as Smarter Transportation, Smarter
we have divested almost $15 billion of annual revenue — Finance and Smarter Cities.

===== PAGE 4 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 3
• We make markets by client: We unlock new opportunity We reinvent the enterprise itself: We have been highly
within our existing client base by creating capabilities disciplined about driving productivity — through the
for a new generation of IT buyers — from chief marketing adoption of common, shared operations and systems; the
officer to chief financial officer to the head of human streamlining of enterprise-wide processes; and the leveraging
resources and more. I discuss this in greater depth below. of global skills — all in the service of global integration.
And we are now taking the next step, becoming a Smarter
We reinvent core franchises: Our System z enterprise Enterprise:
server, introduced in 2012, is just the latest reinvention • In part, this means applying analytics to every part of our
of the mainframe, and it drove System z’s largest capacity business — changing how we manage risk, drive efficiency,
shipment ever during the fourth quarter — with more increase marketing effectiveness and infuse business
than half of that growth coming from Linux workloads. insight across the company.
Core software platforms such as WebSphere have been • In part, it means using social technologies to identify
entirely transformed. And Information Technology IBM experts and enable them to deliver their knowledge
Services, which was once a significant reseller of others’ and leverage our entire portfolio to create a seamless,
technology — generating good revenue but low margins — high-value client experience.
has shifted significantly to high-value services such
as data center energy efficiency, security, and business This ongoing transformation gives us confidence that
continuity and recovery. This has contributed to a we will achieve our goal of $8 billion in productivity
6-point pre-tax income margin improvement in services savings over the course of our 2015 Road Map. Sixty
since 2000. percent of our productivity savings are reinvested
in the business.
We remix our skills and expertise: An innovation model
means continuously remixing and deepening our expertise. Revenue Increase for IBM Growth Initiatives in 2012
For example, over the past three years we have increased For the year ended December 31: 2012
our skill base in analytics by more than 8,100 experts. Smarter Planet 25%
We have also added nearly 9,500 sellers in key areas of Business Analytics 13%
industry expertise — such as healthcare, energy, telecom Cloud 80%
and banking, as well as emerging sectors such as metals Growth Markets 7%*
and mining. This year, IBM Global Business Services and * at constant currency
IBM Research will launch the IBM Client Experience
Lab, as well as joint GBS and Software practices in social We use our strong cash flow strategically: Our cash flow
business and mobility — including a tripling of our skill generation fuels reinvestment in the business — in R&D,
base in social and mobile technologies and doubling our capital expenditures and acquisitions. At the same time,
skill base in Smarter Commerce. we deliver consistently strong returns to you, our owners.

===== PAGE 5 =====
4
Virginia M. Rometty
ChAiRMAn, PReSident And ChieF exeCutive OFFiCeR

===== PAGE 6 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 5
A New Era of Computing $20 billion of revenue. We are also rapidly advancing
To sustain an innovation model in our industry, a company the market place applications for our breakthrough
must do more than accommodate major technology shifts. “cognitive” computing system, Watson, which is
It must lead them. IBM has done this repeatedly over the already demonstrating its potential to transform healthcare
past century — not only pioneering new technology models, and finance. We will introduce our first commercial
but capturing significant economic value. Watson offerings this year.
Today, another new wave is sweeping in — powered
by Big Data, analytics, mobile, social and cloud. We
anticipated this several years ago with our point of view
to sustain an innovation
on building a Smarter Planet — a world that was becoming
instrumented, interconnected and intelligent. Now, the
model in our industry,
IT environment is moving from monolithic applications
to dynamic services; from structured data at rest to
a company must do more
unstructured data in motion; from PCs to unprecedented
numbers and kinds of devices; from stable to unpredictable
than accommodate
workloads; from static infrastructure to cloud services;
and from proprietary standards to open innovation.
major technology shifts.
This shift plays strongly to IBM’s historic position
in enterprise computing. So we are, as we have so often
done in the past, reshaping our investment, innovation
and market strategies to lead. 2. Smarter Computing is built on software-defined
We see three defining characteristics of this new era — environments. To handle today’s volume, velocity and variety
what we call Smarter Computing: of data, enterprise data centers must become more dynamic
and flexible. One way to think about this is to imagine entire
1. Smarter Computing is designed for Big Data. Every IT infrastructures that are as programmable as individual
two days, as much data is now generated as in all of human systems. This new model is known as the “software-defined
history up to 2003. This is “Big Data,” and it constitutes environment,” and cloud computing is its first manifestation.
a vast new natural resource that can revolutionize industries However, it will not be the last. This new model optimizes
and societies — with the right technology, capable of the entire computing “stack” — compute, storage and network
analyzing and extracting value and insight from it. This is resources — so that it can adapt to the type of work required.
one reason IBM’s analytics business is growing so strongly, Hardware built for these new environments will be of
as we work with clients to drive intelligence into every significant business value — exemplified by IBM’s systems
aspect of their operations. Indeed, we have raised our 2015 today. From System z, to Power Systems, to storage, to our
Road Map target for Business Analytics from $16 billion to new PureSystems family, IBM systems are software-defined.

===== PAGE 7 =====
6
3. Smarter Computing is open. Only through open for example, by understanding and enabling customers
standards and platforms can enterprises support an as individuals, rather than “segments.” This helped
expanding universe of heterogeneous data, devices and our Global Business Services Smarter Commerce
services, and engage in today’s rich innovation ecos ystems. signings grow by nearly 200 percent in 2012 — reaching
The challenge is how to turn open approaches into $2 billion.
successful business. IBM helped do so with Linux, Eclipse At the same time, chief procurement officers are
and Apache, supporting their growth into standards with expected to increase their annual investment in Supplier
vital industry ecosystems, and then developing high- Intelligence by 30 percent through 2015, as they reshape
value IBM business on top of them. Today, we are repeating their global supply chains. And leaders of human resources
this strategy through a number of collaborations such as are investing in analytics to build smarter workforces and
OpenStack, a new open source cloud platform; Hadoop, social enterprises. One analyst has ranked IBM as number
an open source platform for Big Data; and several promising one in enterprise social business for the past three years.
open source hardware projects.
Taken together, computing that is open, software-
defined, and designed for Big Data constitutes a profound
“F ront-office” transformation
shift in information technology. And as in prior such
shifts, it will create new markets and new clients. We are
has the potential to fuel
pursuing them aggressively.
the biggest wave of business
New Clients, New Markets
As I mentioned, to capture the opportunities opened up by
technology investment
this new era of technology, IBM is engaging with new kinds
of clients as we make new markets in Big Data/analytics,
since the era of enterprise
cloud for the enterprise, emerging economies and Smarter
Planet. Indeed, from a business perspective, Smarter Planet
resource planning.
is a platform for a growing array of new markets — such as
Smarter Commerce, Smarter Cities and Social Business —
and these new markets take concrete shape through the
engagement and enablement of a new generation of IT City mayors are deploying Intelligent Operations Centers
clients. Today, we are working around the world and across to transform public services in Davao, Philippines;
multiple industries with many new leaders. Rio de Janeiro, Brazil; and Miami-Dade County, Florida.
Perhaps the most active among them in embracing the And urban transportation managers, such as those in
new era of technology have been chief marketing officers, Singapore and Eindhoven, Netherlands, are reducing
who are looking to reinvent the practice of marketing — urban congestion by offering drivers alternate route

===== PAGE 8 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 7
recommendations in exchange for their cars’ data on The era opening before us offers a historic opportunity
braking, acceleration and location. for both businesses and societies to pursue this higher
This list could go on. “Front-office” transformation purpose. A vast new natural resource is being unleashed —
has the potential to fuel the biggest wave of business promising to do for our century what steam, electricity
technology investment since the era of enterprise resource and fossil fuels did for the Industrial Age. The economic and
planning (ERP). And that creates a powerful set of societal potential of this new gusher of data is incalculable.
conditions for the tens of thousands of business advisors It is the opportunity of our lifetime — and IBMers are
and industry experts embedded in the world’s greatest determined to seize it.
engine of technical innovation. It is in this spirit that I express my deep pride in the
In sum, our strong strategic positioning, solid balance worldwide IBM team for bringing us to where we are, and
sheet, recurring revenue, robust profit streams, global reach — my gratitude to you, our shareholders, for your unwavering
and especially our institutional capacity for innovation support. I hope you share our excitement about your
and continuous transformation — give us confidence that we company’s performance and the way in which IBMers are
will continue to provide differentiating value to our clients, building a smarter planet and a brighter future.
employees, partners and communities — and therefore
to you, our owners. “Generating Higher Value at IBM”
(pp. 8–15) summarizes how.
On Being Essential
In closing, let me say a few words on the deeper meaning Virginia M. Rometty
of this model of continuous transformation to higher value, ChAiRMAn, PReSident And ChieF exeCutive OFFiCeR
at this particular moment in history.
As I have noted, an innovation model does not present
an easy path, especially in an industry as fast-changing
as ours. But once you are clear on your choice, it shapes
everything you do: your business strategy, how you recruit
talent, how you develop skills, how you invent, how you
run the company. And for IBM, it means something more.
It speaks to IBMers’ aspiration to be essential to each
of our vital constituencies — our clients, our communities,
our partners, our investors, and one another. We see
this letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to
this as our purpose as an enterprise — to serve their plans facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. For information
about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income
for success, their need to transform and their own unique margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash flow, which are in each case non-GAAP
measures, see the company’s Forms 8-K dated January 22, 2013 and February 28, 2013 (Attachment
sense of purpose. ii—non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).

===== PAGE 9 =====
8
Generating
Higher Value at IBM
iBM is an innovation company. We pursue continuous transformation
both in what we do and how we do it—always remixing to higher value
in our offerings and skills, in our operations and management practices,
and in the transformational capabilities we deliver to our clients.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 9
2015 Road Map 2. We have become a globally
each year iBM describes how the company manages its business integrated enterprise to capture
and serves its shareholders in a detailed financial road map. new growth and productivity.
A long-term perspective ensures iBM is well positioned to take
advantage of major shifts occurring in technology, business and Growth Markets Share of Geographic Revenue
the global economy.
22 %
2012 2011
24% 21 % 2010
1. We continuously change our business
19 %
mix toward higher-value, more profitable 2009
technologies and market opportunities. 11 % 2000*
* excluding divested businesses of PCs and printers.
Segment Pre-tax Income*
($ in billions) iBM operations in more than 170 countries leverage the company’s
global scale and expertise.
3.3 3.7 2.6
A globally integrated model allows us to focus resources
2000** 35% 38% 27%
on client-oriented work and enables rapid deployment of iBM
capabilities to growth markets. in 2012, we continued our rapid
3.3 9.9 10.8
geographic expansion—opening 144 branch offices. Our growth
2012 14% 41% 45%
markets delivered more than 60 percent of our geographic
gross profit growth between 2010 and 2012.
hardware/Financing Services Software Global integration of all our major enterprise functions—from
* Sum of external segment pre-tax income not equal to iBM pre-tax income.
service delivery to marketing—has enabled iBM to deliver enterprise
** excludes enterprise investments and not restated for stock-based compensation.
2000 Segment Pti is reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation. productivity savings while improving quality.
About 50% of iBM segment profit Approaching 30% of geographic
expected to come from Software by 2015. revenue from growth markets by 2015.

===== PAGE 11 =====
10
3. B y aligning our business model 4. T his allows us to invest in future
with our clients’ needs, we achieve sources of growth and provide strong
our financial goals. returns to our shareholders.
Our operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income margin in 2012 was Primary Uses of Cash Since the Beginning of 2000
22.2 percent, 12 points higher than in 2000. the primary driver ($ in billions)
of this performance was gross profit margin expansion, as a result
of the shift in our business mix to more profitable, higher-value $26
$237
segments and improved productivity. $123
At the same time, we’ve increased R&d investment. Since the
beginning of 2000, we’ve spent $75 billion in R&d, enabling
$55
us to deliver key innovations and maintain u.S. patent leadership
for our 20th consecutive year in 2012. Acquisitions
Our solid business model performance has resulted in Capital expenditures
consistently strong free cash flow. in 2012 our free cash flow $33 dividends
was $18.2 billion, $12 billion higher than a decade ago. Share repurchases (gross)
Free Cash Flow and Operating Pre-tax Income Margin* Acquisitions: Since the beginning of 2000, we have acquired
($ in billions) more than 140 companies in strategic areas including analytics,
$20
Free Cash Flow 18.2 cloud, security and Smarter Commerce. We expect to spend
Operating Pre-tax income Margin $20 billion in acquisitions over the 2015 Road Map period to
support growth initiatives.
16
Capital Expenditures: We have invested more than $55 billion
22.2% since 2000 to advance our capabilities.
12
Share Repurchase and Dividends: Since 2000, we have
returned almost $150 billion to shareholders—paying $26 billion
in dividends and reducing the outstanding share count by
8
6.7 over 35 percent. We expect to return $70 billion to shareholders
in our 2015 Road Map period—$50 billion through gross share
repurchases and $20 billion in dividends.
10.1% 4
$ 70 billion expected to be returned
to shareholders through 2015.
0
00 12
* excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating retirement-related charges.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 11
5. This delivers long-term value and
performance for all key IBM stakeholders —
investors, clients, employees and society.
Our 2015 Road Map continues the drive to higher value—
with the expectation of at least $20 operating (non-GAAP)
ePS in 2015.
Key 2015 Road Map Objectives: Key Drivers for 2015 Road Map
At Least
• Software becomes about Revenue Growth Share Repurchase $ 20
half of segment profit A combination of base Leveraging our strong cash Operating ePS*
revenue growth, a shift generation to return value
• Growth markets to faster growing businesses to shareholders by reducing
approach 30 percent and strategic acquisitions. shares outstanding.
of geographic revenue
Operating Leverage
• Generate $8 billion A shift to higher-margin
in productivity through businesses and enterprise $15.25
productivity derived
enterprise transformation
from global integration
• Return $70 billion and process efficiencies. $13.44
to shareholders
• invest $20 billion $11.67
in acquisitions
$3.32
Operating (non-GAAP) EPS*
Segment Pre-tax Income*, **
Software
Services $1.81
Hardware / Financing
* excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating
retirement-related charges.
** 2000 and 2001 exclude enterprise investments
and not restated for stock-based compensation.
Sum of external segment pre-tax income not
equal to iBM pre-tax income.
2000 2002 2010 2011 2012 2015

===== PAGE 13 =====
12
6. Five years ago, we saw the emergence 7. To lead this shift, IBM is pioneering a new
of a Smarter Planet — a world becoming computing model — what we call Smarter
instrumented, interconnected and Computing. It has three core attributes.
intelligent.
Designed for Data
the it industry and the global economy have been transformed As new sources of data continue to grow in volume, variety and
by massive amounts of data, new ways to deliver computing and velocity, so too does their potential to revolutionize the decision-
the rise of mobile and social platforms. making processes in every industry—if organizations can analyze
it all and extract insight.
Big Data is the planet’s new natural resource. iBM has the world’s deepest portfolio of analytics solutions
hundreds of billions of connected sensors and devices have and software; 30,000 enterprise analytics engagements; a leading
created a massive, invisible flow of digital “1s” and “0s”—a global position in powerful optimized systems; and the business
gusher of information. and industry expertise of 9,000 business analytics consultants,
400 researchers and 9 analytics solution centers. We have acquired
Advanced analytics enable us to mine it. 33 companies since 2005, including five in 2012, to build targeted
enterprises and institutions are analyzing this flow of streaming, analytics and information expertise—helping clients turn massive
unstructured data and acting upon those insights in real time. volumes of real-time, unstructured data into high-value knowledge
available instantly.
Cloud computing is coming of age.
the model of computing known as “the cloud” delivers on-demand
computing over the internet. it brings new scale and efficiency to
service delivery and enables more agile ways of doing business.
Social and mobile create a new platform for work.
With devices in hand, individuals now expect to interact with
the world around them—as consumers, as students, as citizens.
For many, mobile devices have supplanted the PC, consumer
electronics and even the wallet.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 13
Defined by Software Open and Collaborative
entire it environments can now be as simple, adaptable and An expanding universe of mobile devices, networked services
programmable as individual systems are today—thanks to and social enterprises requires open platforms. iBM helped open
a new model known as the software-defined environment. platforms such as Linux, eclipse and Apache become standards
Cloud is its first major manifestation—but it will not be the last. with vital industry ecosystems, and then we developed high-
in a software-defined environment, networks, storage value businesses on top of them. today, iBM collaborates broadly
and servers, as well as software, can be tuned flexibly to to support open platforms such as OpenStack and hadoop.
a desired workload. hardware systems optimized for these iBM has been the market leader in social enterprise software*
new environments—such as iBM’s System z mainframe, for the past three years. With thousands of mobile experts,
Power Systems, storage systems and our new PureSystems— 270 patents in wireless innovations and 160 iBM Research
are creating significant new business value. scientists focused on mobile technologies, iBM has helped more
iBM’s SmartCloud manages 13 billion security events than 1,000 clients become mobile enterprises. Looking ahead,
for more than 4,000 clients per day and connects more we will integrate these capabilities with the powerful behavioral
than 300,000 trading entities. iBM has also helped clients analytics of newly acquired Kenexa to help leaders of human
build more than 3,500 private clouds. resources build smarter workforces.
* idC, “Worldwide enterprise Social Software 2011 vendor Shares,” June 2012.

===== PAGE 15 =====
14
8. The infusion of digital intelligence into the world’s
systems is changing the way people, organizations
and entire industries approach what they do.
in thousands of Smarter Planet client engagements, iBM is helping our clients seize
competitive advantage, not only through improved productivity but by reframing their
industry’s issues in unexpected, often counterintuitive ways.
Smarter Stock Exchange Smarter Wind Energy
to compete with exchanges in places like vestas, the world’s largest windmill manufacturer,
London and new York, the Santiago Stock is tapping into the power of an iBM supercomputer
exchange needed to handle the growing and Big data analytics software to model past,
volume of high-frequency and algorithmic present and future wind patterns—a process that
trading activity—and do so from the ground up. involves huge amounts of data—to optimize the
Working with iBM, it built a trade processing location and design of sites its customers are
solution that increased capacity tenfold, cut developing. vestas’s system is on track to digest
latency to microseconds and enabled real-time and analyze 20 petabytes of information in hours
fraud surveillance. the exchange’s transaction instead of months. the result: fewer customer
volume is up 50 percent in the first year. power disruptions and more predictable revenues
for utilities.
0176.980
Smarter Customer Retention Smarter Cancer Treatment Smarter City Operations
Pakistani telephone provider ufone faced a Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center is the Philippines city of davao’s 1.5 million
challenge common to start-ups in emerging working with iBM to use the cognitive computing citizens will be the first in Asia to benefit from
markets. After a period of rapid growth— capabilities found in iBM’s Watson to help doctors an intelligent Operations Center. it ties together
reaching 24 million subscribers in less than develop personalized, evidence-based cancer data and operations of four agencies—crime
a decade—it had to retain those customers treatment options. the system uses insights prevention; emergency response; threat
in an increasingly competitive market. iBM gleaned from the deep experience of Memorial prevention and response; and traffic manage-
analytics enabled it to scan call detail records Sloan-Kettering’s world-renowned oncologists ment. Geolocation mapping, in combination
in near-real time, flagging customers who fit to provide individualized treatment options based with GPS-equipped task forces on the ground,
the profile for a particular promotion. today, on a patient’s medical information, the synthesis will allow officials to analyze building, street
by issuing offers customized to a user’s unique of a vast array of updated and vetted treatment and infrastructure data to substantially reduce
usage patterns, ufone has doubled its guidelines, and published research. the result: response times. A new early warning system
campaign response rates. a decision support system for physicians that will monitor key risk indicators so agencies can
will offer individualized, confidence-weighted take quick action before situations escalate.
treatment options for their patients.

===== PAGE 16 =====
Generating Higher Value at IBM 15
9. Looking ahead, IBM Research is probing
the future of information technology.
For all its remarkable advances, computation in the past half-
century—the era of “programmable” computers—has been
limited to “yes/no” decisions. the new era now emerging
will unlock far deeper understanding of the complexities and
ambiguities of the real world—both natural and man-made.
doing so will require both steady incremental advances
and true scientific breakthroughs that come only from deep, Massive-Scale Analytics for Cybersecurity iBM researchers
multidisciplinary research—such as that underway today have found cyber criminals hiding in billions of log files by surfacing
in iBM’s labs. small “tells” in the actions of attackers who elude even the most
advanced virus detection.
Accelerated Discovery iBM researchers are unlocking data- “Synapse” Chip iBM researchers are now developing cognitive
driven “white spaces,” such as finding new uses for drugs already computer chips that learn without programming. Modeled on
proven safe in the data of 15 million patents, 18 million scientific the human brain, they have already simulated more than 500 billion
papers, 10 million chemical compounds and 100 million genes. neurons and 100 trillion synapses.
Quantum Computing iBM researchers have taken a step closer Atomic-Scale Memory iBM researchers have extended the
to a practical quantum computer, based not only on digital “1s” frontiers of the unimaginably small by showing the possibility
and “0s” but also on multiphased “qubits” that enable millions of storing a “bit” of memory on just 12 atoms. Such a break through
of computations at once. holds the potential to increase storage capacity one thousandfold.
“Generating higher value at iBM” includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. For
information about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash flow for 2012, see the company’s Forms
8-K dated on January 22, 2013 and February 28, 2013 (Attachment ii—non-GAAP Supplementary Materials). For information about the company’s financial results related to (i) growth markets share of geographic
revenue excluding divested PCs and printers and (ii) free cash flow, in each case for 2000, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the SeC on May 12, 2010 (Attachment ii—non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).

===== PAGE 17 =====
1166 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011
Revenue $104,507 $106,916
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 17,627 $ 16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.37 $ 13.06
Basic $ 14.53 $ 13.25
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 15.25 $ 13.44
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 19,586 $ 19,846
Capital expenditures, net 4,307 4,059
Share repurchases 11,995 15,046
Cash dividends paid on common stock 3,773 3,473
Per share of common stock 3.30 2.90
At December 31: 2012 2011
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 11,128 $ 11,922
Total assets 119,213 116,433
Working capital 5,807 8,805
Total debt 33,269 31,320
Total equity 18,984 20,236
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 1,117 1,163
Market capitalization $214,032 $213,886
Stock price per common share $ 191.55 $ 183.88
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 434,246 433,362
* See page 38 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 18 =====
Report of Financials 17
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Discussion Notes to Consolidated
Overview 18 Financial Statements
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 18 A Significant Accounting Policies 76
Management Discussion Snapshot 19 B Accounting Changes 86
Description of Business 21 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 87
Year in Review 26 D Financial Instruments 92
Prior Year in Review 44 E Inventories 98
Other Information 55 F Financing Receivables 99
L ooking Forward 55 G Property, Plant and Equipment 102
Liquidity and Capital Resources 56 H Investments and Sundry Assets 102
Critical Accounting Estimates 59 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 102
Currency Rate Fluctuations 61 J Borrowings 104
Market Risk 62 K Other Liabilities 106
F inancing Risks 62 L Equity Activity 107
Employees and Related Workforce 63 M Contingencies and Commitments 110
Global Financing 63 N Taxes 113
Report of Management 68 O Research, Development and Engineering 115
Report of Independent Registered P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 116
Public Accounting Firm 69 Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 116
R Stock-Based Compensation 117
S Retirement-Related Benefits 120
Consolidated Financial Statements
T Segment Information 134
Earnings 70 U Subsequent Events 138
Comprehensive Income 71
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 139
Financial Position 72
Cash Flows 73 Selected Quarterly Data 140
Changes in Equity 74 Performance Graph 141
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 142
Stockholder Information 143

===== PAGE 19 =====
1188 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Overview Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
The financial section of the International Business Machines In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results
Cor por ation (IBM or the company) 2012 Annual Report includes the of the business, the company separates business results into oper-
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State ments ating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings is a
and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial State ments. This non-GAAP measure that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-
Over view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective related charges and retirement-related costs, and their related tax
regarding the information contained in the financial section. impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amortiza-
tion of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related
Organization of Information charges such as in-process research and development, transac-
• T he Management Discussion is designed to provide readers with tion costs, applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax
an overview of the business and a narrative on the company’s charges related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related
financial results and certain factors that may affect its future costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and
prospects from the perspective of the company’s management. others as non-operating. The company includes defined benefit plan
The “Management Discussion Snap shot,” on pages 19 to 21, and nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, amortiza-
presents an overview of the key performance drivers in 2012. tion of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribution plans in
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 26, the Managem ent operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related cost includes
Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan
segment of the business and a discussion of the company’s finan- interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial
cial position and cash flows. Other key sections within the gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/settlements and
Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” on page 55, multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency costs and other
and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on pages 56 through 58. costs. Non-operating costs are primarily related to changes in pen-
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a sion plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market
stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section is performance and the company considers these costs to be outside
included beginning on page 63. the operational performance of the business.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on pages Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a view
70 through 75. These statements provide an overview of the of operating earnings as described above provides increased trans-
company’s income and cash flow performance and its financial parency and clarity into both the operational results of the business
position. and the performance of the company’s pension plans; improves
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among visibility to management decisions and their impacts on operational
other items, the Notes contain the company’s accounting policies performance; enables better comparison to peer companies; and
(pages 76 to 86), acquisitions and divestitures (pages 87 through allows the company to provide a long-term strategic view of the
91), detailed information on specific items within the financial business going forward. For its 2015 earnings per share road map,
statements, certain contingencies and commitments (pages 110 the company is utilizing an operating view to establish its objectives
to 113) and retirement-related benefits information (pages 120 and track its progress. The company’s reportable segment financial
to 134). results reflect operating earnings, consistent with the company’s
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have been management and measurement system.
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States (GAAP). Forward-Looking and
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant cur- Cautionary Statements
rency” in the Management Discussion do not include operational
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
rates. Certain financial results are adjusted based on a simple
Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking state-
mathematical model that translates current period results in local
ment in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is
currency using the comparable prior year period’s currency con-
made; the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any
version rate. This approach is used for countries where the
such statements. Forward-looking statements are based on the
functional currency is the local country currency. This informa-
company’s current assumptions regarding future business and
tion is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed
financial performance; these statements, by their nature, address
without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates,
matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking
thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business
statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors
performance. See “Currency Rate Fluctuations” on page 61 for
that could cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed
additional information.
more fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s
• W ithin the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report,
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), includ-
certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded
ing the company’s 2012 Form 10-K filed on February 26, 2013.
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Management Discussion 19
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Discussion Snapshot business model, which is designed to deliver profit and cash on
a sustained basis.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
The company continued to deliver value to its clients and capitalize
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ on key trends in 2012. The company had strong performance in busi-
Margin ness analytics, cloud and Smarter Planet—key growth initiatives that
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
leverage the software portfolio and contribute to margin expansion.
Revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)%*
Within the growth markets, the company continued to expand its capa-
Gross profit margin 48.1% 46.9% 1.2 pts.
bilities and build out IT infrastructures in emerging markets. In 2012, the
Total expense and other income $ 28,396 $ 29,135 (2.5)%
growth markets revenue growth rate at constant currency outpaced
Total expense and other
the major markets by 8 points. The company continues to invest
income-to-revenue ratio 27.2% 27.3% (0.1)pts.
for innovation and technological leadership. These investments
Income before income taxes $ 21,902 $ 21,003 4.3%
supported the introduction of the new System z mainframe, stor-
Provision for income taxes 5,298 5,148 2.9%
age and POWER7+ products in hardware, as well as a series of
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855 4.7% major launches across software that included more than 400 new or
Net income margin 15.9% 14.8% 1.1 pts. upgraded product announcements. The introduction of PureSystems,
Earnings per share a new category of expert integrated systems, brings together hardware
of common stock and software and provides built-in expertise to deliver a more efficient
Assuming dilution $ 14.37 $ 13.06 10.0% and effective solution to the company’s clients. In addition, the company
Weighted-average shares was awarded more U.S. patents in 2012 than any other company for
outstanding the 20th consecutive year, with many of the patents this year in key
Assuming dilution 1,155.4 1,213.8 (4.8)% areas such as business analytics, Big Data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile,
Assets** $119,213 $116,433 2.4% social networking and software-defined environments. The company
Liabilities** $100,229 $ 96,197 4.2% also continued to add to its capabilities to support the growth initiatives
Equity** $ 18,984 $ 20,236 (6.2)% by acquiring 11 companies in 2012—investing approximately $4 billion.
At the same time, the company divested its Retail Store Solutions
* 0.0 percent adjusted for currency.
(RSS) business as it focused the Smarter Commerce portfolio on higher
** At December 31.
value, intellectual property-based opportunities. Throughout the
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) year, the company continued the transformation of the business—
earnings for 2012 and 2011. shifting to higher value areas and improving its structure—resulting
in a higher quality revenue stream and margin expansion.
($ in millions except per share amounts) Segment performance was led by Software which increased
Yr.-to-Yr. revenue 2.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change branded middleware which increased 2.9 percent (5 percent adjusted
Net income as reported $16,604 $15,855 4.7% for currency). Global Services revenue decreased 2.3 percent as
Non-operating adjustments reported, but was up 0.4 percent on a constant currency basis.
(net of tax) Global Services revenue performance was led by the growth markets
Acquisition-related charges 641 495 29.5 which were up 4.8 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and now
Non-operating retirement-related represents more than 20 percent of total Global Services revenue.
costs/(income) 381 (32) NM Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent; adjusting
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $17,627 $16,318 8.0% for the divested RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent (4 percent
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) adjusted for currency). The company’s new mainframe was well
earnings per share $ 15.25 $ 13.44 13.5% received in the market, with System z revenue increasing 5.4 percent
(6 percent adjusted for currency) versus the prior year. Global
N M—Not meaningful
* See page 38 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings. Financing revenue decreased 4.2 percent as reported, 1 percent
on a constant currency basis, compared to the prior year.
In 2012, the company reported revenue of $104.5 billion, expanded Across all of the segments, the company continued to have
gross, pre-tax and net income margins, and delivered diluted strong performance in its key growth initiatives. These are not stand-
earnings per share growth of 10.0 percent as reported and 13.5 alone offerings; they are integrated into the overall client offerings
percent on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. This was the 10th and are included in the financial results of the segments. In the
consecutive year of double-digit earnings per share growth for growth markets, revenue increased 4.2 percent (7 percent adjusted
the company. The company generated $19.6 billion in cash from for currency) year to year and represented 24 percent of total geo-
operations, and $18.2 billion in free cash flow driving shareholder graphic revenue, an increase of 8 points since 2006. The company
returns of $15.8 billion in gross common stock repurchases and has been successful in capturing the opportunity in these faster
dividends. The free cash flow performance in 2012 was $12.3 growing markets. The company’s business analytics initiative
billion greater than the company generated in 2002. The financial continues to expand. The company has made significant strides
results demonstrate the strength and flexibility of the company’s and expanded its leadership in a number of strategic areas

===== PAGE 21 =====
2200 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
including Risk Management, Price and Promotion Optimization and The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.0 percent
Sales Performance Management. The value proposition in busi- versus 24.5 percent in 2011.
ness analytics uniquely leverages the integration between the Diluted earnings per share improved 10.0 percent year to year
software portfolio and the Global Business Services (GBS) con- reflecting the growth in net income and the benefits of the common
sulting expertise. In 2012, business analytics revenue increased 13 stock repurchase program. In 2012, the company repurchased
percent compared to the prior year, led by the GBS consulting prac- approximately 61 million shares of its common stock. Diluted earn-
tice. Within cloud computing, the company’s SmartCloud portfolio ings per share of $14.37 increased $1.31 from the prior year. Operating
addresses the full scope of enterprise client requirements. In 2012, (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $15.25 increased $1.81
the company continued to see strong demand for the foundational versus 2011 driven by the following factors:
offerings in hardware and software that help clients build and run
• Revenue decrease at actual rates $ (0.30)
their private clouds, as well as for cloud-based solutions, like the
• Margin expansion $ 1.38
company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) offerings. With strong
• Common stock repurchases $ 0.73
global growth, cloud revenue for 2012 increased 80 percent com-
pared to the prior year. The Smarter Planet growth initiative expanded At December 31, 2012, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
significantly in the past year—measured in terms of offerings, mar- positions remained strong and were well positioned to support the
kets, clients and revenue performance. Clients are leveraging the company’s objectives. Cash and marketable securities at year end
company’s growing capabilities in areas like: Smarter Commerce, was $11,128 million. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash
Social Business and Smarter Cities, and in next generation systems, flows are highlighted below.
like Watson, which are helping clients with their complex challenges. Total assets increased $2,780 million ($3,242 million adjusted for
For the year, Smarter Planet solutions generated revenue growth of currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by:
over 25 percent versus the prior year. Overall, within the offerings in
• Increases in total receivables ($3,053 million), goodwill
business analytics, cloud and Smarter Planet, approximately half of
($3,034 million), marketable securities ($717 million) and
the revenue is software. Therefore, as these offerings become a
intangible assets ($395 million), partially offset by
larger percentage of total revenue, they are driving the higher quality
• Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($1,899 million), cash
revenue stream and improved mix and margins.
and cash equivalents ($1,511 million) and prepaid expenses
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.2 points
and other current assets ($1,224 million).
versus 2011 to 48.1 percent. This was the ninth consecutive year of
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) Total liabilities increased $4,032 million ($4,511 million adjusted for
gross margin of 48.7 percent increased 1.5 points compared to the currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by:
prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2012 was driven by margin
improvements in Software and both Global Services segments, and • Increased retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit
an improved revenue mix driven by Software. obligations ($2,044 million), total debt ($1,949 million),
Total expense and other income decreased 2.5 percent in 2012 taxes ($1,635 million) and total deferred income ($399 million),
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other partially offset by
income decreased 3.9 percent compared to the prior year. The year- • Decreases in other liabilities ($1,389 million) and accounts
to-year drivers were approximately: payable ($565 million).
Total equity of $18,984 million decreased $1,252 million from
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) December 31, 2011 as a result of:
• Currency* (5) points (5) points
• Increased treasury stock ($12,168 million) driven by share repur-
• Acquisitions** 3 points 2 points
chases and increased losses in accumulated other comprehensive
• Base expense (0) points (2) points
income/(loss) of ($3,874 million) driven by pension remeasurements,
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. partially offset by
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. • Higher retained earnings ($12,783 million) and common stock
($1,980 million).
Pre-tax income grew 4.3 percent and the pre-tax margin was
21.0 percent, an increase of 1.3 points versus 2011. Net income The company generated $19,586 million in cash flow provided by
increased 4.7 percent and the net income margin was 15.9 percent, operating activities, a decrease of $260 million when compared to
an increase of 1.1 points versus 2011. The effective tax rate for 2012 2011, primarily driven by a decrease in cash due to receivables
was 24.2 percent compared with 24.5 percent in the prior year. ($1,290 million) and an increased use of cash for accounts payable
Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew 7.3 percent and the ($675 million), partially offset by a decrease in net taxes paid ($999
operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 22.2 percent, an increase million) and the increase in net income ($749 million). Net cash used
of 2.0 points versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) net income in investing activities of $9,004 million was $4,608 million higher than
increased 8.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) net income 2011, primarily due to an increase in cash used of $2,719 million
margin of 16.9 percent increased 1.6 points versus the prior year. associated with net purchases and sales of marketable securities

===== PAGE 22 =====
Management Discussion 21
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and other investments, increased cash used for acquisitions ($1,911 New types of solutions, new market opportunities and new deci-
million) and increased net capital investments ($248 million), partially sion makers are emerging as clients look to make use of technology
offset by increased cash from divestitures ($585 million). Net cash to generate innovation and competitive advantage. These opportuni-
used in financing activities of $11,976 million was $1,719 million lower, ties are driven by a new era of computing that is enabled by
compared to 2011, primarily due to lower cash used for common analytics, cloud computing, Big Data, mobility, social computing
stock repurchases ($3,051 million), partially offset by lower cash and supported by enterprise grade security solutions. The com-
provided by common stock transactions ($914 million) and increased pany’s strategy is to establish leadership in this new era of smarter
dividend payments ($300 million). computing—computing that is designed for Big Data, built on soft-
In January 2013, the company disclosed that it is expecting ware-defined environments and open—in order to enhance the
GAAP earnings of at least $15.53 and operating (non-GAAP) earn- value we deliver, create new markets and engage new clients.
ings of at least $16.70 per diluted share for the full year 2013. To capture the opportunities arising from these market trends,
For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review” IBM is focused on four key growth initiatives: Smarter Planet, Growth
section on pages 26 through 43. For additional information regard- Markets, Business Analytics and Optimization and Cloud Comput-
ing 2002 free cash flow, see the company’s Form 8-K filed with the ing. Each initiative represents a significant growth opportunity with
SEC on January 22, 2013. attractive profit margins for IBM.
Smarter Planet
Description of Business
Smarter Planet is IBM’s vision of a technology-enabled world that
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with
is more instrumented, interconnected and intelligent than ever
the SEC on February 26, 2013 for a more detailed version of this
before, enabling people and organizations to tackle significant busi-
Des cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
ness and societal challenges. At the heart of this vision is the
The company creates business value for clients and solves
opportunity for meaningful innovation—exploring and extending the
business problems through integrated solutions that leverage
boundaries of businesses, industries and communities. It’s about
information technology and deep knowledge of business processes.
helping the company’s clients become better at what they do for
IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s operational
their clients. IBM’s strategy is to accelerate progress toward a
costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate revenue. These
“smarter planet” by equipping clients with the advanced, integrated
solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting,
capabilities they need to thrive in this exciting new world that is
delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems
unfolding before us—capabilities such as analytics for business and
and financing.
physical systems, business process management, social business,
mobile computing and cloud computing.
Strategy
IBM has continued to deepen its commitment to understanding
Despite the volatility of the information technology (IT) industry over and delivering on the promise of Smarter Planet for both line of
the past decade, IBM has consistently delivered strong perfor- business and IT executives across a broad range of industries. An
mance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings per share industry-based approach is central to the strategy, since every
growth and cash generation. The company has shifted its business industry confronts a distinct set of challenges and opportunities in
mix, exiting certain segments while increasing its presence in today’s constantly transforming world. Whether “smarter” means
higher-value areas such as services, software and integrated helping a hospital group to deliver improved healthcare, a local gov-
solutions. As part of this shift, the company has acquired more ernment to ease traffic congestion, or a retail chain to execute a
than 140 companies since 2000, complementing and scaling its successful cross-channel campaign, IBM is aggressively developing
portfolio of products and offerings. and investing in a portfolio of industry solutions that helps these
IBM’s strategy of delivering high value solutions to enterprise clients achieve their goals.
clients has yielded consistent business results. Working with enter- Three initiatives that drive significant value illustrate IBM’s deep
prise clients across the full spectrum of their business and commitment to building a smarter planet: Smarter Commerce,
technical opportunities, IBM delivers leadership innovation in tech- Smarter Cities and Social Business. IBM’s Smarter Commerce model
nology, high value solutions and insights that improve client and integrates and transforms how companies manage and adapt their
industry outcomes. A highly engaged, global workforce with deep buy, market, sell and service processes, placing the customer
technical and business skills, teamed with an unmatched eco- squarely at the center of their business. IBM’s Smarter Cities initiative
system of partners provides a world-class client experience. enables federal, state and local governments to make smarter deci-
These priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending toward sions, anticipate issues and coordinate resources more effectively,
innovation and efficiency, as companies seek higher levels of busi- while delivering citizen-centric services that underpin sustainable
ness value from their IT investments. IBM has been able to deliver economic growth. IBM’s Social Business initiative helps clients inte-
this enhanced client value thanks to its industry expertise, under- grate social technologies and practices into their front-end processes
standing of clients’ businesses, sustained investment in core and to more effectively create and share knowledge to accelerate innova-
applied research and development (R&D), global reach and the tion, improve customer service, and build a smarter workforce. Each
breadth and depth of the company’s capabilities. of these initiatives is powered by market-leading IBM innovations and
software, developed both by IBM and through acquisitions.

===== PAGE 23 =====
2222 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Growth Markets IBM is committed to continually innovating across the spectrum
The company has benefited from its investments over the past sev- of analytic capabilities, systems, research, services, deployment and
eral years in the growth markets. The focus now is on geographic skills. For example, in 2012, the game changing innovations in
expansion of IBM’s presence; on selected industries of the highest Watson were applied to Healthcare and Financial Services, analytic
impact and opportunity; on countries’ build-outs of infrastructure research like the ground-breaking work being done on temporal
aligned with their national agendas; and, on creating markets and causal modeling and visualization, and investments in analytic skills
new business models to serve the different requirements that exist and deployment ability in our new Analytics research centers in
in these emerging countries. The company’s effort in developing Columbus, Ohio and Halifax, Nova Scotia.
new growth markets within the African continent is a good example
of this focus. Many of these initiatives are leading-edge, both in tech- Cloud Computing
nologies and business models, and are delivering both increased Cloud is a model for consuming and delivering business and IT
revenue and margin expansion. services. It can deliver significant economies, enable new levels of
In order to support this growth, IBM continues to invest signifi- speed, flexibility and agility and even serve as a transformative plat-
cantly in these markets to expand capacity, to develop talent and to form for business innovation. From a business perspective, cloud
deepen its R&D capabilities on the ground. At the same time, IBM computing is reshaping industry ecosystems, invigorating product
continues to leverage talent across the growth markets under its innovation and enabling new business models that leverage new
globally integrated enterprise model to the benefit of both its clients sources of competitive differentiation. From an IT perspective, cloud
and the company worldwide. offers improved access to and utilization of information technology
through use of highly efficient virtualization and management tech-
Business Analytics and Optimization nology, consumer-style user interfaces and ubiquitous connectivity,
Business Analytics and Optimization (BAO) is the category of soft- including via mobile technologies.
ware, systems and services that help organizations take advantage IBM has already helped thousands of its clients adopt and lever-
of all the data available to them for better and faster decision making age cloud computing through its broad portfolio of IBM SmartCloud
and process optimization. This includes data that is being labeled products, solutions and services. Organizations moving beyond initial
“Big Data,” which is data of extreme volume, data being generated exploration of cloud computing seek solutions that align with their
at a high velocity, and newer varieties of data like blogs, tweets, specific needs. IBM’s breadth of cloud capabilities gives it a unique
pictures, videos, unstructured text created by the explosion of social ability to help clients exploit the advantages of cloud. IBM has cloud
media websites and the instrumentation of nearly everything. BAO solutions that span infrastructure, platform, applications and busi-
is core to achieving a smarter planet, helping leaders of this new ness process services all geared to enable clients to drive significant
information-centric and insight-driven world infuse intelligence into business value through the rapid adoption and exploitation of new
their business processes. cloud capabilities. IBM’s expert consulting, breakthrough technolo-
Smarter Analytics is IBM’s unique offering for the BAO category. gies and a portfolio of cloud-based services are squarely focused
With Smarter Analytics and the company’s deep expertise, IBM on the requirements of the enterprise.
can help organizations: 1) grow, retain and satisfy customers The company offers a full array of cloud delivery models, includ-
through deep insight on individual customers and similar segments; ing private clouds, public clouds and a hybrid of both. IBM helps
2) increase operational efficiency through, for example, supply build out private, on-premises cloud-based environments that pro-
chain optimization, predictive maintenance, fraud reduction and vide the control, security and isolation that clients require for their
optimization of sales incentives and compensation; 3) transform most mission-critical workloads. IBM public clouds provide infra-
their financial processes such as planning, budgeting, forecasting, structure, platforms and applications as rapidly provisioned and
financial consolidation, regulatory filing and financial reporting; and highly-scalable cloud services on a pay-as-you-go basis. Hybrid
4) better manage risk and regulatory compliance. clouds provide seamless integration across private and public cloud
The company’s approach to analytics is to ensure clients have models, ensuring the interoperability, portability and scalability that
complete end-to-end solutions across industries and functional clients need to realize the full value of cloud.
focus areas like finance, sales, marketing, operations and risk. These
solutions are designed to help organizations: 1) align around all their Business Model
data—both traditional and big data—and establish a strong informa- The company’s business model is built to support two principal
tion foundation; 2) apply analytics to their data so they can anticipate goals: helping clients to become more innovative, efficient and com-
and shape business outcomes, identify patterns and gain insights petitive through the application of business insight and IT solutions;
into future performance; 3) enable workers on the front lines who and providing long-term value to shareholders. The business model
collectively make thousands and even millions of decisions daily with has been developed over time through strategic investments in
insight that is immediately actionable so they can make the best capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth
possible decision—decisions like what claims to fast track in an and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
insurance call center, or what offer is the best for each individual The company’s global capabilities include services, software,
customer who calls a call center; and 4) create a culture that takes systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad
action on analytics and that truly transforms. mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
grated solutions to the company’s clients.

===== PAGE 24 =====
Management Discussion 23
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and
changing market and economic environment. The company con- productivity, while reducing costs. The standardized portfolio is
tinues to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position built around key assets and patented software, and incorporates
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher- best practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive
value segments like business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud quality of delivery, security and compliance.
computing. In addition, the company has transformed itself into a
Technology Support Services: delivers a complete line of support
globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall productivity
services from product maintenance through solution support to
and is driving investment and expanding participation in the world’s
maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT infrastructures.
fastest growing markets.
This business model, supported by the company’s financial Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across two
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term. primary business areas: Consulting and Application Management
Services. These professional services deliver business value and
Business Segments and Capabilities
innovation to clients through solutions which leverage industry and
The company’s major operations consists of five business seg- business process expertise. The role of GBS is to drive initiatives
ments: Global Techn ology Services and Global Business Services, that integrate IBM content and solutions and drive the progress of
which the company collectively calls Global Services, Soft ware, the company’s four primary growth initiatives.
Systems and Technology and Global Finan cing. As clients transform themselves in response to market trends
like Big Data, social and mobile computing, GBS is aligning its exper-
Global Services is a critical component of the company’s strategy
tise and capabilities to address two interdependent categories of
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to
opportunity: Front Office Digitization, which describes the markets
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software
forming around new models of engagement with all audiences; and
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client solu-
the Globally Integrated Enterprise, which describes the mandate to
tion requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services
integrate data and processes in support of the new front-office pro-
segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourcing
grams, and build far more flexible information applications.
and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services backlog
provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within Global GBS Capabilities
Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech nology Consulting: delivering client value with solutions in Strategy and
Services and Global Business Services. Transformation; Application Innovation Services; Enterprise Applica-
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra- tions and Smarter Analytics. Consulting is also focused on bringing
structure and business process services, creating business value to market client solutions that drive Front Office Digitization in
for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services within Smarter Commerce, Cloud, Mobile and Social Business.
its global delivery model. By leveraging insights and experience drawn Application Management Services: application management, main-
from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with applied innova- tenance and support services for packaged software, as well as
tion from IBM Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered through advanced
high-quality services with improved productivity, flexibility, cost capabilities in areas such as application testing and modernization,
and outcomes. cloud application services, the company’s highly differentiated glob-
ally integrated capability model, industry knowledge and the
GTS Capabilities
standardization and automation of application management.
Strategic Outsourcing Services: delivers comprehensive IT out-
sourcing services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems
infrastructures to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate systems,
management and financial value. The company integrates long- processes and applications across a standard software platform to
standing expertise in service management and technology with the improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain com-
ability to exploit the power of new technologies from IBM systems petitive advantage within their industries. IBM middleware is
and software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, designed on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to business applications, developed by different methods and imple-
achieve business objectives. mented at different times. Operating systems are the software
engines that run computers. Approximately two-thirds of external
Global Process Services: delivers a range of offerings consisting of
Software segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring
standardized through transformational solutions including process-
license charges and ongoing post-contract support. The remaining
ing platforms and business process outsourcing. These services
one-third relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which
deliver improved business results to clients through the strategic
clients pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically,
change and/or operation of the client’s business processes, applica-
the sale of OTC software includes one year of post-contract sup-
tions and infrastructure.
port. Clients can also purchase ongoing post-contract support after
Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project- the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades and
based and managed services that enable clients to transform and technical support.

===== PAGE 25 =====
2244 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Capabilities Systems and Technology Capabilities
WebSphere Software: delivers capabilities that enable organizations Systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems
to run high-performance business applications. With these applica- designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific
tions, clients can integrate and manage business processes across computing needs. These systems—System z, Power Systems and
their organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond System x—are typically the core technology in data centers that
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture provide required infrastructure for business and institutions. Also,
(SOA), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social these systems form the foundation for IBM’s integrated offerings,
interactions, the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to extend such as IBM PureSystems, IBM Smart Analytics, IBM Netezza,
their reach and optimize interactions with their key constituents. IBM SmartCloud Entry and IBM BladeCenter for Cloud. IBM serv-
Smarter Commerce software helps companies better manage and ers use both IBM and non-IBM microprocessor technology and
improve each step of their value chain and capitalize on opportunities operating systems. All IBM servers run Linux, a key open-source
for profitable growth, efficiency and increased customer loyalty. operating system.
Information Management Software: enables clients to integrate, Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to
manage and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital infor-
of sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their mation. These solutions address critical client requirements for
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real value information retention and archiving, security, compliance and stor-
out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. IBM’s age optimization including data deduplication, availability and
middleware and integrated solutions include advanced database virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and
management, information integration, data governance, enterprise tape storage systems and software.
content management, data warehousing, business analytics and intel-
Microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily
ligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics.
for use in IBM systems and storage products as well as delivering
Tivoli Software: helps clients optimize the value they get from semiconductors and related services to external clients.
their infrastructures and technology assets through greater visibility,
Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems,
control and automation across their end-to-end business opera-
software and services. Global Financing invests in financing assets,
tions. These asset management solutions foster integrated service
leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the
delivery for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint
objective of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The
and mobile device management, asset and facilities management,
primary focus on the company’s offerings and clients mitigates
and storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software
many of the risks normally associated with a financing company.
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform that
Global Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its
enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise and
client base and a clear insight into the products and services that
prevent security breaches.
are being financed. This combination allows Global Financing to
Lotus Software: enables businesses to connect people and pro- effectively manage two of the major risks (credit and residual value)
cesses for more effective communication and increased productivity that are normally associated with financing.
through collaboration, messaging and social networking software. By
Global Financing Capabilities
remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, IBM’s social business
offerings help organizations reap real benefits associated with social Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal
networking, as well as create a more efficient and effective workforce. clients for terms generally between one and seven years. Internal
financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term
Rational Software: supports software development for both IT, as client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected
well as complex and embedded system solutions, with a suite of portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash
Collaborative Lifecycle Management products. Jazz, Rational’s tech- management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at
nology platform, transforms the way people work together to build arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
software, making software delivery more integrated and collabora-
tive, while optimizing for successful business outcomes. Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receiv-
able financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products.
Operating Systems: software that manages the fundamental
processes that make computers run. Remanufacturing and Remarketing: as equipment is returned at
the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished
Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with business and sold or leased to new or existing clients both externally and
solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capa- internally. Exter nally remarketed equipment revenue represents
bilities. Approximately half of Systems and Technology’s server and sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equip-
storage sales transactions are through the company’s business ment revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold
partners; with the balance direct to end-user clients. In addition, internally to Systems and Technology and Global Services. Systems
Systems and Technology provides leading semiconductor technology, and Technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from
products and pack aging solutions for IBM’s own advanced technol- Global Financing to external clients.
ogy needs and for external clients.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Management Discussion 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Worldwide Organizations Research, Development and Intellectual Property
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s delivery IBM’s R&D operations differentiate the company from its competitors.
of value to its clients: IBM annually invests over $6 billion for R&D, focusing on high-
growth, high-value opportunities.
• Sales and Distribution IBM Research works with clients and the company’s business
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property units through 12 global labs on near-term and mid-term innovations.
• Enterprise Transformation It contributes many new technologies to IBM’s portfolio every year
• Integrated Supply Chain and helps clients address their most difficult challenges. IBM
Research also explores the boundaries of science and technol-
Sales and Distribution
ogy—from nanotechnology, to future systems, to big data analytics,
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than
to secure clouds, to IBM Watson, a “cognitive” learning system that
170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribu-
applied advanced analytics to defeat the all-time champions on the
tion of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization
television quiz show, Jeopardy!. The Watson system is being intro-
manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based
duced to the market for advanced healthcare applications and is
operating units focused on delivering client value. Within these units,
being further developed and extended within healthcare and in
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of con-
other industries.
sultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to improve
IBM Research also focuses on differentiating IBM’s services
clients’ business performance. These teams deliver value by under-
businesses providing new capabilities and solutions. It has the
standing the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring together
world’s largest mathematics department of any public company,
capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of Business
enabling IBM to create unique analytic solutions and actively engage
Partners to develop and implement solutions.
with clients on their toughest challenges.
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s
In 2012, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for
company for the 20th consecutive year. IBM’s 6,478 patents in 2012
local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and
included inventions that will enable fundamental advancements in
timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic
analytics, big data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile, social networking
units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas.
and software defined environments, as well as industry solutions for
IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by lever-
retail, banking, healthcare and transportation. It was the most U.S.
aging industry skills with marketing, Inside Sales and local
patents ever awarded to one company in a single year.
Business Partner resources.
The company continues to actively seek intellectual property
Through its growth markets organization, the company continues
protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other
to increase its focus on the emerging markets around the world
initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership.
that have market growth rates greater than the global average—
Some of IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively
countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East
in IBM products, while others are licensed and may be used in
and Latin America. The company’s major markets include the G7
either/both IBM products and/or the products of the licensee.
countries of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States
While the company’s various proprietary intellectual property rights
(U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) plus Austria, the Bahamas,
are important to its success, IBM believes its business as a whole
Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece,
is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license,
Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
or any particular group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is
Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration, relating
The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s original
to its products.
equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, occurs in
industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors: Enterprise Transformation
A key element of the company’s strategy has been focused on
• Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance
becoming the premier globally integrated enterprise. The company
• Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences
has implemented a consistent set of processes and standards
• Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive,
worldwide to reduce inefficiencies and improve collaboration. With
Chemical and Petroleum, Electronics
its processes fully standardized, the company implemented a new
• Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail,
operating model with work shared in global resource centers of
Travel and Trans portation
excellence located where it made the most business sense. The
• Communications: Telecommunications,
company has shifted resources toward building client relationships
Media and Entertain ment, Energy and Utilities
and employee skills, while positioning the company for new market
• General Business: Cross-sector representation of intermediate-
opportunities. During this transformation, IBM pioneered this new
sized large enterprises as well as mid-market clients (less than
operating model, changing from a classic “multinational,” with smaller
1,000 employees)
versions of the parent company replicated in countries around the
world, to a global model with one set of processes, shared services
and broadly distributed decision making.

===== PAGE 27 =====
2266 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company has now embarked on the next generation of optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and streamlining internal
its transformation in which new capabilities and technologies like processes has improved sales force productivity and operational
business analytics and cloud computing will drive performance. effectiveness and efficiency. Continuous improvements to supply
The proven principles of the globally integrated enterprise will chain resiliency against marketplace changes and risks have been
be applied to all of the company’s spending to continue to drive particularly valuable in maintaining continuity during natural disasters
additional productivity benefits in shared services, end-to-end and other disruptive events.
process transformation and integrated operations. The company The company’s continuing efforts to derive business value from
primarily reinvests the benefits of its enterprise transformation initia- its own globally integrated supply chain provides a strategic advan-
tives in remixing its spending profile and resources to the higher tage for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its
growth, higher margin initiatives such as business analytics, Smarter supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business
Planet and cloud computing, in addition to improving profitability. transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate
clients’ end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to
Integrated Supply Chain logistics.
IBM spends approximately $35 billion annually through its supply Increasingly the company is using analytics to measure, manage
chain, procuring materials and services globally. In addition, in 2012, and fine tune its supply chain operations, which will help to reshape
the company managed approximately $20 billion in procurement its operations and create value for clients. The goal is to continue to
spending for its clients through the Global Process Services orga- increase the use of analytics in the five major areas of supply chain:
nization. The supply, manufacturing, and logistics and customer 1) Supply Chain Visibility, 2) Risk Management, 3) Customer Insight,
fulfillment operations are integrated in one operating unit that has 4) Cost Containment, and 5) Global Supply Chain and Sustainability.
Year in Review
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2012 versus 2011 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 40,236 $ 40,879 (1.6)% 1.3%
Gross margin 36.6% 35.0% 1.6 pts.
Global Business Services 18,566 19,284 (3.7)% (1.6)%
Gross margin 30.0% 28.8% 1.2 pts.
Software 25,448 24,944 2.0% 4.3%
Gross margin 88.7% 88.5% 0.2 pts.
Systems and Technology 17,667 18,985 (6.9)% (5.9)%
Gross margin 39.1% 39.8% (0.7) pts.
Global Financing 2,013 2,102 (4.2)% (1.2)%
Gross margin 46.5% 49.8% (3.3 ) pts.
Other 577 722 (20.1)% (18.7)%
Gross margin (71.6)% (54.5)% (17.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)% 0.0%
Total consolidated gross profit $ 50,298 $ 50,138 0.3%
Total consolidated gross margin 48.1% 46.9% 1.2 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 375 340 10.3%
Acquisition-related charges 1 1 13.1
Retirement-related costs/(income) 264 2 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 50,938 $ 50,481 0.9%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 48.7% 47.2% 1.5 pts.
N M—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue as a percentage of total segment external revenue and each
reportable segment’s pre-tax income as a percentage of total segment pre-tax income.
Revenue Pre-tax Income*
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2012 2011
Global Technology Services 38.7% 38.5% 29.0% 27.4%
Global Business Services 17.9 18.2 12.4 13.1
Total Global Services 56.6 56.7 41.4 40.6
Software 24.5 23.5 45.0 43.5
Systems and Technology 17.0 17.9 5.1 7.1
Global Financing 1.9 2.0 8.5 8.8
Total 100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%
* Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items;
see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 134 to 138 for additional information.
Global Services
In 2012, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services declined 4.0 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) year to year.
(GTS) and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered revenue of The services segments also had strength in all the key growth initia-
$58,802 million, grew pre-tax profit 7 percent and expanded pre-tax tives, which are becoming a larger part of the services business as
margin 1.5 points on an as-reported basis. Revenue performance was the company continues to shift toward higher value content. Total
led by strength in the growth markets which were up 4.8 percent (9 outsourcing revenue of $27,552 million decreased 2.6 percent (flat
percent adjusted for currency) and now represents over 20 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional revenue of $23,907
of total Global Services revenue. Revenue from the major markets million decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $58,802 $60,163 (2.3)% 0.4%
Global Technology Services $40,236 $40,879 (1.6)% 1.3%
Outsourcing 23,344 23,911 (2.4) 0.5
Integrated Technology Services 9,550 9,453 1.0 3.7
Maintenance 7,343 7,515 (2.3) 0.6
Global Business Services $18,566 $19,284 (3.7)% (1.6)%
Outsourcing 4,209 4,390 (4.1) (1.7)
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,358 14,895 (3.6) (1.6)

===== PAGE 29 =====
2288 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Technology Services revenue of $40,236 million in 2012 $6,961 million in 2012 increased 10.8 percent year to year and the
decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted pre-tax margin expanded 1.9 points to 16.8 percent. Normalized for
for currency year to year. Revenue growth from the backlog was workforce rebalancing charges of $151 million and $5 million in the
partially offset by a decline in revenue from new signings and a third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, GTS pre-tax income was
decrease in sales in existing accounts. Revenue performance was up 13.1 percent and pre-tax margin expanded 2.2 points. The year-
led by the growth markets which were up 5.0 percent (9 percent over-year gross and pre-tax margin expansion was driven by several
adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 2.4 factors: the work done to improve the profitability of a number of low
percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency margin contracts in the outsourcing portfolio, increased contribution
in 2012. Outsourcing revenue from the growth markets increased from the higher margin growth markets, and increased efficiency
2.4 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), as the outsourcing and productivity from the focus on automation and process primarily
offerings help clients build out their IT infrastructures. Integrated through the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives.
Technology Services (ITS) revenue increased 1.0 percent (4 percent The GBS gross profit margin expanded 1.2 points, led primarily
adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011, and continued by improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS
to be led by strength in the growth markets which increased 10.3 pre-tax income of $2,983 million declined 0.8 percent in 2012 with
percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). a pre-tax margin of 15.5 percent, an improvement of 0.5 points year
Global Business Services revenue of $18,566 million decreased to year. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of $113 million
3.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012. On a geographic and $5 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively,
basis, solid performance in the growth markets, with revenue up GBS pre-tax income was up 2.8 percent and the pre-tax margin
4.3 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency), was offset by a expanded 1.1 points. The gross and pre-tax margins benefitted from
5.1 percent decline (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the major improved service delivery and yield from the company’s enterprise
markets. The growth initiatives—business analytics, Smarter Planet productivity initiatives.
and cloud had solid double-digit revenue growth, and represented The total Global Services business delivered strong profit and
over one-third of total GBS revenue in 2012. As GBS shifts more of margin expansion throughout 2012. Pre-tax income of $9,944 million
its business to higher value content, these larger, more complex in 2012 increased 7.0 percent year to year. Normalized for the higher
engagements are having a positive effect on the GBS backlog. level of workforce rebalancing charges in 2012, pre-tax income was
The GBS backlog grew for the fourth consecutive year at constant up 9.8 percent and the pre-tax margin expanded 1.9 points com-
currency—although the backlog is mixing to longer duration engage- pared to the prior year.
ments. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 4.1 percent
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 year to year, and Consulting Global Services Backlog
and Systems Integration (C&SI) revenue decreased 3.6 percent The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2012 was
(2 percent adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had $140 billion, a decrease of 0.3 percent as reported, but an increase
solid revenue performance year to year in the growth markets with of 1 percent adjusted for currency compared to the December 31,
Application Outsourcing and C&SI up 1.5 percent and 5.3 percent, 2011 balance, and an increase of 1.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for
respectively, as reported, and up 6 percent and 8 percent, respec- currency) compared to the September 30, 2012 balance. Revenue
tively, at constant currency. generated from the backlog is approximately 70 percent of total
services annual revenue in any year, with the remainder coming from
($ in millions)
transactional signings in the year, and sales and volumes into the
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ existing client base. In 2013, the projected total services revenue
Margin from the backlog is expected to be up 1 percent year to year at
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
consistent foreign currency exchange rates. This includes 2 percent
Global Services
growth from the run out of the opening backlog and a 1 percent
Global Technology Services
impact from the work done to restructure a number of lower margin
External gross profit $14,740 $14,320 2.9%
contracts in the outsourcing business. Despite the impact to revenue
External gross profit margin 36.6% 35.0% 1.6 pts. growth, these restructured contracts have improved the profitability
Pre-tax income $ 6,961 $ 6,284 10.8% of the backlog. These contracts provided year-to-year profit
Pre-tax margin 16.8% 14.9% 1.9 pts. improvement in 2012. This impact, which will carryforward to 2013,
Global Business Services will contribute modest profit growth in 2013 off this higher profit
External gross profit $ 5,564 $ 5,545 0.3% base, with the gross profit coming from the backlog more represen-
External gross profit margin 30.0% 28.8% 1.2 pts. tative of a 2 percent backlog growth versus a 1 percent growth.
The total estimated growth markets backlog at December 31,
Pre-tax income $ 2,983 $ 3,006 (0.8)%
2012 increased 13.6 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) year
Pre-tax margin 15.5% 15.0% 0.5 pts.
to year. The estimated transactional backlog at December 31, 2012
GTS gross profit increased 2.9 percent in 2012 and the gross profit increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and the
margin improved 1.6 points year to year with margin expansion estimated outsourcing backlog decreased 3.3 percent (2 percent
in each line of business, led by Outsourcing. Pre-tax income of adjusted for currency), respectively, from the December 31, 2011 levels.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Backlog
Total backlog $140.3 $140.6 (0.3)% 0.6%
Outsourcing backlog 89.4 92.5 (3.3) (2.4)
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commit-
Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Maintenance. ment, including the type and duration of the agreement, and the
Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Outsourc- presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
ing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting and Systems Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and
Integration.Total backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract extensions
under contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of
estimates are subject to change and are affected by several factors, the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included in signings
including terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
revalidations, adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjust- revenues equal renewals.
ments for currency. Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services contract. company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or coin-
calculation of signings. The calculation used by management involves cidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Total signings $56,595 $57,435 (1.5)% 1.1%
Outsourcing signings $27,891 $29,251 (4.6)% (1.9)%
Transactional signings 28,703 28,184 1.8 4.1
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011* Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,448 $24,944 2.0% 4.3%
Middleware $20,983 $20,650 1.6% 3.9%
Key Branded Middleware 16,528 16,055 2.9 5.2
WebSphere Family 7.8 9.9
Information Management 1.5 3.8
Lotus (2.1) 0.3
Tivoli 4.1 6.2
Rational (1.6) 0.6
Other middleware 4,455 4,596 (3.1) (0.6)
Operating systems 2,525 2,480 1.8 4.3
Other 1,940 1,813 7.0 9.2
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.
Software revenue of $25,448 million increased 2.0 percent (4 percent strength and share gains in WebSphere and Tivoli. Software contin-
adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Software revenue ued its momentum throughout 2012 in the growth initiatives with
growth continued to be led by the key branded middleware products strong performance in business analytics, Smarter Commerce and
with constant currency growth in all the brands, and particular cloud. The Software business delivered $10.8 billion in segment

===== PAGE 31 =====
3300 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
pre-tax profit, an increase of $840 million from 2011. The results strong contribution from Q1 Labs which provides next generation
reflect the company’s sustained investment in strategic branded security intelligence.
software. In addition to organic investments, acquisitions have pro- Lotus revenue decreased 2.1 percent as reported, but was flat
vided additional capabilities, while leveraging the existing portfolio year to year at constant currency in 2012. The social business offer-
of offerings. The software business completed nine acquisitions in ings performed well, including contribution from the acquisition of
2012, further increasing the company’s capabilities in analytics, Kenexa, a leading provider of recruiting and talent management
cloud and Smarter Planet. solutions.
Key branded middleware revenue increased 2.9 percent (5 percent Rational revenue decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased
adjusted for currency) and again gained market share in 2012, as the 1 percent at constant currency in 2012 year over year, and held share.
Software business continued to be the leader in the middleware Operating systems revenue increased 1.8 percent (4 percent
market. Revenue continued to mix to the faster growing and higher adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011, driven by Platform
value branded middleware products which accounted for 65 percent Computing which provides cluster and grid management software
of total software revenue in 2012, an increase of 1 point from 2011. for distributed computing environments.
WebSphere revenue increased 7.8 percent (10 percent adjusted Other software revenue increased 7.0 percent (9 percent adjusted
for currency) in 2012, with strong performance throughout the year, for currency) driven by growth in software-related services.
and gained share. Revenue performance included strong growth in
the core offerings of commerce and application servers. Commerce ($ in millions)
revenue increased 14 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) and Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
application server products increased 6 percent (8 percent adjusted Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
for currency). The company further strengthened its WebSphere
portfolio during the year with the acquisitions of Worklight, DemandTec, Software
Emptoris and Tealeaf. External gross profit $22,569 $22,065 2.3%
Information Management revenue increased 1.5 percent (4 per- External gross profit margin 88.7% 88.5% 0.2 pts.
cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Performance Pre-tax income $10,810 $ 9,970 8.4%
was led by growth in the business analytics offerings. The acquisi- Pre-tax margin 37.6% 35.3% 2.3 pts.
tions of Varicent and Vivisimo expanded the Business Analytics and
Optimization software capabilities. Varicent’s analytics software Software gross profit increased 2.3 percent to $22,569 million in
helps clients optimize sales performance management. Vivisimo 2012, with a gross profit margin of 88.7 percent, up 0.2 points year
expands the breadth of the company’s big data capabilities and to year. Software pre-tax income of $10,810 million increased 8.4
creates the most complete end-to-end big data solution for clients. percent and the pre-tax margin improved 2.3 points to 37.6 percent.
Tivoli revenue increased 4.1 percent (6 percent adjusted for cur- Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of $94 million and
rency) in 2012, led by its storage and security offerings, and gained $6 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, software
share. Tivoli storage revenue was up 12 percent (14 percent adjusted pre-tax income was up 9.3 percent and the pre-tax margin
for currency) in 2012, with double-digit constant currency growth in expanded 2.6 points. The Software business had another success-
each quarter, reflecting the value of storage software. Tivoli security ful year leveraging revenue growth and expense productivity to drive
revenue increased 8 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency), with significant margin expansion and profit growth.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011* Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $17,667 $18,985 (6.9)% (5.9)%
System z 5.4% 6.3%
Power Systems (8.5) (7.4)
System x (3.7) (2.7)
Storage (5.8) (4.1)
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions (3.7) (2.5)
Microelectronics OEM (14.4) (14.4)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions (5.1) (4.0)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012) (52.6) (51.7)
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent (6 percent Retail Stores Solutions revenue decreased 52.6 percent (52 per-
adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Adjusting for the divested cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. In the third quarter,
RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent (4 percent adjusted for the company divested the Retail Stores Solutions business to Toshiba
currency) in 2012. Growth markets revenue increased 0.3 percent Tec. See the caption, “Divestitures,” on page 91 for additional infor-
(1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, compared to the prior year mation regarding the transaction.
while major markets revenue decreased 8.3 percent (7 percent Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 14.4 percent (14
adjusted for currency). During 2012, the company’s continued invest- percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011.
ments for innovation supported the introduction of the new System
z mainframe, the PureSystems offerings and new Storage and ($ in millions)
POWER7+ products. In its introductory year, the company sold more Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
than 2,300 PureSystems in over 70 countries. Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
System z revenue increased 5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for
Systems and Technology
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. The increase was driven by the new
mainframe which began shipping late in the third quarter. Fourth External gross profit $6,903 $7,555 (8.6)%
quarter revenue increased 55.6 percent (56 percent adjusted for External gross profit margin 39.1% 39.8% (0.7) pts.
currency), as revenue increased in the major markets over 50 per- Pre-tax income $1,227 $1,633 (24.9)%
cent and over 65 percent in the growth markets. MIPS (millions of Pre-tax margin 6.7% 8.2% (1.5) pts.
instructions per second) shipments increased 19 percent in 2012
versus the prior year. The increase in MIPS was driven by the new The decrease in external gross profit in 2012 versus 2011 was due
mainframe shipments, including specialty engines, which increased to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin.
44 percent year over year driven by Linux workloads. This is a good Overall gross margin decreased 0.7 points in 2012 versus the
indicator of new workloads moving to this platform. The performance prior year. The decrease was driven by lower margins in System x
reflects the technology leadership and value of the vertically integrated (0.6 points), Microelectronics (0.6 points), Storage (0.5 points) and
stack that the company’s flagship server is delivering to its clients. Power Systems (0.2 points), partially offset by improvement due to
Power Systems revenue decreased 8.5 percent (7 percent revenue mix (1.2 points).
adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Low-end servers increased Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased $406
6 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) offset by declines in million (24.9 percent) to $1,227 million in 2012, with a pre-tax margin
high-end and midrange products. Early in October, the company of 6.7 percent. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of
announced new POWER7+ based servers. The high-end and mid- $46 million and $3 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011,
range models available in the fourth quarter performed well in the respectively, pre-tax income decreased 22.2 percent and the pre-
period. The company will continue to refresh the Power portfolio in tax margin decreased by 1.3 points.
the first half of 2013. In 2012, the company had nearly 1,200 competi-
Global Financing
tive displacements resulting in over $1 billion of business; almost
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
equally from Hewlett Packard and Oracle/Sun.
segment results.
System x revenue decreased 3.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. High-end System x revenue increased
5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus the prior
year, while high-volume and blade servers declined year to year.
Storage revenue decreased 5.8 percent (4 percent adjusted for
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Total disk revenue decreased 3 per-
cent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Tape
revenue decreased 16 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) in
2012 versus the prior year. The value in storage solutions continues
to shift to software, as demonstrated by the ongoing success the
company is having in its Tivoli storage software offerings.

===== PAGE 33 =====
3322 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Total revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)% 0.0%
Geographies $102,268 $104,170 (1.8)% 0.5%
Americas 44,556 44,944 (0.9) 0.0
Europe/Middle East/Africa 31,775 33,952 (6.4) (1.0)
Asia Pacific 25,937 25,273 2.6 3.3
Major markets (3.5)% (1.3)%
Growth markets 4.2% 6.9%
BRIC countries 7.4% 12.2%
Total geographic revenue decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for adjusted for currency) and Italy was down 8.4 percent (1 percent
currency) in 2012; excluding the divested RSS business, revenue adjusted for currency). The EMEA growth markets increased 0.8
decreased 1.4 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent at percent (5 percent at constant currency) led by growth in Russia of
constant currency compared to the prior year. Revenue perfor- 11.7 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency).
mance at constant currency was driven by strong results in the Asia Pacific revenue increased 2.6 percent (3 percent adjusted
growth markets, offsetting a modest decline year to year in the for currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets
major markets. increased 6.0 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), with growth
Across all geographies, growth markets revenue increased 4.2 led by China (17.9 percent as reported, 16 percent at constant
percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and these countries now currency) and India (decreased 0.9 percent as reported, increased
represent 24 percent of total geographic revenue, an increase of 8 13 percent at constant currency). Japan revenue decreased 1.9
points since 2006 when the company introduced its 2010 road map. percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) but improved sequentially
Adjusted for currency, revenue growth in these fast growing markets throughout the year at constant currency and returned to growth
outpaced the major markets in 2012 by approximately 8 points. The in the fourth quarter of 2012.
BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India and China combined revenue OEM revenue of $2,239 million in 2012 decreased 18.5 percent
increased 7.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, with (18 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2011, driven by the
double-digit growth in Russia, India and China, adjusted for currency. Microelectronics OEM business.
Overall in 2012, the company had double-digit constant currency
revenue growth in nearly 35 growth market countries. The company Total Expense and Other Income
is continuing to expand into new countries and territories, to build
($ in millions)
out IT infrastructures in support of economic growth and to take a Yr.-to-Yr.
leadership position in key industries. To drive market expansion, in Percent/
Margin
2012 the company accelerated the opening of new branch offices For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
resulting in a doubling of the number of face-to-face branches when Total consolidated expense
compared to 2011. The company now has almost 450 face-to-face and other (income) $28,396 $29,135 (2.5)%
and virtual branch offices in the growth markets. Non-operating adjustments
Americas revenue decreased 0.9 percent (flat adjusted for Amortization of acquired
currency) in 2012. Within the major market countries, the U.S. intangible assets (328) (289) 13.3
decreased 1.1 percent and Canada decreased 1.5 percent as Acquisition-related charges (35) (45) (21.2)
reported (flat adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America Non-operating retirement-related
growth markets increased 1.4 percent (8 percent adjusted for (costs)/income (274) 74 NM
currency) with constant currency growth in Brazil of 6 percent, Total operating (non-GAAP)
down 4.6 percent as reported. expense and other (income) $27,760 $28,875 (3.9)%
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 6.4 per- Total consolidated
cent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. expense-to-revenue ratio 27.2% 27.3% (0.1) pts.
Within the major market countries, the UK was essentially flat (up 1 Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 26.6% 27.0% (0.4) pts.
percent adjusted for currency), Germany was down 7.6 percent (flat
adjusted for currency), France was down 12.6 percent (6 percent N M—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) decreased 2.5 percent in 2012 Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 1.6 percent pri-
versus 2011. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) marily driven by the effects of currency (3 points) and lower base
decreased 3.9 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers of the spending (1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending
year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) were (2 points). The increase in workforce rebalancing charges was due
approximately: to actions primarily focused on the company’s non-U.S. operations
in the third quarter of 2012. The increase in retirement-related costs
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) was primarily driven by the charge related to a court decision
• Currency* (5) points (5) points regarding one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a result of the
• Acquisitions** 3 points 2 points ruling, the company recorded an additional retirement-related obli-
• Base expense (0) points (2) points gation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012. This charge is not
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. reflected in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense. See note M,
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 110 through 112 for
additional information. Bad debt expense decreased $37 million in
In the execution of its strategy, the company continues to invest 2012 versus 2011, as the company increased its provisions in 2011
in its growth initiatives, innovation and strategic acquisitions. The reflecting the European credit environment. The accounts receivable
company also has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency provision coverage is 1.4 percent at December 31, 2012, a decrease
and productivity across the business. of 10 basis points from year-end 2011.
For additional information regarding total expense and other
income, see the following analyses by category. Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
Selling, General and Administrative
Yr.-to-Yr.
($ in millions) Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Other (income) and expense
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Foreign currency transaction
Selling, general and losses/(gains) $(240) $ 513 NM%
administrative expense
(Gains)/losses on derivative
Selling, general and instruments 72 (113) NM
administrative—other $19,589 $20,287 (3.4)%
Interest income (109) (136) (20.2)
Advertising and promotional expense 1,339 1,373 (2.5)
Net (gains)/losses from securities
Workforce rebalancing charges 803 440 82.5 and investment assets (55) (227) (75.5)
Retirement-related costs 945 603 56.7 Other (511) (58) NM
Amortization of acquired Total consolidated other
intangible assets 328 289 13.3 (income) and expense $(843) $ (20) NM%
Stock-based compensation 498 514 (3.0) Non-operating adjustment
Bad debt expense 50 88 (42.5) Acquisition-related charges (13) (25) (46.0)
Total consolidated selling, general Operating (non-GAAP)
and administrative expense $23,553 $23,594 (0.2)% other (income) and expense $(857) $ (45) NM%
Non-operating adjustments
NM—Not meaningful
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (328) (289) 13.3
Other (income) and expense was income of $843 million and $20
Acquisition-related charges (22) (20) 10.2
million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. The increase in income of
Non-operating retirement-related $823 million in 2012 was primarily driven by higher gains from foreign
(costs)/income (294) (13) NM
currency transactions ($753 million) due to rate volatility year to year,
Operating (non-GAAP)
and the gain associated with the divested RSS business ($446
selling, general and
million) reflected in Other in the table above. These increases in
administrative expense $22,910 $23,272 (1.6)%
income were partially offset by increased losses on derivative instru-
NM—Not meaningful ments ($184 million) and lower gains from securities and investment
asset sales ($171 million). In 2011, the company had investment gains
Total Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased
of over $200 million, primarily from the sale of Lenovo shares.
0.2 percent in 2012 versus 2011. The decrease was primarily driven
by the effects of currency (3 points), partially offset by acquisition-
related spending (2 points), while base spending was essentially flat.

===== PAGE 35 =====
3344 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering Stock-Based Compensation
($ in millions) Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $688 million
Yr.-to-Yr. decreased $9 million compared to 2011. The decrease was primarily
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change related to the company’s performance share units ($30 million), par-
tially offset by increases related to restricted stock units ($16 million)
Total consolidated research,
development and engineering $6,302 $6,258 0.7% and the assumption of stock-based awards previously issued by
Non-operating adjustment acquired entities ($5 million). Cost, and the year-to-year change, was
reflected in the following categories: Cost: $132 million, up $11
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income 20 88 (76.9) million; SG&A expense: $498 million, down $16 million; and RD&E
Operating (non-GAAP) research, expense: $59 million, down $4 million.
development and engineering $6,322 $6,345 (0.4)% See note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 117 to 120
for additional information on stock-based incentive awards.
The company continues to invest in research and development,
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities Retirement-Related Plans
and extending its technology leadership. Total research, development The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 0.7 percent in 2012 related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated
versus 2011, primarily driven by acquisitions (3 points), partially offset Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E)
by the effects of currency (2 points) and lower base spending (1 relating to the job function of the plan participants.
point). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 0.4 percent
in 2012 compared to the prior year primarily driven by the effects of ($ in millions)
currency (2 points) and lower base spending (2 points), partially Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
offset by acquisitions (3 points). RD&E investments represented For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
6.0 percent of revenue in 2012, compared to 5.9 percent in 2011. Retirement-related plans—cost
Service cost $ 493 $ 549 (10.2)%
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Amortization of prior
($ in millions) service cost/(credits) (148) (157) (5.5)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Cost of defined contribution plans 1,506 1,513 (0.4)
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Total operating costs $ 1,851 $ 1,905 (2.8)%
Sales and other transfers Interest cost 4,238 4,601 (7.9)
of intellectual property $ 324 $ 309 4.7%
Expected return on plan assets (6,356) (6,574) (3.3)
Licensing/royalty-based fees 251 211 19.0
Recognized actuarial losses 2,407 1,788 34.6
Custom development income 500 588 (14.9)
Plan amendments/curtailments/
Total $1,074 $1,108 (3.0)% settlements 1 1 14.4
Multi-employer plan/other costs 247 112 121.3
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may vary
Total non-operating costs/
significantly from period to period depending upon timing of dives-
(income) $ 538 $ (72) NM%
titures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the timing
Total retirement-related
of new patents and know-how development. There were no signifi-
plans—cost $ 2,389 $ 1,832 30.3%
cant individual IP transactions in 2012 or 2011.
NM—Not meaningful
Interest Expense
In 2012, total retirement-related plans cost increased by $556 million
($ in millions)
compared to 2011, primarily driven by an increase in recognized
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent actuarial losses of $619 million, lower expected return on plan assets
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change ($219 million) and the charge related to the UK pension litigation
Interest expense ($162 million). These increases were partially offset by lower interest
Total $459 $411 11.8% cost of $363 million and lower service cost of $56 million.
The increase in interest expense in 2012 versus 2011 was primarily
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in
the Consolidated State ment of Earnings only if the related external
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2012 was $1,004 million, an increase
of $40 million year to year.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section Financial Position
on page 18, the company characterizes certain retirement-related Dynamics
costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this At December 31, 2012, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2012 were positions remained strong and well-positioned to support the com-
$1,851 million, a decrease of $54 million compared to 2011, primarily pany’s long-term objectives. Cash and marketable securities at
driven by the $56 million decrease in service cost. Non-operating year end were $11,128 million, a decrease of $794 million from the
costs of $538 million increased $610 million in 2012, compared prior year-end position. During the year the company continued to
to the prior year, driven primarily by the increase in recognized actu- manage the investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation
arial losses ($619 million), lower expected return on plan assets and liquidity objectives. At December 31, 2012, there were no hold-
($219 million) and the charge related to the UK pension litigation ings of European sovereign debt securities in the investment
($162 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($363 million). portfolio.
Total debt of $33,269 million increased $1,949 million from the
Income Taxes
prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at December
The effective tax rate for 2012 was 24.2 percent compared with 31, 2012 was $1,800 million, a decrease of $500 million from the
24.5 percent in 2011. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2012 prior year. Within total debt, $24,501 million is in support of the
was 24.0 percent compared with 24.5 percent in 2011. The 0.3 point Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.0 to 1 ratio.
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven The company continues to have substantial flexibility in the market.
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (2.6 points) During 2012, the company completed bond issuances totaling
and the one-time benefit in the first quarter associated with a tax $7,875 million, with terms ranging from three to 30 years and priced
restructuring in Latin America (0.8 points), primarily offset by a from 0.55 to 4.00 percent depending on the maturity. The com-
decrease in the utilization of foreign tax credits in 2012 (2.9 points) pany has consistently generated strong cash flow from operations
and the unfavorable tax impact of the gain on the RSS divestiture and continues to have access to additional sources of liquidity
(0.3 points).The remaining items were individually insignificant. through the capital markets and its $10 billion global credit facility,
with 100 percent of the facility available on a same-day basis.
Earnings Per Share Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasures
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted- the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during December 31. At December 31, 2012, the overall net underfunded
the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of position was $20,190 million, an increase of $3,800 million from
the weighted-average number of shares of common stock out- December 31, 2011, as the increase in the benefit obligation due to
standing plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock options were well funded and the cash requirements related to these plans
and stock awards. remain stable going forward at approximately $1 billion per year
through 2015. In 2012, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan
assets was 11.3 percent and the plan was 98 percent funded. Over-
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent all, global asset returns were 11.1 percent and the company’s
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 94 percent funded.
Earnings per share of common stock The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European
Assuming dilution $14.37 $13.06 10.0% sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retire-
Basic $14.53 $13.25 9.7% ment-Related Benefits,” on page 128 for additional information.
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $15.25 $13.44 13.5% During 2012, the company generated $19,586 million in cash
Weighted-average shares from operations, a decrease of $260 million compared to 2011. In
outstanding (in millions) addition, the company generated $18,185 million in free cash flow
Assuming dilution 1,155.4 1,213.8 (4.8)% in 2012, an increase of $1,581 million over the prior year. See pages
Basic 1,142.5 1,197.0 (4.5)% 56 and 57 for additional information on free cash flow. The com-
pany returned $15,768 million to shareholders in 2012, with $11,995
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 2011 were million in gross share repurchases and $3,773 million in dividends.
1,117.4 million and 1,163.2 million, respectively. The average number In 2012, the company repurchased approximately 61 million shares
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 58.3 million and had $8.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization
shares lower in 2012 versus 2011. The decrease was primarily the at year end. The company’s strong cash generation permits the
result of the common stock repurchase program. See note L, company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most
“Equity Activity,” on page 107 for additional information regarding attractive long-term opportunities.
common stock activities. Also see note P, “Earnings Per Share of
Common Stock,” on page 116.

===== PAGE 37 =====
3366 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing busi- Cash Flow
ness are a significant part of the company’s financial position. The The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing
financial position amounts appearing on page 72 are the consoli- activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
dated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts appearing on page 73, is summarized in the table below. These amounts include
in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on page 63, are the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
supplementary data presented to facilitate an understanding of the
Global Financing business. ($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011
Working Capital Net cash provided by/(used in)
($ in millions) Operating activities $ 19,586 $ 19,846
At December 31: 2012 2011 Investing activities (9,004) (4,396)
Current assets $49,433 $50,928 Financing activities (11,976) (13,696)
Current liabilities 43,625 42,123 Effect of exchange rate changes
Working capital $ 5,807 $ 8,805 on cash and cash equivalents (116) (493)
Current ratio 1.13:1 1.21:1 Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ (1,511) $ 1,262
Working capital decreased $2,998 million from the year-end 2011 Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $260 million
position. The key changes are described below: in 2012 as compared to 2011 driven by the following key factors:
Current assets decreased $1,496 million ($1,212 million adjusted
• A decrease in cash due to receivables of $1,290 million
for currency) due to:
(normalized for a $339 million tax refund received in 2012),
• A decrease of $1,224 million in prepaid expenses and other as a result of higher volumes in 2012;
current assets due to: • A decrease in vendor payables of $675 million;
– A decrease of $610 million related to derivatives; • An increase in cash used for workforce rebalancing payments
$398 million in cash collateral received, and $213 million of $236 million, primarily in the non-U.S.; and
primarily related to currency rate volatility; and • An increase in cash used for retirement-related plans
– A decrease of $614 million in various prepaid expenses of $181 million driven by an increase in nonpension post-
(taxes, maintenance, insurance, deposits) retirement contributions, partially offset by
• A decline of $794 million ($661 million adjusted for currency) • Lower net tax payments of $999 million compared
in cash and cash equivalents, and marketable securities to 2011;
(see cash flow analysis in the following column); and • Improved net income of $749 million; and
• A decrease of $308 million in inventory, primarily in Systems • Lower cash requirements for inventory of $442 million.
and Technology; partially offset by
Net cash used in investing activities increased $4,608 million primarily
• An increase of $1,016 million ($1,047 million adjusted for driven by:
currency) in short-term receivables primarily attributable
to higher volumes of financing receivables driven by • A net increase of $1,325 million in net cash used for
customer loans and inventory financing. acquisitions/divestitures; and
• A decrease in cash of $2,719 million from net purchases
Current liabilities increased $1,502 million ($1,682 million adjusted
of marketable securities and other investments.
for currency) as a result of:
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $1,719 million
• An increase of $1,635 million in taxes primarily due to the primarily as a result of:
reclassification of long-term tax liabilities to short term; and
• An increase of $719 million ($879 million adjusted for currency) • A decrease of $2,137 million of net cash used for common
in short-term debt due to: stock transactions; partially offset by
– Reclassifications of $5,638 million from long-term debt • An increase of $300 million in cash dividends paid.
and short-term additions of $4,541 million, offset by
– Maturities of approximately $8,792 million, and a decline
of approximately $500 million in commercial paper; partially
offset by
• A decrease of $565 million in accounts payable primarily
related to the obligation to return cash collateral received
related to derivative valuations.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2012 2011 other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, gener-
ate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing
Noncurrent assets $69,780 $65,505
asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global Services
Long-term debt $24,088 $22,857
assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $32,516 $31,217
base. The debt analysis in the previous column is further detailed in
the Global Financing section on pages 66 and 67.
The increase in noncurrent assets of $4,276 million ($4,454 million
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-to-
adjusted for currency) was driven by:
capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and equity
• An increase of $3,429 million ($3,236 million adjusted as management believes this is more representative of the com-
for currency) in goodwill and intangible assets driven by pany’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from period to
acquisitions; period as the company manages its global cash and debt positions.
• An increase of $470 million in deferred taxes ($580 million “Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing
adjusted for currency) driven by retirement-related debt and equity) was 36.1 percent at December 31, 2012 compared
activity; and to 32.0 percent at December 31, 2011. The increase was primarily
• An increase of $2,036 million in financing receivables driven by an increase in non-Global Financing debt of $780 million
($2,214 million adjusted for currency) driven by increased and a decrease in non-Global Financing equity of $1,497 million from
volumes, partially offset by the December 31, 2011 balances.
• A decrease of $1,899 million in prepaid pension assets Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2012
($1,922 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by plan was 63.7 percent versus 60.7 percent at December 31, 2011.
remeasurements. The increase in both the “core” debt-to-capitalization ratio and
Long-term debt increased by $1,231 million primarily driven by new the consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio was impacted by the
debt issuances of $7,700 million, partially offset by reclasses to $5.2 billion impact to equity as a result of retirement-related plan
short-term debt of $5,638 million, and debt repurchased as a result remeasurements in December.
of the debt exchange of $665 million.
Debt Exchange
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $1,299
In the second quarter of 2012, the company completed an exchange
million ($1,558 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
of approximately $6 million of principal of its 7.125 percent deben-
• An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations tures due in 2096, $104 million principal of its 8.00 percent notes
of $2,044 million ($2,264 million adjusted for currency) due in 2038 and $800 million of principal of its 5.60 percent senior
as a result of pension remeasurements; and notes due in 2039 for approximately $1,107 million of 4.00 percent
• An increase in deferred income of $644 million driven by senior notes due in 2042 and cash of approximately $121 million.
services and software arrangements; partially offset by The exchange was completed to retire high coupon debt in the
• A decrease of $1,389 million in other liabilities driven current favorable interest rate environment.
by a reclass of tax-related liabilities to short term. The debt exchange was accounted for as a non-revolving debt
modification in accordance with accounting guidance, and therefore
Debt
it did not result in any gain or loss recorded in the Consolidated
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and
Statement of Earnings. Cash payments will be amortized over the
strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liability
life of the new debt. Administrative fees with third parties in relation
profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility to
to the exchange were expensed as incurred.
access global funding sources as needed.
Equity
($ in millions)
Total equity decreased by $1,252 million as a result of an increase in
At December 31: 2012 2011
treasury stock of $12,168 million; pension adjustments of $3,669
Total company debt $33,269 $31,320
million reflecting the impact of retirement-related plan remeasure-
Total Global Financing segment debt $24,501 $23,332
ments; partially offset by an increase in retained earnings of $12,783
Debt to support external clients 21,583 20,051 million, and an increase of $1,980 million in common stock primarily
Debt to support internal clients 2,919 3,281 driven by stock option exercises and stock based compensation.

===== PAGE 39 =====
3388 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,298 $ 376 $ 264 $50,938
Gross profit margin 48.1% 0.4 pts. 0.3 pts. 48.7%
SG&A $23,553 $(349) $(294) $22,910
RD&E 6,302 0 20 6,322
Other (income) and expense (843) (13) 0 (857)
Total expense and other (income) 28,396 (363) (274) 27,760
Pre-tax income 21,902 739 538 23,179
Pre-tax income margin 21.0% 0.7 pts. 0.5 pts. 22.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,298 $ 98 $ 156 $ 5,552
Effective tax rate 24.2% (0.4) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.0%
Net income $16,604 $ 641 $ 381 $17,627
Net income margin 15.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 16.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 14.37 $0.55 $0.33 $ 15.25
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,138 $ 341 $ 2 $50,481
Gross profit margin 46.9% 0.3 pts. 0.0 pts. 47.2%
SG&A $23,594 $(309) $ (13 ) $23,272
RD&E 6,258 0 88 6,345
Other (income) and expense (20) (25) 0 (45)
Total expense and other (income) 29,135 (334) 74 28,875
Pre-tax income 21,003 675 (72) 21,605
Pre-tax income margin 19.6% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 20.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,148 $ 179 $ (40) $ 5,287
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.1) pts. 24.5%
Net income $15,855 $ 495 $ (32) $16,318
Net income margin 14.8% 0.5 pts. (0.0) pts. 15.3%
Diluted earnings per share $ 13.06 $0.41 $(0.03) $ 13.44
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results On a geographic basis, revenue performance was led by the
growth markets which increased 6.8 percent as reported and 7 per-
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
cent at constant currency. The BRIC countries delivered combined
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ growth of 11.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency). In the
Margin
fourth quarter, over 30 growth market countries grew constant
For the fourth quarter: 2012 2011 Change
currency revenue at a double-digit rate reflecting ongoing broad-
Revenue $29,304 $29,486 (0.6)%*
based strength.
Gross profit margin 51.8% 49.9% 1.8 pts.
Within the company’s segments, performance was led by con-
Total expense and other income $ 7,336 $ 7,448 (1.5)%
tinued momentum in the growth initiatives and successful product
Total expense and other
launches in high-end systems—both of which drove a more profit-
income-to-revenue ratio 25.0% 25.3% (0.2 ) pts.
able mix. Software revenue increased 3.5 percent (4 percent
Income before income taxes $ 7,831 $ 7,274 7.7%
adjusted for currency), driven by business analytics, Smarter Com-
Provision for income taxes 1,998 1,784 12.0%
merce and cloud with strength in several emerging areas where the
Net income $ 5,833 $ 5,490 6.3%
company has been targeting its investments—Social Business,
Net income margin 19.9% 18.6% 1.3 pts. mobile and security. Systems and Technology revenue declined 0.7
Earnings per share of common stock percent (1 percent adjusted for currency); adjusted for the RSS
Assuming dilution $ 5.13 $ 4.62 11.0% divestiture, revenue increased 3.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for
Weighted-average shares outstanding currency) versus the prior year. New product introductions per-
Assuming dilution 1,136.4 1,188.7 (4.4)% formed well in the quarter. System z revenue increased 55.6 percent
(56 percent adjusted for currency) reflecting strong acceptance of
* 0.3 percent adjusted for currency.
the new mainframe. System z revenue increased over 50 percent
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) in the major markets and over 65 percent in the growth markets.
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2012 and 2011. Global Services revenue decreased 2.1 percent (1 percent adjusted
for currency) with the constant currency growth rate consistent with
($ in millions except per share amounts) the third quarter of 2012. Global Services continued to have strong
Yr.-to-Yr. performance in all of the key growth initiatives which are becoming
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2012 2011 Change a larger part of the services business.
Net income as reported $5,833 $5,490 6.3% The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.8 points versus
the fourth quarter of 2011 to 51.8 percent. The operating (non-GAAP)
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
gross margin increased 2.1 points to 52.3 percent. The improvement
Acquisition-related charges 243 119 103.4
was driven by a combination of strong mainframe growth, good
Non-operating retirement-related
margin expansion in both services segments and an improving seg-
costs/(income) 53 (12) NM
ment mix due to the relative strength of software.
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $6,129 $ 5,597 9.5%
Total expense and other income decreased 1.5 percent in the
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-
earnings per share $ 5.39 $ 4.71 14.4%
GAAP) expense and other income decreased 2.3 percent. The
* See page 43 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings. year-to-year drivers for both categories were approximately:
NM—Not meaningful
Total Operating
Snapshot Consolidated (non-GAAP)
In the fourth quarter of 2012, the company improved its year-to-year • Currency* (1) point (1) point
revenue growth rate, primarily in higher margin areas, while driving • A cquisitions** 2 points 2 points
significant margin expansion and profit growth. The company deliv- • B ase expense (3) points (3) points
ered diluted earning per share of $5.13, a growth of 11.0 percent, and * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
$5.39, an increase of 14.4 percent on an operating (non-GAAP) ** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
basis. The company generated $6.3 billion in cash from operations
in the fourth quarter driving shareholder returns of $4.0 billion in Pre-tax income grew 7.7 percent and the pre-tax margin was 26.7
gross common stock repurchases and dividends. percent, an increase of 2.1 points versus the fourth quarter of
Revenue in the fourth quarter declined 0.6 percent as reported, 2011. Net income increased 6.3 percent and the net income
but was flat at constant currency. Normalized for the RSS divestiture, margin increased 1.3 points to 19.9 percent. The effective tax rate
revenue increased 1 point at constant currency in the quarter, a for the fourth quarter was 25.5 percent, an increase of 1 point
2 point improvement from the third quarter of 2012 constant cur- versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew
rency growth rate. Consistent with the company’s business model 9.5 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was
to move to higher value areas, revenue continued to grow in the 27.7 percent, an increase of 2.6 points versus the prior year. Oper-
higher margin businesses which contributed to the overall margin ating (non-GAAP) net income increased 9.5 percent and the
expansion and profit growth in the fourth quarter. operating (non-GAAP) net income margin was 20.9 percent, an

===== PAGE 41 =====
4400 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
increase of 1.9 points compared to the prior year. The operating $5.39 increased $0.68 versus the fourth quarter of 2011 driven
(non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.4 percent, flat compared to by the following factors:
the fourth quarter of 2011.
• Revenue decrease at actual rates $ (0.03)
Diluted earnings per share of $5.13 increased $0.51 or 11.0
• Margin expansion $ 0.47
percent from the fourth quarter of 2011. In the fourth quarter, the
• Common stock repurchases $ 0.24
company repurchased 15.4 million shares of its common stock.
Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share increased Margin expansion was the largest contributor to the growth in
14.4 percent reflecting the growth in operating (non-GAAP) net operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share in the fourth quarter. This
income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase was achieved through a combination of gross margin improvements
program. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of and expense productivity.
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2012 versus the fourth quarter of 2011 reportable segment external revenue and gross
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arms-length transfer
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $10,284 $10,452 (1.6)% (0.3)%
Gross margin 37.6% 36.6% 1.1 pts.
Global Business Services 4,720 4,877 (3.2)% (2.0)%
Gross margin 29.9% 29.3% 0.7 pts.
Software 7,915 7,648 3.5% 4.2%
Gross margin 90.6% 89.8% 0.8 pts.
Systems and Technology 5,763 5,803 (0.7)% (0.6)%
Gross margin 44.1% 40.5% 3.6 pts.
Global Financing 535 548 (2.3)% (0.9)%
Gross margin 43.8% 49.7% (5.9) pts.
Other 87 159 (45.3)% (45.1)%
Gross margin (73.2)% (11.0)% (62.2) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $29,304 $29,486 (0.6)% 0.3%
Total consolidated gross profit $15,167 $14,722 3.0%
Total consolidated gross margin 51.8% 49.9% 1.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 99 81 22.4%
Acquisition-related charges 0 0 50.8
Retirement-related costs/(income) 60 (10) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $15,327 $14,793 3.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 52.3% 50.2% 2.1 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Global Services
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services and adjusted for currency) year over year. Total Global Services pre-tax
Global Business Services delivered $15,004 million of revenue in the income was $2,868 million, an increase of 3.5 percent year to
fourth quarter, a decrease of 2.1 percent (1 percent adjusted for cur- year. The combined pre-tax margin improved 1 point year to year
rency) year to year. Overall revenue performance in the quarter was to 18.5 percent.
led by the growth markets with revenue up 5.8 percent (7 percent Global Technology Services revenue of $10,284 million decreased
adjusted for currency). Total outsourcing revenue of $6,978 million 1.6 percent as reported, but was flat on a constant currency basis in
decreased 3.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and total the fourth quarter versus the same period in 2011. There were two
transactional revenue of $6,184 million decreased 1.0 percent (flat major factors within the major markets that impacted outsourcing

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
revenue growth in the quarter. First, GTS did a tremendous amount momentum across its brands in the growth initiatives in the fourth
of work to address a number of low margin contracts to improve the quarter with strong performance in business analytics, Smarter
profitability of the outsourcing portfolio. The benefits of that work were Commerce and cloud. WebSphere revenue increased 10.6 percent
realized in profit and margin performance, though it did have some (11 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter year to year
impact on revenue. In the fourth quarter, the impact was 1 point of and gained share. The company continued to expand its portfolio
year-to-year revenue growth to GTS, and to Global Services in total. to capture the emerging opportunity around mobile computing and
Second, revenue from sales and volumes into existing base accounts had solid revenue growth in several of its core WebSphere offerings,
declined year to year in the fourth quarter. This activity tends to be such as application servers and commerce in the fourth quarter.
more transactional in nature and economically sensitive. The impact Information Management revenue increased 2.2 percent (3 percent
of these factors are reflected in GTS Outsourcing revenue, which adjusted for currency) and held share with strong performance in
decreased 3.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth Information Integration and predictive analytics, both driven by big
quarter. Outsourcing revenue in the growth markets increased 6.1 data. Tivoli revenue increased 4.3 percent (5 percent adjusted for
percent, 8 percent at constant currency, and the outsourcing backlog currency) and held share, led by its storage and security offerings.
in these markets was up 9 percent at constant currency. The backlog Revenue from the storage portfolio increased 12 percent (13 percent
growth reflects an ongoing trend as clients are building out their infra- adjusted for currency), reflecting the continued value of storage
structures and scaling to meet the growth objectives of their software. Tivoli security increased 16 percent (16 percent adjusted
businesses. ITS revenue of $2,542 million increased 2.1 percent (3 for currency) driven by Q1 Labs. Lotus revenue increased 8.6 per-
percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter with the growth cent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share as the Lotus
markets up 10.1 percent (10 percent at constant currency). GTS gross portfolio continues to transform to the faster-growing social busi-
profit increased 1.3 percent and the gross profit margin improved 1.1 ness offerings. Revenue growth was driven by strong performance
points to 37.6 percent with margin improvement across all lines of from the existing social business offerings and the recent acquisition
business. GTS fourth-quarter 2012 pre-tax income increased 5.0 of Kenexa, which closed in December 2012. Kenexa helps clients
percent to $2,027 million with the pre-tax margin expanding 1.2 points create a more efficient and effective workforce, and brings a unique
to 19.2 percent, versus the fourth quarter of 2011. Margin expansion combination of cloud-based technology and consulting services to
resulted from increased efficiency and productivity from the focus on an already extensive portfolio of social business solutions. Rational
automation and process, primarily through the company’s enterprise revenue increased 11.6 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in
productivity initiatives. the fourth quarter and gained share. Growth was driven by double-
Global Business Services revenue of $4,720 million decreased digit growth in both analysis, modeling and design software and the
3.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter Automated Software Quality business. Software gross profit
of 2012. From a geographic perspective, the growth markets increased 4.5 percent and the gross profit margin expanded 0.8
increased 2.0 percent (3 percent at constant currency) and Japan points to 90.6 percent. Software delivered pre-tax income of $4,017
improved 0.3 percent (6 percent at constant currency)—the second million in the fourth quarter, a growth of 8.3 percent compared to
consecutive quarter of revenue growth in Japan. The growth initia- the fourth quarter of 2011, with a pre-tax margin of 46.0 percent, up
tives continued to drive strong performance with double-digit 2.4 points.
revenue growth in business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud
Systems and Technology
offerings in the quarter. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased
3.8 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and C&SI revenue Systems and Technology revenue of $5,763 million decreased 0.7
decreased 3.0 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). GBS has percent (1 percent adjusted for currency); adjusted for the RSS
been taking actions to address the more traditional customized divestiture, revenue increased 3.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for
packaged application work including: adding partners, increasing currency). Performance was driven by the company’s new main-
sales capability and targeting and closing large transformational frame and momentum in PureSystems—the company’s new
opportunities in the growth markets. GBS gross profit decreased expert integrated systems. System z revenue increased 55.6 per-
1.0 percent in the fourth quarter with the gross profit margin expanding cent (56 percent adjusted for currency) driven by the first full
0.7 points versus the prior year. GBS pre-tax income of $841 million quarter of the new mainframe product. MIPS shipments increased
was essentially flat year to year with a pre-tax margin of 17.2 percent, 66 percent year to year; the largest quarter of MIPS shipments in
an improvement of 0.6 points. Improved utilization and improved history. Approximately half of these MIPS were specialty engines,
services delivery more than offset the impact from revenue. which were up over 80 percent year to year driven by Linux work-
loads. Revenue growth in System z was over 50 percent in the
Software major markets and over 65 percent in the growth markets. In the
Software revenue of $7,915 million increased 3.5 percent (4 percent growth markets, the company had strong sales to established as
adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter with growth in all the key well as new mainframe customers. Power Systems revenue
brands, and particular strength and share gains in WebSphere, decreased 18.9 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency),
Lotus and Rational. Key branded middleware revenue increased although both the new POWER7+ midrange and high-end Power
5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year and gained servers performed well in the quarter. In the fourth quarter, the
share as the software business continued to be the leader in company had over 350 competitive displacements resulting in over
the middleware market. The software business had continued $335 million of business; approximately half of which came from

===== PAGE 43 =====
4422 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Oracle/Sun and half from Hewlett Packard. System x revenue OEM revenue of $679 million in the fourth quarter decreased
decreased 2.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 4.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
quarter year to year. Storage hardware revenue decreased 5.4 per- prior year.
cent (5 percent adjusted for currency) driven by tape products. Total
tape revenue decreased 23 percent (23 percent adjusted for cur- Total Expense and Other Income
rency) while total disk revenue was essentially flat year to year. Within ($ in millions)
disk, the company announced the new high-end DS8870 in October Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
2012, and the product was sold out in the fourth quarter. Systems
Margin
and Technology gross margin increased 3.6 points to 44.1 percent For the fourth quarter: 2012 2011 Change
driven primarily by a mix to the higher margin System z in the fourth Total consolidated expense
quarter of 2012. Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income and other (income) $7,336 $7,448 (1.5)%
increased 23.2 percent to $974 million in the fourth quarter and the Non-operating adjustments
pre-tax margin increased 3.2 points to 16.4 percent. Systems and Amortization of acquired
Technology’s profit performance was driven by the new product intangible assets (86) (72) 19.6
introductions in mainframe, Power, Storage and PureSystems. Acquisition-related charges (12) (13) (8.2)
Non-operating retirement-related
Global Financing (costs)/income (23) 25 NM
Global Financing revenue of $535 million decreased 2.3 percent (1 Total operating (non-GAAP)
percent adjusted for currency), driven by a decrease in financing expense and other (income) $7,215 $7,388 (2.3)%
revenue, partially offset by an increase in used equipment sales Total consolidated
revenue. The Global Financing fourth-quarter pre-tax income expense-to-revenue ratio 25.0% 25.3% (0.2) pts.
increased 0.7 percent to $518 million and the pre-tax margin Operating (non-GAAP)
increased 0.9 points to 46.9 percent. expense-to-revenue ratio 24.6% 25.1% (0.4) pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Geographic Revenue
Total geographic revenue of $28,624 million decreased 0.5 percent
Total expense and other income decreased 1.5 percent year to year
(flat adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter of 2012 compared
in the fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue-ratio of 25.0 per-
to the prior year. Americas revenue of $12,550 million increased 0.3
cent compared to 25.3 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Total
percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, led by strong
operating (non-GAAP) expense and other income decreased 2.3
growth in Latin America (up 13.5 percent as reported and 18 percent
percent in the fourth quarter. The decrease in total expense and
adjusted for currency). The U.S. was down 0.7 percent, but the
other income was primarily driven by lower base expense (3 points)
growth rate improved 3 points compared to the third quarter of 2012.
and currency (1 point), partially offset by increased expense from
Canada was down 6.2 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency)
the company’s acquisitions over the past 12 months (2 points).
compared to strong year-to-year growth of 13 percent at constant
Within Selling, general and administrative expense, accounts receiv-
currency in the fourth quarter of 2011. EMEA revenue of $9,091
able provisions were approximately $20 million in the fourth quarter
million decreased 5.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency),
of 2012 an improvement of nearly $70 million from the fourth quarter
reflecting the macroeconomic climate in that region. Germany was
of 2011 when provisions were increased to reflect the European
down 7.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) and the UK was
credit environment.
down 4.7 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency). Italy revenue
decreased 3.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency), an improvement Cash Flow
sequentially from the third-quarter constant currency growth rate. The company generated $6,346 million in cash flow provided by
Asia Pacific revenue of $6,984 million increased 4.2 percent (5 per- operating activities, a decrease of $751 million compared to the
cent adjusted for currency) led by Japan, which returned to growth fourth quarter of 2011, driven primarily by an increase in cash used
(0.2 percent as reported, 5 percent at constant currency) in the in operating assets and liabilities ($889 million). Net cash used in
fourth quarter of 2012. Across all geographies, revenue from the investing activities of $4,092 million increased $587 million primarily
growth markets increased 6.8 percent (7 percent adjusted for cur- due to an increase in cash used by non-operating finance receiv-
rency) in the fourth quarter and outpaced growth in the major ables ($501 million) and an increase in cash used from net purchases
markets by 9 points on a constant currency basis. Revenue perfor- of marketable securities and other investments ($300 million). Net
mance was again broad based with over 30 growth market cash used in financing activities of $3,791 million increased $982
countries delivering double-digit revenue growth year to year, million compared to the prior year primarily due to a net decrease
adjusted for currency. Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue in cash from total debt ($1,397 million); partially offset by a decrease
increased 11.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency), the stron- in cash used for gross common stock repurchases ($575 million).
gest quarterly growth in 2012. Brazil returned to growth in the fourth
quarter with revenue up 15.5 percent (24 percent adjusted for cur-
rency). The growth markets also had good performance in Africa,
led by South Africa, and in the Middle East.

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $15,167 $ 100 $ 60 $15,327
Gross profit margin 51.8% 0.3 pts. 0.2 pts. 52.3%
SG&A $ 5,921 $ (91) $ (29) $ 5,801
RD&E 1,580 0 6 1,586
Other (income) and expense (47) (7) 0 (54)
Total expense and other (income) 7,336 (98) (23) 7,215
Pre-tax income 7,831 198 83 8,112
Pre-tax income margin 26.7% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 27.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,998 $ (45) $ 30 $ 1,983
Effective tax rate 25.5% (1.2) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.4%
Net income $ 5,833 $ 243 $ 53 $ 6,129
Net income margin 19.9% 0.8 pts. 0.2 pts. 20.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 5.13 $0.21 $ 0.05 $ 5.39
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $14,722 $ 81 $ (10) $14,793
Gross profit margin 49.9% 0.3 pts. (0.0) pts. 50.2%
SG&A $ 6,076 $ (82) $ 2 $ 5,996
RD&E 1,555 0 23 1,578
Other (income) and expense (44) (2) 0 (46)
Total expense and other (income) 7,448 (85) 25 7,388
Pre-tax income 7,274 166 (35) 7,405
Pre-tax income margin 24.7% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 25.1%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,784 $ 47 $ (24) $ 1,808
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.2) pts. 24.4%
Net income $ 5,490 $ 119 $ (12) $ 5,597
Net income margin 18.6% 0.4 pts. (0.0) pts. 19.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 4.62 $0.10 $(0.01) $ 4.71
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 45 =====
4444 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Prior Year in Review Snapshot
In 2011, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the
by solid revenue performance, continued margin expansion, strong
company’s financial performance in 2011 as compared to 2010.
profit and cash generation and effective use of cash. In its centennial
For a detailed discussion of prior-year performance, see the 2011
year, the company achieved record levels of revenue, profit, free cash
Annual Report.
flow and earnings per share. The financial performance was the
result of the transformation of the company which began years ago.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr. This transformation has been focused on shifting the business to
Percent/ higher value areas of the market, improving productivity and invest-
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change ing in opportunities to drive future growth. These changes have
Revenue $106,916 $ 99,870 7.1%* contributed to nine consecutive years of double-digit earnings per
Gross profit margin 46.9% 46.1% 0.8 pts. share growth. More importantly, this transformation has strength-
Total expense and other income $ 29,135 $ 26,291 10.8% ened the business and put the company on track to achieve its
2015 road map objective of at least $20 of operating (non-GAAP)
Total expense and other
income-to-revenue ratio 27.3% 26.3% 0.9 pts. earnings per share.
Income before income taxes $ 21,003 $ 19,723 6.5% The focus on key growth initiatives and investments in innova-
tion have enabled the company to expand into new markets and
Provision for income taxes 5,148 4,890 5.3%
capitalize on trends like business analytics and cloud computing.
Net income $ 15,855 $ 14,833 6.9%
The growth markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out
Net income margin 14.8% 14.9% 0.0 pts.
IT infrastructures and lead in specific industries is driving strong
Earnings per share of common stock
performance and market share gains. Growth markets revenue
Assuming dilution $ 13.06 $ 11.52 13.4%
increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011
Weighted-average shares outstanding contributing approximately two-thirds of the total constant currency
Assuming dilution 1,213.8 1,287.4 (5.7)% revenue growth for the year and represented 22 percent of total
Assets** $116,433 $113,452 2.6% geographic revenue. The company’s business analytics solutions
Liabilities** $ 96,197 $ 90,279 6.6% helps clients leverage massive amounts of data and content to gain
Equity** $ 20,236 $ 23,172 (12.7)% business insight and optimize results. Business analytics revenue
increased 16 percent compared to 2010. The Smarter Planet offer-
* 3.4 percent adjusted for currency.
ings generated close to 50 percent growth year to year, with Smarter
** At December 31.
Commerce demonstrating strong market momentum. In Cloud
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) Computing, the company is helping its clients improve the economics
earnings for 2011 and 2010. of information technology. In 2011, the company continued to
expand its offerings and cloud revenue for the year was more than
($ in millions except per share amounts) three times the prior year results. With strong contribution from
Yr.-to-Yr. these growth initiatives, the company delivered revenue growth of
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change 7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010.
Net income as reported $15,855 $14,833 6.9% Segment performance was led by Software which increased
Non-operating adjustments revenue 10.9 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key
(net of tax) branded middleware which increased 15.6 percent (13 percent
Acquisition-related charges 495 443 12.0 adjusted for currency) and continued to extend its lead in the middle-
Non-operating retirement-related ware market. In the Global Services business, Global Technology
costs/(income) (32) (253) (87.3) Services increased 7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $16,318 $15,023 8.6% and Global Business Services grew revenue 5.8 percent (1 percent
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) adjusted for currency) driven by strong performance in the growth
earnings per share $ 13.44 $ 11.67 15.2% markets where both segments grew revenue 11 percent at constant
currency. Systems and Technology delivered revenue growth of
* See page 54 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
5.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by strong per-
formance in Power Systems which increased 12.0 percent (9 percent
adjusted for currency) and the growth markets which increased
14.9 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.8 points versus At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
2010 to 46.9 percent. This was the eighth consecutive year of were well positioned to support the company’s objectives. Cash
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) and cash equivalents at year end was $11,922 million. Key drivers
gross margin of 47.2 percent increased 1.1 points compared to the in the balance sheet and total cash flows are highlighted below.
prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2011 was driven by margin Total assets increased $2,981 million ($4,636 million adjusted for
improvements in Software, Systems and Technology and Global currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by:
Services, and an improved revenue mix driven by Software.
• Increases in total receivables ($1,564 million), cash and
Total expense and other income increased 10.8 percent in 2011
cash equivalents ($1,262 million), goodwill ($1,077 million)
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other
and prepaid expenses and other assets ($1,022 million),
income increased 10.2 percent compared to the prior year. The year-
partially offset by
to-year drivers for both categories were approximately:
• Decreases in marketable securities ($990 million) and
• C urrency* 4 points investments and sundry assets ($883 million).
• A cquisitions** 3 points
Total liabilities increased $5,918 million ($6,324 million adjusted for
• Base expense 3 points
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by:
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. • Increases in total debt ($2,695 million), retirement and
nonpension postretirement benefit obligations ($2,396 million),
Pre-tax income grew 6.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was accounts payable ($713 million) and deferred income
19.6 percent, a decrease of 0.1 points versus 2010. Net income ($798 million), partially offset by
increased 6.9 percent and the net income margin was 14.8 percent, • Decreases in taxes payable ($903 million).
flat versus 2010. The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent,
compared with 24.8 percent in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) Total equity of $20,236 million decreased $2,937 million from
pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) December 31, 2010 as a result of:
pre-tax margin was 20.2 percent, an increase of 0.3 points versus • Increased treasury stock ($14,803 million) driven by
the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings increased 8.6 percent share repurchases, pension adjustments ($2,448 million)
and the operating (non-GAAP) earnings margin of 15.3 percent and currency translation adjustments ($711 million),
increased 0.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) partially offset by
effective tax rate was 24.5 percent versus 24.4 percent in 2010. • Higher retained earnings ($12,326 million) and common
Diluted earnings per share improved 13.4 percent reflecting the stock ($2,711 million).
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repur-
chase program. In 2011, the company repurchased approximately 89 The company generated $19,846 million in cash flow from opera-
million shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of tions, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010, primarily driven
$13.06 increased $1.54 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) by the increase in net income. Net cash used in investing activities
diluted earnings per share of $13.44 increased $1.77 versus 2010 of $4,396 million was $4,111 million lower than 2010, driven by less
driven by the following factors: cash used for acquisitions ($4,111 million). Net cash used in financing
activities of $13,696 million was $1,267 million higher, compared to
• Revenue increase at actual rates $0.82 2010, primarily due to lower cash from common stock transactions
• Margin expansion $0.18 ($991 million) and increased dividend payments ($296 million).
• Common stock repurchases $0.77

===== PAGE 47 =====
4466 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2011 and 2010 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an
arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 40,879 $38,201 7.0% 2.7%
Gross margin 35.0% 34.5% 0.5 pts.
Global Business Services 19,284 18,223 5.8% 1.5%
Gross margin 28.8% 28.0% 0.7 pts.
Software 24,944 22,485 10.9% 8.0%
Gross margin 88.5% 87.9% 0.5 pts.
Systems and Technology 18,985 17,973 5.6% 3.2%
Gross margin 39.8% 38.1% 1.6 pts.
Global Financing 2,102 2,238 (6.1)% (9.1)%
Gross margin 49.8% 51.3% (1.5 ) pts.
Other 722 750 (3.8)% (6.3)%
Gross margin (54.5)% (8.6)% (45.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $106,916 $99,870 7.1% 3.4%
Total consolidated gross profit $ 50,138 $46,014 9.0%
Total consolidated gross margin 46.9% 46.1% 0.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 340 260 30.8%
Acquisition-related charges 1 0 NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 2 (204) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 50,481 $46,070 9.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 47.2% 46.1% 1.1 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
The Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) transaction gain recorded In the segment analysis on page 47, each segment’s pre-tax income
in the first quarter of 2010 impacted the year-to-year results of and pre-tax margin for 2011 and 2010 is presented on an as-
the company’s reportable segments for 2011 compared to 2010. In reported basis and on a basis normalized for these actions in both
addition, workforce rebalancing charges were incurred in every years to provide a better perspective of the underlying operational
segment in the first quarter of both years. The PLM transaction gain performance of the segments.
($591 million) was recorded in Software in the first quarter of 2010.

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
The Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, delivered $60,163 margin 2 points higher than in the major markets. The services
million of revenue in 2011, an increase of 6.6 percent (2 percent segments also had good performance in the other key growth
adjusted for currency) compared to 2010. Services revenue per- initiatives: cloud, business analytics and Smarter Planet. Total out-
formance, adjusted for currency, was consistent over the course sourcing revenue of $28,301 million increased 7.8 percent (3
of the year driven by stability in the backlog. Performance in 2011 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional revenue of
was led by strength in the growth markets with total services rev- $24,348 million increased 6.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for
enue up 16.9 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) and gross currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $60,163 $56,424 6.6% 2.3%
Global Technology Services $40,879 $38,201 7.0% 2.7%
Outsourcing 23,911 22,241 7.5 3.0
Integrated Technology Services 9,453 8,714 8.5 4.1
Maintenance 7,515 7,250 3.6 (0.2)
Global Business Services $19,284 $18,223 5.8% 1.5%
Outsourcing 4,390 4,007 9.5 4.8
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,895 14,216 4.8 0.5
GTS revenue of $40,879 million increased 7.0 percent (3 percent ($ in millions)
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Revenue performance Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
was led by the growth markets which were up 16.8 percent (11 per- Margin
cent adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing revenue increased 7.5 For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 and gained share. Global Services
Outsourcing performance in 2011 was driven by strength in the Global Technology Services
growth markets with revenue up 11 percent, adjusted for currency, External gross profit $14,320 $13,194 8.5%
as the outsourcing offerings are continuing to help clients build out External gross profit margin 35.0% 34.5% 0.5 pts.
their IT infrastructures. ITS revenue increased 8.5 percent (4 percent Pre-tax income $ 6,284 $ 5,499 14.3%
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, also led by the growth Pre-tax margin 14.9% 13.9% 1.0 pts.
markets which increased 13 percent, adjusted for currency. Revenue
Pre-tax income—normalized* $ 6,399 $ 5,771 10.9%
growth year over year, adjusted for currency, in both GTS Outsourc-
Pre-tax margin—normalized 15.2% 14.6% 0.6 pts.
ing and ITS was relatively consistent over the course of the year.
Global Business Services
GBS revenue of $19,284 million increased 5.8 percent (1 percent
External gross profit $ 5,545 $ 5,106 8.6%
adjusted for currency) in 2011 led by strength in the growth markets
External gross profit margin 28.8% 28.0% 0.7 pts.
with revenue up 17.4 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency).
Application Outsourcing revenue increased 9.5 percent (5 percent Pre-tax income $ 3,006 $ 2,546 18.1%
adjusted for currency) in 2011 year to year. C&SI, which includes Pre-tax margin 15.0% 13.4% 1.6 pts.
Consulting, Application Management Services systems integration Pre-tax income—normalized** $ 3,052 $ 2,674 14.1%
and the U.S. Federal business, grew revenue in 2011 4.8 percent (1 Pre-tax margin—normalized 15.2% 14.1% 1.1 pts.
percent adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had
* Excludes $116 million and $273 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
strong year-to-year performance in the growth markets with double-
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
digit constant currency revenue growth. GBS was impacted in 2011 ** Excludes $45 million and $128 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
by revenue declines in Japan and in the Public Sector; excluding quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Japan and the Public Sector, total GBS revenue increased 11.9
percent in 2011 (8 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 49 =====
4488 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit increased 8.5 percent in 2011 and gross margin Total Global Services segment pre-tax income was $9,290 mil-
improved 0.5 points year to year. Margin expansion was driven by lion in 2011, an increase of $1,246 million or 15.5 percent year to year.
improved gross profit performance in all lines of business. Pre-tax The combined pre-tax margin in 2011 improved 1.2 points versus
income increased to $6,284 million in 2011 with a pre-tax margin of 2010. On a normalized basis, total Global Services pre-tax income
14.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in in 2011 increased 11.9 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent,
2011 increased 10.9 percent and margin expanded 0.6 points to up 0.8 points year to year. In 2011, the company established two
15.2 percent. Global Services integration hubs which will drive the business to a
GBS gross profit increased 8.6 percent in 2011 and gross margin new level of global consistency, integration and standardization in
improved 0.7 points to 28.8 percent, led primarily by margin the development and delivery of solutions to clients. Both Global
improvement in Application Management Services Outsourcing. Services segments had strong profit and margin performance in
GBS segment pre-tax income improved 18.1 percent to $3,006 million 2011 as they continued to mix to higher value offerings and markets,
with a pre-tax margin of 15.0 percent. On a normalized basis, and continued to focus on productivity and cost management.
segment pre-tax income in 2011 increased 14.1 percent with a
pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent, an increase of 1.1 points year to year.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Software external revenue $24,944 $22,485 10.9% 8.0%
Middleware $20,650 $18,445 12.0% 9.0%
Key Branded Middleware 16,051 13,879 15.6 12.7
WebSphere 40.5 37.4
Information Management 12.5 9.6
Lotus 3.8 0.2
Tivoli 10.2 7.4
Rational 4.9 1.8
Other middleware 4,600 4,565 0.8 (1.9)
Operating systems 2,479 2,282 8.6 5.6
Other 1,814 1,758 3.2 0.4
Software revenue of $24,944 million increased 10.9 percent (8 percent market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. Adjusting for the branded middleware which accounted for 64 percent of total soft-
divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 11.8 percent (9 percent ware revenue in 2011, an increase of 3 points from 2010. Performance
adjusted for currency) in 2011. Revenue growth was driven by key in 2011 was led by strong double-digit growth in WebSphere. The
branded middleware, reflecting continued strong demand for the Software business continued to have solid performance in its
company’s offerings and solid growth in key focus areas such as growth initiatives, with business analytics revenue up double digits
Smarter Commerce and business analytics. Overall, the Software in 2011 year to year.
business had another very good year in 2011, delivering nearly WebSphere revenue increased 40.5 percent (37 percent
$10 billion in segment pre-tax income, an increase of $500 million adjusted for currency) in 2011 with strong performance throughout
from 2010. The company continued to invest in additional capabilities the year and gained share. WebSphere’s five product areas all had
for the Software business through both organic investments and revenue growth of 18 percent or higher in 2011, led by the Smarter
strategic acquisitions, including the completion of five acquisitions in Commerce offerings, which more than tripled year to year. This per-
2011, plus acquisitions announced in the fourth quarter of 2011 that formance contributed to the company’s overall growth in the retail
closed in the first quarter of 2012. industry in each of the last two years. The 2010 acquisitions of
Key branded middleware revenue increased 15.6 percent Sterling Commerce, Coremetrics and Unica Corporation all contrib-
(13 percent adjusted for currency) and again gained market share in uted to the WebSphere year-to-year performance.
2011, as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Information Management revenue increased 12.5 percent ($ in millions)
(10 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share in 2011 com- Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
pared to 2010. Distributed Database revenue increased 33 percent Margin
in 2011, led by strong performance from the Netezza offerings. For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
Since acquiring Netezza in November 2010, the Software business Software
has expanded the Netezza customer base by over 40 percent. The External gross profit $22,065 $19,774 11.6%
company’s business analytics software offerings, most of which External gross profit margin 88.5% 87.9% 0.5 pts.
are part of Information Management, continued to outpace the Pre-tax income $ 9,970 $ 9,466 5.3%
market with double-digit revenue growth, year to year in 2011. Pre-tax margin 35.3% 37.2% (1.9 )pts.
Lotus revenue increased 3.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) Pre-tax income-normalized* $10,009 $ 8,972 11.6%
in 2011 compared to 2010, with growth driven by the Social Business
Pre-tax margin—normalized 35.5% 35.3% 0.2 pts.
offerings.
Tivoli revenue increased 10.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for * Excludes $39 million and $98 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in the
currency) in 2011 when compared to 2010 and gained share. Rev- first quarter of 2010.
enue growth was led by Storage software with growth of 25 percent
(22 percent adjusted for currency). Security solutions software Software gross profit increased 11.6 percent to $22,065 million in
also delivered growth in 2011, with revenue up 9 percent (6 percent 2011 driven primarily by the growth in revenue. Gross profit margin
adjusted for currency). improved 0.5 points versus 2010. Software delivered segment
Rational revenue increased 4.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for pre-tax income of $9,970 million in 2011, an increase of 5.3 percent
currency) in 2011 versus 2010 and gained share. Revenue growth versus 2010. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income
was driven by Telelogic, which increased 11 percent (7 percent increased 11.6 percent and segment pre-tax margin improved
adjusted for currency) year to year. 0.2 points to 35.5 percent in 2011. The Software segment delivered
Operating systems revenue increased 8.6 percent (6 percent strong margin and profit growth in 2011 and contributed to the
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010, driven primarily by company’s continued margin expansion and profit performance.
growth in Power Systems.
Other software revenue increased 3.2 percent (flat adjusted for
currency) with growth in software-related services partially offset
by the divestiture of the PLM operations in the first quarter of 2010.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011* 2010* Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $18,985 $17,973 5.6% 3.2%
System z 0.3% (2.1)%
Power Systems 12.0 9.5
System x 5.7 2.4
Storage 5.8 3.1
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions 6.3 3.5
Microelectronics OEM 0.2 0.1
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions 5.4 3.0
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012) 11.6 9.4
* Reclassified to conform with 2012 presentation.
Systems and Technology revenue increased 5.6 percent (3 percent System z revenue increased 0.3 percent (down 2 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Performance in 2011 adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. MIPS shipments
was driven by the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent increased 16 percent in 2011 versus 2010. The revenue performance
(12 percent adjusted for currency). The major markets increased and lower MIPS growth was a result of the strong prior-year perfor-
2.7 percent, but were essentially flat at constant currency versus mance and was consistent with prior mainframe product cycles, as
the prior year period. the company successfully launched its zEnterprise 196 (z196) server
in the third quarter of 2010. Since the z196 server began shipping,
the company added over 115 new System z clients, with more than
33 percent in the growth markets through year-end 2011.

===== PAGE 51 =====
5500 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Power Systems revenue increased 12.0 percent (9 percent ($ in millions)
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010 with performance driven Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
by strong growth in high-end systems. High-end systems revenue Margin
increased 31 percent (28 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 com- For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
pared to 2010. The company extended its market leadership in 2011, Systems and Technology
having posted 15 consecutive quarters of year-to-year share gains. External gross profit $7,555 $6,856 10.2%
In addition, this was the second consecutive year that the company External gross profit margin 39.8% 38.1% 1.6 pts.
had over 1,000 competitive displacements, which this year gener- Pre-tax income $1,633 $1,456 12.2%
ated over $1 billion of business; approximately 50 percent of this Pre-tax margin 8.2% 7.8% 0.5 pts.
business was from Hewlett Packard, with most of the balance from Pre-tax income—normalized* $1,652 $1,513 9.2%
Oracle/Sun.
Pre-tax margin—normalized 8.3% 8.1% 0.3 pts.
System x revenue increased 5.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. High-end System x revenue * Excludes $19 million and $57 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
increased 35 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011
versus the prior year. System x revenue increased 22 percent (18 The increase in external gross profit in 2011 versus 2010 was due to
percent adjusted for currency) in the growth markets and closed the higher revenue and an improved overall gross profit margin.
year with its ninth consecutive quarter with a double-digit increase Overall gross margin increased 1.6 points in 2011 versus the prior
in the growth markets. year. The increase was primarily driven by margin improvements
Storage revenue increased 5.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for in Power Systems (1.2 points), System z (0.4 points) and System x
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Total disk revenue increased 7 percent (0.6 points), partially offset by lower margins in Microelectronics
(4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, driven by (0.6 points) and Storage (0.2 points).
growth in enterprise disk products. Tape revenue increased 3 per- Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased $177
cent (flat adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. When combined million (12.2 percent) to $1,633 million in 2011 and on a normalized
with storage software, total storage revenue increased 10 percent basis increased $139 million to $1,652 million in 2011, when com-
in 2011 compared to the prior year. pared to the prior year. Pre-tax margin increased 0.5 points, and on
Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 11.6 percent (9 percent a normalized basis 0.3 points, versus the prior year.
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus the prior year. The brand gained
share in 2011 and contributed to the company’s overall improved Global Financing
performance in the retail industry. See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 0.2 percent (flat segment results.
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, as the company shifted
its production to meet internal demand.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately on
page 51.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change Currency
Total revenue $106,916 $99,870 7.1% 3.4%
Geographies $104,170 $97,060 7.3% 3.6%
Americas 44,944 42,044 6.9 6.2
Europe/Middle East/Africa 33,952 31,866 6.5 1.6
Asia Pacific 25,273 23,150 9.2 1.7
Major markets 5.1% 1.6%
Growth markets 16.0% 11.4%
BRIC countries 18.6% 16.1%
Total geographic revenue increased 7.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) to $104,170 million in 2011, led by strong performance in
the growth markets.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted Total Expense and Other Income
for currency) in 2011 and gained 4 points of market share. The
($ in millions)
growth markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT
Yr.-to-Yr.
infrastructures and lead in specific industries has driven the strong Percent/
Margin
performance and share gains. Revenue growth outpaced growth
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
in the major markets by 10 points in 2011 on a constant currency
Total consolidated expense
basis. In the BRIC countries, revenue increased 18.6 percent (16 and other (income) $29,135 $26,291 10.8%
percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, with double-digit growth in Non-operating adjustments
each country. Overall in 2011, the company had double-digit constant
Amortization of acquired
currency revenue growth in nearly 40 growth market countries. intangible assets (289) (253) 14.4
These countries contributed nearly two-thirds of the company’s 2011 Acquisition-related charges (45) (46) (1.8)
constant currency revenue growth and represented 22 percent of
Non-operating retirement-related
total geographic revenue in 2011. To further drive market expansion, (costs)/income 74 210 (64.6)
the company opened 92 new branches and added over 1,500 new Total operating (non-GAAP)
sales resources in 2011. expense and other (income) $28,875 $26,202 10.2%
Americas revenue increased 6.9 percent (6 percent adjusted Total consolidated
for currency) in 2011. Within the major market countries, the U.S. expense-to-revenue ratio 27.3% 26.3% 0.9 pts.
increased 4.2 percent and Canada increased 14.3 percent (10 percent Operating (non-GAAP)
adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets expense-to-revenue ratio 27.0% 26.2% 0.8 pts.
increased 16.9 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) with
growth in Brazil of 13.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency). Total expense and other (income) increased 10.8 percent in 2011
EMEA revenue increased 6.5 percent (2 percent adjusted for versus 2010. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. In the major market countries, (income) increased 10.2 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers
revenue growth was led by the UK up 9.4 percent (5 percent adjusted of the year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) for
for currency), Spain up 11.2 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency), both expense presentations were approximately:
Germany up 5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and
• Currency* 4 points
France up 4.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency). Revenue in Italy
• Acquisitions** 3 points
decreased 0.6 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). The EMEA
• Base expense 3 points
growth markets increased 11.6 percent (10 percent adjusted for
*Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
currency) in 2011, led by growth in Russia of 49.8 percent (49 percent
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
adjusted for currency).
Asia Pacific revenue increased 9.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for For additional information regarding total expense and other income,
currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets increased see the following analyses by category.
16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by growth in
China of 21.6 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) and India
of 10.9 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue
increased 2.0 percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted for currency).
OEM revenue of $2,746 million in 2011 decreased 2.3 percent
(3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010, driven by the
Microelectronics OEM business.

===== PAGE 53 =====
5522 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
Selling, general and Other (income) and expense
administrative expense Foreign currency transaction
Selling, general and losses/(gains) $513 $ 303 69.2%
administrative—other $20,287 $18,585 9.2% (Gains)/losses on
Advertising and promotional expense 1,373 1,337 2.7 derivative instruments (113) (239) (52.9)
Workforce rebalancing charges 440 641 (31.3) Interest income (136) (92) 48.4
Retirement-related costs 603 494 22.1 Net (gains)/losses from securities
Amortization of acquired and investment assets (227) 31 NM
intangible assets 289 253 14.4 Other (58) (790) (92.7)
Stock-based compensation 514 488 5.4 Total consolidated other
Bad debt expense 88 40 116.6 (income) and expense $ (20) $(787) (97.4)%
Non-operating adjustment
Total consolidated selling, general
and administrative expense $23,594 $21,837 8.0% Acquisition-related charges (25) (4) NM
Non-operating adjustments Operating (non-GAAP) other
Amortization of acquired (income) and expense $ (45) $(791) (94.3)%
intangible assets (289) (253) 14.4
NM—Not meaningful
Acquisition-related charges (20) (41) (52.3)
Non-operating retirement-related Other (income) and expense was income of $20 million and
(costs)/income (13) 84 NM $787 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in income
Operating (non-GAAP) in 2011 was primarily driven by the net gain ($591 million) from the
selling, general and PLM transaction recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and a net gain
administrative expense $23,272 $21,628 7.6%
associated with the disposition of a joint venture in the third quarter
NM—Not meaningful of 2010 ($57 million) reflected in Other in the table above. In addition,
foreign currency rate volatility drove higher foreign currency transac-
Total SG&A expense increased 8.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for tion losses ($210 million) and lower gains on derivative instruments
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Overall the increase was driven by ($126 million). These decreases in income were partially offset by
currency impacts (3 points), acquisition-related spending (3 points) higher net gains from securities and investment asset sales ($258
and base expense (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense million), primarily in the first quarter of 2011.
increased 7.6 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) primarily
driven by the same factors. Workforce rebalancing charges Research, Development and Engineering
decreased $201 million due primarily to actions taken in the first
($ in millions)
quarter of 2010 ($558 million). Bad debt expense increased $47 Yr.-to-Yr.
million in 2011 primarily due to higher receivable balances and the Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
economic environment in Europe. The accounts receivable provision
Total consolidated research,
coverage was 1.5 percent at December 31, 2011, a decrease of 30
development and engineering $6,258 $6,026 3.8%
basis points from year-end 2010.
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income 88 126 (30.4)
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
development and engineering $6,345 $6,152 3.1%
The company continues to invest in research and development,
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities
and to extend its technology leadership. Total RD&E expense
increased 3.8 percent in 2011 versus 2010, primarily driven by acqui-
sitions (up 4 points) and currency impacts (up 2 points), partially
offset by base expense (down 2 points). Operating (non-GAAP)
RD&E expense increased 3.1 percent in 2011 compared to the
prior year primarily driven by the same factors. RD&E investments
represented 5.9 percent of revenue in 2011, compared to 6.0 percent
in 2010.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income Financial Position
($ in millions) Cash and cash equivalents at year end was $11,922 million, an
Yr.-to-Yr. increase of $271 million from the prior year-end position. During
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change 2011, the company continued to manage its investment portfolio
to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives, which
Sales and other transfers of
intellectual property $ 309 $ 203 52.3% resulted in a shift to higher rated institutions. At year end, a signifi-
Licensing/royalty-based fees 211 312 (32.5) cant portion of the investment portfolio was invested in U.S.
sovereign instruments with no holdings of European sovereign debt
Custom development income 588 638 (8.0)
securities.
Total $1,108 $1,154 (4.0)%
Total debt of $31,320 million increased $2,695 million from
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may the prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing of December 31, 2011 was $2,300 million, an increase of $1,156 million
divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the from the prior year. Within total debt, $23,332 million is in support
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1
significant individual IP transactions in 2011 or 2010. ratio. The company continued to have substantial flexibility in the
market. During 2011, the company completed bond issuances
Interest Expense totaling $4,850 million, with terms ranging from three to 10 years
and priced from 0.875 to 2.90 percent depending on the maturity.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. In addition, the company renewed its $10 billion global credit facility
Percent for five years, with 100 percent of the facility available on a same
For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010 Change
day basis.
Interest expense
Consistent with accounting standards the company remeasured
Total $411 $368 11.6%
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
December 31. At December 31, 2011, the overall net underfunded
The increase in interest expense in 2011 versus 2010 was primarily
position was $16,389 million, an increase of $2,654 million from
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average
December 31, 2010 as the increase in the benefit obligation due to
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in
the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan
the Consolidated State ment of Earnings only if the related external
assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
were well funded and its cash requirements related to these plans
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global
remained stable going forward. In 2011, the return on the U.S.
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense
Personal Pension Plan assets was 8.4 percent and the plan was
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2011 was $964 million, an increase
98 percent funded. Overall, global asset returns were 6.1 percent and
of $41 million year to year.
the company’s qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 96
percent funded.
Income Taxes
The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European
The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent compared with
sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retire-
24.8 percent in 2010. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2011
ment-Related Benefits,” on page 128 for additional information.
was 24.5 percent compared with 24.4 percent in 2010. The 0.3 point
During 2011, the company generated $19,846 million in cash from
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven
operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010. In addi-
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (0.6 points),
tion, the company generated $16,604 million in free cash flow in
the lack of prior year impacts related to certain intercompany pay-
2011, an increase of $305 million over the prior year. See pages 56
ments made by foreign subsidiaries (6.6 points) and a reduced
and 57 for additional information on free cash flow. The company
impact associated with the intercompany licensing of certain intel-
returned $18,519 million to shareholders in 2011, with $15,046 million
lectual property and acquisition integration costs (2.2 points). These
in gross share repurchases and $3,473 million in dividends. In 2011,
benefits were offset by a decrease in the utilization of foreign tax
the company repurchased approximately 89 million shares and had
credits (3.7 points) and a decrease in the benefits associated with
$8.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization at year end.
the settlements of the U.S. federal income tax audit (5.5 points).
The company has consistently generated strong cash from opera-
The remaining items were individually insignificant.
tions and strong free cash flow and this permits the company to
invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-term
opportunities.

===== PAGE 55 =====
5544 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,138 $ 341 $ 2 $50,481
Gross profit margin 46.9% 0.3 pts. 0.0 pts. 47.2%
SG&A $23,594 $(309) $ (13) $23,272
RD&E 6,258 0 88 6,345
Other (income) and expense (20) (25) 0 (45)
Total expense and other (income) 29,135 (334) 74 28,875
Pre-tax income 21,003 675 (72) 21,605
Pre-tax income margin 19.6% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 20.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,148 $ 179 $ (40) $ 5,287
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.1) pts. 24.5%
Net income $15,855 $ 495 $ (32) $16,318
Net income margin 14.8% 0.5 pts. (0.0) pts. 15.3%
Diluted earnings per share $ 13.06 $0.41 $(0.03) $ 13.44
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2010: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $46,014 $ 260 $ (204) $46,070
Gross profit margin 46.1% 0.3 pts. (0.2) pts. 46.1%
SG&A $21,837 $(294) $ 84 $21,628
RD&E 6,026 0 126 6,152
Other (income) and expense (787) (4) 0 (791)
Total expense and other (income) 26,291 (298) 210 26,202
Pre-tax income 19,723 558 (414) 19,867
Pre-tax income margin 19.7% 0.6 pts. (0.4) pts. 19.9%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,890 $ 116 $ (162) $ 4,844
Effective tax rate 24.8% (0.1)pts. (0.3) pts. 24.4%
Net income $14,833 $ 443 $ (253) $15,023
Net income margin 14.9% 0.4 pts. (0.3) pts. 15.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 11.52 $0.34 $(0.20) $ 11.67
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Information
Looking Forward
In 2012, the company delivered revenue of $104.5 billion, net income continue to invest in the growth markets—which represent over 20
of $16.6 billion, up 4.7 percent and earnings per share of $14.37, an percent of services revenue and where the company sees the most
increase of 10.0 percent compared to 2011. Operating (non-GAAP) opportunity for growth. The company will continue to transform the
earnings per share was $15.25, an increase of 13.5 percent versus services portfolio to higher value content, and away from the more
the prior year. The 2012 results put the company well on track to its commoditizing labor-based content. Global Services profit and
2015 operating earnings per share road map objective. margin performance will continue to benefit from the work being
The company measures the success of its business model over done to infuse more IP content into its offerings. In addition, Global
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s Services will continue to be the prime beneficiary of the focus on
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective enterprise productivity. The company believes that Global Services
of optimizing long-term performance. has a good set of opportunities to continue to drive profit growth and
In May 2010, the company met with investors and introduced margin expansion in 2013. As a result, the company expects the
a road map for earnings per share in 2015. The objective of the Global Services business to deliver profit growth in 2013, consistent
road map for growth is to achieve at least $20 of operating (non- with its business model expectations, with double-digit profit growth
GAAP) earnings per diluted share in 2015. The company has in the first quarter. In addition, with its backlog growth and the mix
identified the major drivers of financial performance: revenue toward longer duration engagements, the company expects Global
growth, margin expansion and common stock share repurchase. Business Services to return to revenue growth at constant currency
The revenue growth will come from a combination of base revenue in 2013. Within Systems and Technology, looking forward to 2013,
growth, a shift to faster growing businesses and from acquisitions performance in the first half of the year will be defined by the momen-
closed between 2010 and 2015. The contribution from margin tum related to the System z mainframe content. The company
expansion will be driven by the mix of higher margin businesses expects that momentum to drive double-digit profit growth in Sys-
and enterprise productivity. The company will also continue to tems and Technology in the first half of 2013.
return value to its shareholders, with approximately $50 billion of The economy could impact the credit quality of the company’s
gross share repurchases and $20 billion of dividends expected receivables, and therefore the allowance for credit losses. The com-
during the road map period. pany will continue to apply its rigorous credit policies and analysis,
Looking forward, the company expects to continue its trans- and will also continue to monitor the current economic environment,
formation in 2013. The company will continue to acquire key particularly in Europe. Total receivables in Portugal, Italy, Ireland,
capabilities, divest of certain businesses, rebalance its workforce Greece and Spain were approximately $2.7 billion and $2.6 billion, net
and invest in innovation. The company continues to retool its skills of allowances, and represented approximately 7 percent of total net
and offerings to shift to higher value content and meet its clients’ trade and financing accounts receivables at December 31, 2012 and
needs. The company’s expectation for 2013 includes all these fac- 2011, respectively. The company will continue to monitor potential
tors. In January 2013, the company disclosed that it is expecting exposures in these countries in conjunction with the application of its
GAAP earnings of at least $15.53 and operating (non-GAAP) earn- credit policies.
ings of at least $16.70 per diluted share for the full year 2013. The The company expects 2013 pre-tax retirement-related plan
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation excludes cost to be approximately $3.1 billion, an increase of approximately
acquisition-related charges of $0.48 per share and non-operating $700 million compared to 2012. This estimate reflects current
retirement-related costs of $0.69 per share. This expectation results pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2012. Within total
in an increase year to year of 8 percent in GAAP earnings per share retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan cost
and an increase of 10 percent year to year in operating (non-GAAP) is expected to be approximately $1.9 billion, an increase of approxi-
earnings per share which keeps the company on track to its 2015 mately $100 million versus 2012. Non-operating retirement-related
objective. On an operating (non-GAAP) basis, the company expects plan cost is expected to be approximately $1.1 billion, an increase
the first half earnings per share growth rate to be slightly higher of approximately $600 million, compared to 2012. See note S,
than the growth rate in the second half primarily driven by the new “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional
System z mainframe content and the resulting year-to-year product information.
cycle impacts. The company expects in the normal course of business that
From a segment perspective, the Software business once again its effective tax rate and operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will be
delivered strong results in 2012 and continued market leadership. approximately 25 percent in 2013. The rate will change year to year
The company expects the Software business to continue its momen- based on non-recurring events, such as the settlement of income
tum in 2013 and deliver revenue growth in the mid single-digits on a tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors
constant currency basis with strong profit contribution. Within Global including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing
Services, entering 2013, the company will continue to drive its key and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local taxes
plays and shift toward higher value content. The company will and the effects of various global income tax strategies.

===== PAGE 57 =====
5566 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $18.8 billion company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evaluate
and $20.8 billion per year over the past five years. The company strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and need
provides for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term under
an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, a GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow
committed global credit facility and other committed and uncommit- amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The company
ted lines of credit worldwide. The following table provides a summary defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the
of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, change in Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures,
2008 through 2012. including the investment in software. As discussed on page 24, a
key objective of the Global Financing business is to generate strong
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends returns on equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a
($ in billions) financing business. Accordingly, management considers Global
2012 2011 2010 2009 2008 Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as work-
Net cash from ing capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering
operating activities $19.6 $19.8 $19.5 $20.8 $18.8 Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net
Cash and short-term operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by the
marketable securities $11.1 $11.9 $11.7 $14.0 $12.9 company as free cash flow.
Committed global Net cash from operating activities per GAAP was $19.6 billion in
credit facility $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0
2012, a decrease of $0.3 billion from the prior year. As discussed on
page 36, a key driver was a decrease in cash provided by receiv-
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securities
ables, primarily Global Financing receivables, which increased $3.2
at December 31, 2012 appear in the following table. The Standard
billion year to year. The increase in Global Financing receivables
and Poor’s ratings reflect an upgrade on May 30, 2012. The other
resulted from an increase in originations primarily driven by an
agency ratings remain unchanged from December 31, 2011. The
improved participation rate. From the perspective of how manage-
company’s debt securities do not contain any acceleration clauses
ment views cash flow, in 2012, free cash flow was $18.2 billion, an
which could change the scheduled maturities of the obligation. In
increase of $1.6 billion compared to 2011. The increase was primarily
addition, the company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in
driven by the increase in net income and a reduction in income tax
its debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders
payments as a result of audit settlements in 2011. Within its strong
to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments
free cash flow performance, the company increased its capital
thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The company’s
expenditures by $0.2 billion versus the prior year.
contractual agreements governing derivative instruments contain
In 2012, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on
standard market clauses which can trigger the termination of the
returning value to shareholders including $3.8 billion in dividends
agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below investment
and $10.5 billion in net stock transactions, including the common
grade. At December 31, 2012, the fair value of those instruments that
stock repurchase program. In addition, $3.7 billion was utilized to
were in a liability position was $503 million, before any applicable
acquire 11 companies. For the full year, the company generated $18.2
netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations in fair value period
billion in free cash flow and utilized $18.0 billion on acquisitions, net
to period based on the level of the company’s outstanding instru-
share repurchases and dividends.
ments and market conditions. The company has no other contractual
Over the past five years, the company generated over $80 billion
arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would
in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested nearly
result in a material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
$19 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $61 billion to
shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases. The
Moody’s amount of prospective returns to shareholders in the form of divi-
Standard Investors Fitch
& Poor’s Service Ratings dends and share repurchases will vary based upon several factors
Senior long-term debt AA- Aa3 A+ including each year’s operating results, capital expenditure require-
Commercial paper A-1+ Prime-1 F1 ments, research and development investments and acquisitions, as
well as the factors discussed on page 57.
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2012, the Board
presentation on page 73 and highlights causes and events under- of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
lying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 36. For the dividend from $0.75 to $0.85 per share.
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors
and analyzes cash flows in a different format.

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described on page 56.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 19.6 $ 19.8 $ 19.5 $20.8 $ 18.8
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables (2.9) (0.8) (0.7) 1.9 (0.0)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Global Financing receivables 22.5 20.7 20.3 18.9 18.8
Capital expenditures, net (4.3) (4.1) (4.0) (3.7) (4.5)
Free cash flow 18.2 16.6 16.3 15.1 14.3
Acquisitions (3.7) (1.8) (5.9) (1.2) (6.3)
Divestitures 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.4 0.1
Share repurchase (12.0) (15.0) (15.4) (7.4) (10.6)
Dividends (3.8) (3.5) (3.2) (2.9) (2.6)
Non-Global Financing debt 0.7 1.7 2.3 (4.7) (3.2)
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and Global Financing debt) (0.8) 2.3 3.5 1.7 5.0
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities $ (0.8) $ 0.3 $ (2.3) $ 1.1 $ (3.2)
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in operating its current domestic operations and obligations, including investing
results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. The
adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding requirements company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, and,
during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the in those circumstances where the company has additional cash
timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such an adverse requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity options
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more com- available. These options may include the ability to borrow additional
pletely described in note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its committed global
pages 110 through 112. With respect to pension funding, in 2012, the credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and utilizing inter-
company contributed $617 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit company loans with certain foreign subsidiaries.
plans versus $798 million in 2011. As highlighted in the Contractual The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
Obligations table on page 58, the company expects to make legally income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely rein-
mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of vest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and
approximately $4.0 billion in the next five years. The 2013 contribu- accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made
tions are currently expected to be approximately $700 million. on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company
Financial market performance and/or further weakening in the Euro- periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that
pean sovereign debt credit environment in 2013 could increase the it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the
legally mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. coun- deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested
tries that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. earnings is not practicable. While the company currently does not
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign subsidiaries, if
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in these funds are needed for operations and obligations in the U.S., the
the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations. company could elect to repatriate these funds which could result in
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in a reassessment of the company’s policy and increased tax expense.
2006, and, among other things, increases the funding requirements
for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after December 31,
2007. No mandatory contribution is required for the U.S. defined
benefit plan in 2013 as of December 31, 2012.

===== PAGE 59 =====
5588 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual Payments Due In
Payment Stream 2013 2014-15 2016-17 After 2017
Long-term debt obligations $29,599 $ 5,548 $ 6,444 $ 7,570 $10,037
Interest on long-term debt obligations 9,842 1,014 1,617 1,410 5,800
Capital (finance) lease obligations 61 13 24 19 6
Operating lease obligations 5,806 1,466 2,312 1,281 747
Purchase obligations 1,383 559 618 139 68
Other long-term liabilities
Minimum pension funding (mandated)* 4,000 700 1,600 1,700 —
Executive compensation 1,595 94 206 229 1,066
Long-term termination benefits 1,283 221 174 126 763
Tax reserves** 3,942 1,724 — — —
Other 1,107 60 91 81 876
Total $58,619 $11,398 $13,086 $12,554 $19,363
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2017 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $1,724 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the
next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the
progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months.
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above excluding Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the amounts From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. arrangements as defined by the SEC Financial Reporting Release
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase 67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con tractual
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the com- Obligations.”
pany would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or At December 31, 2012, the company had no off-balance sheet
(3) the company must make specified minimum payments even if arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services is non- condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capi-
cancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the table tal expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for the
above. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur company’s contractual obligations, and note M, “Contingencies and
a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included Commitments,” on page 113, for detailed information about the com-
as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified pany’s guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification
in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they rep- arrangements. The company does not have retained interests in
resent the portion of each contract that is a firm commitment. assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into con- balance sheet interests or instruments.
tracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a portion of
its requirements of a specific product, commodity or service from
a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in
order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not
specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore,
the company does not consider them to be purchase obligations.
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the
effective interest rate at December 31, 2012, plus the interest rate
spread associated with that debt, if any.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is
and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost (see page
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and 126 for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan
assumptions discussed in this section are those that the company assets assumption). Expected returns on plan assets are calculated
considers to be the most critical to its financial statements. An based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes
accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-
the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectiv- year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic
ity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable pension (income)/cost. The differences between the actual return
range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to the on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets
company’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets
the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component
the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the service lives
company’s significant accounting policies are described in note A, of the employees in the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresh-
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 86. olds which are based upon the obligation or the value of plan assets,
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that informa- as provided by accounting standards.
tion is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such
material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sen- that management changes its expected long-term return on plan
sitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in the
of the Annual Report to understand a general direction cause and expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption will have
effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent manage- an estimated increase or decrease, respectively, of $249 million on
ment’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/cost
be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 2012 and
and estimates require regular review and adjustment. assuming no contributions are made in 2013).
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required,
Pension Assumptions by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results that
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measurement differ from the estimates may result in more or less future company
of the company’s benefit obligation to employees and net periodic funding into the pension plans than is planned by management.
pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s pension plans
including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected in other countries worldwide will vary depending upon the status of
return on plan assets. each respective plan.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the (gain)/
loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic Revenue Recognition
pension (income)/cost calculation (see page 126 for information Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related to
regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the projected benefit the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the company
obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount rate to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrange-
assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based ments with nonstandard terms and conditions may require
defined benefit plan, by 60 basis points to 3.60 percent on Decem- significant contract interpretation to determine the appropriate
ber 31, 2012. This change will increase pre-tax cost and expense accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple
recognized in 2013 by an estimated $156 million. If the discount rate element arrangement should be treated as separate units of
assumption for the PPP increased by 60 basis points on December accounting. Other significant judgments include determining whether
31, 2012, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2013 would have IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and
decreased by an estimated $200 million. Changes in the discount whether separate contracts are considered part of one arrangement.
rate assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact the Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability
company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. Each to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. The
25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate will cause company considers various factors, including a review of specific
a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical experi-
PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based upon December 31, 2012 data. ence and market and economic conditions when calculating these
provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each quarter
to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates were
changed by 10 percent in 2012, net income would have been
impacted by $79 million (excluding Global Financing receivables
discussed on page 65).

===== PAGE 61 =====
6600 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Costs to Complete Service Contracts To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
The company enters into numerous service contracts through its decreases by 1 percent of income before income taxes, consolidated
Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue, net income would have decreased/improved by $219 million in 2012.
cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profit-
Valuation of Assets
ability of each contract, especially contracts for which the company
The application of business combination and impairment accounting
uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of accounting. If
requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The acqui-
at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract will be unprof-
sition method of accounting for business combinations requires the
itable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is
company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities
recorded immediately in cost. The company performs ongoing
assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree to properly
profitability analyses of its services contracts in order to deter-
allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are
mine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors
depreciated and amortized from goodwill and indefinite-lived intan-
reviewed by the company to estimate the future costs to complete
gible assets. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and
each contract are future labor costs, future product costs and
indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash flows
expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded
to those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair
as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates
approximately $54 million and $52 million at December 31, 2012 and
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which
2011, respectively.
are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require
the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect
Income Taxes
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determin-
Valuation of Goodwill
ing the consolidated provision for income taxes.
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually, in the
During the ordinary course of business, there are many trans-
fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances
actions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is
indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable.
uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its reporting
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due.
units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events and circum-
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s
stances that affect the fair value of reporting units, the company
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
assesses individual factors such as:
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
review by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals for • A significant adverse change in legal factors
tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its or the business climate;
assessment of many factors, including past experience and inter- • An adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
pretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and • Unanticipated competition;
assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments • A loss of key personnel; and
about future events. To the extent that new information becomes • A more likely than not expectation that a reporting
available which causes the company to change its judgment unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be
regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to sold or otherwise disposed of.
tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine
such determination is made.
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation
impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if the com-
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the
pany concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available
fair value is less than its carrying amount. After performing the
evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, esti-
annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis during the fourth
mates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax
quarter of 2012, the company determined it was not necessary to
planning strategies. In the event that the company changes its deter-
perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
mination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be
realized, the company will adjust its valuation allowance with a cor- Loss Contingencies
responding impact to income tax expense in the period in which The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
such determination is made. proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period significant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. If
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the com-
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the pany accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local is required in both the determination of probability and the determi-
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. nation as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
of uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only dollars than at year-end 2011. The company uses financial hedging
on the best information available at the time. As additional informa- instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing trans-
tion becomes available, the company reassesses the potential actions and other foreign currency-based transactions. Further
liability related to its pending claims and litigation, and may revise its discussion of currency and hedging appears in note D, “Financial
estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98.
could have a material impact on the company’s results of operations Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses
and financial position. that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pricing
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of the
port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position com-
description of the methods used by management to estimate the petitively, and price more aggressively to win the business,
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to
Accounting Policies,” on page 85. Factors that could result in actual its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action.
receivable losses that are materially different from the estim ated Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency-
reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The
change in the economic health of a particular client that represents company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash man-
a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio. agement purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the volatility
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage- of currency impacts on the company’s financial results.
ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s consoli- U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period.
dated income before income taxes would be higher or lower by an References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect
estimated $36 million (using 2012 data), depending upon whether adjustments based upon a simple constant currency mathematical
the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the translation of local currency results using the comparable prior
estimates. period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant currency
methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this information
Residual Value does not incorporate any operational actions that management may
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. Based on the currency
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates rate movements in 2012, total revenue decreased 2.3 percent as
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as operat- reported and was flat at constant currency versus 2011. On a pre-tax
ing or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of income basis, these translation impacts offset by the net impact of
leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no
market for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-looking pricing or sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $100 million
product information such as marketing plans and technological in 2012. The same mathematical exercise resulted in an increase of
innovations. Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed and approximately $600 million in 2011. The company views these
“other than temporary” declines in estimated future residual values amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported finan-
are recognized upon identification. Anticipated increases in future cial results. Considering the operational responses mentioned
residual values are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from the hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts
estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment market on any particular period, but the company believes it could be sub-
brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations and stantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive
any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment. pressure in the marketplace.
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dol-
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s segment lars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, translation
pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income before adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, the
income taxes for 2012 would have been lower by an estimated company manages currency risk in these entities by linking prices
$105 million. If the actual residual value recovery is higher than and contracts to U.S. dollars. The company continues to monitor
management’s estimates, the increase in income will be realized at the economic conditions in Venezuela. On December 30, 2010, the
the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. official rate for essential goods was eliminated, with no change to
the SITME rate. The SITME rate remained constant throughout 2012
Currency Rate Fluctuations and 2011. In February 2013, the SITME rate was eliminated, and the
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. official rate was set at 6.3 bolivars fuerte (BsF) to the U.S. dollar. This
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. devaluation is not expected to have a material impact given the size
At December 31, 2012, currency changes resulted in assets and of the company’s operations in Venezuela (less than 1 percent of
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer total 2011 and 2012 revenue, respectively).

===== PAGE 63 =====
6622 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2012 and
company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the 2011, are as follows:
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and Interest Rate Risk
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts At December 31, 2012, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets. rates with all other variables held constant would result in a decrease
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established in the fair market value of the company’s financial instruments of
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse $192 million as compared with a decrease of $310 million at Decem-
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the com- ber 31, 2011. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest rates with
pany does not anticipate any material losses from these risks. all other variables held constant would result in an increase in the
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $181 million as
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, contains compared to an increase of $290 million at December 31, 2011.
an element of market risk from changes in interest and currency Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s
rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through the use of a financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as described level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the com-
in note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98. pany’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a sen-
sitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other finan- At December 31, 2012, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against for-
cial instruments. eign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments
analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash equivalents, of $1,203 million as compared with an increase of $1,303 million at
marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial December 31, 2011. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar
financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long- against foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant,
term and short-term debt and all derivative financial instruments. would result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial
The company’s derivative financial instruments generally include instruments of $1,203 million compared with a decrease of $1,303
interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts. million at December 31, 2011. The change in impact from 2011 to
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the 2012 was comprised of: assets ($84 million), debt ($216 million) and
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in derivatives ($202 million).
interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-sen-
Financing Risks
sitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value See the “Description of Business” on page 24 for a discussion of
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
are attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
rates used for the present value computations were selected
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates in Cybersecurity
effect at December 31, 2012 and 2011. The differences in this com- While neither a business unit nor a worldwide organization, the com-
parison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with each pany’s approach on cybersecurity demonstrates its ability to adapt
type of risk. to a changing environment, as well as the depth and breadth of its
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces- global capabilities. IBM has leveraged its extensive knowledge and
sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company experience on cybersecurity matters to help its customers. The
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to practi- company has a suite of software solutions that showcase IBM’s
cal limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor broad capabilities in identity and access management, data security,
are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are con- application security, network security and endpoint security. IBM’s
strained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from software solutions include a security intelligence dashboard that
the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing can collect information on customer IT security events and provide
or hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items detailed information to customers about potential threats and secu-
include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and rity posture. The company’s services businesses offer professional
direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and solutions for security from assessment to deployment. In addition, the
the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a conse- company offers managed and outsourced security solutions from
quence, reported changes in the values of some of the financial multiple security operations centers around the world. Finally, security
instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not is embedded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineer-
matched with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that ing processes and by critical functions (encryption, access control,
those instruments are designed to finance or hedge. etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
From an enterprise perspective, IBM has implemented a multi- its workforce to be knowledgeable about cybersecurity threats and
faceted approach involving people, tools, and processes to identify their responsibilities to identify and mitigate these risks. IBM per-
and address cybersecurity risks. The company has established forms ongoing assessments regarding its technical controls and its
policies and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s methods for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The
infrastructure and data are managed, which help protect IBM and company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to defend
client data. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online against cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, data
education, Web articles and other awareness initiatives to enable centers, and applications.
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012-11 2011-10
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 434,246 433,362 426,751 0.2% 1.5%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 8,009 7,523 9,334 6.5 (19.4)
Complementary 24,740 25,500 27,784 (3.0) (8.2)
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in over Results of Operations
170 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the higher
($ in millions)
value segments of enterprise computing. The company continually
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
assesses its resource needs with the objective of balancing its
External revenue $2,013 $2,102 $2,238
workforce globally to improve the company’s global reach and
Internal revenue 2,060 2,092 1,842
competitiveness.
Total revenue 4,073 4,195 4,080
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited- Cost 1,400 1,467 1,474
term employment arrangements to meet specific business needs Gross profit $2,673 $2,728 $2,606
in a flexible and cost-effective manner. Gross profit margin 65.6% 65.0% 63.9%
Pre-tax income $2,034 $2,011 $1,956
Global Financing After-tax income* $1,362 $1,338 $1,292
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a Return on equity* 41.0% 40.7% 41.1%
stand-alone entity. * See page 67 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation.
In 2012, as the global economy continued to face a challenging
credit environment, the Global Financing business remained focused Total revenue in 2012 decreased $122 million versus 2011 as a result of:
on its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s
• A decline in external revenue of 4.2 percent (1 percent
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing deliv-
adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in financing
ered external revenue of $2,013 million and total revenue of $4,073
revenue (down 8.7 percent to $1,471 million), partially
million, and expanded gross and pre-tax margins. Total pre-tax
offset by an increase in used equipment sales revenue
income of $2,034 million increased 1.1 percent compared to 2011 and
(up 10.6 percent to $540 million); and
return on equity was 41.0 percent.
• A decline in internal revenue of 1.6 percent driven by
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact
a decrease in financing revenue (down 11.3 percent to
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results
$500 million), partially offset by an increase in used
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact
equipment sales revenue (up 2.0 percent to $1,559 million).
Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both financing
revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations, which The decreases in external and internal financing revenue were due
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like busi- to lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue.
ness, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales and services Global Financing gross profit decreased 2.0 percent compared to
volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates. Participation 2011 due to a decrease in financing gross profit, partially offset by
rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their transactions an increase in used equipment sales gross profit. The gross profit
through Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or margin increased 0.6 points due to a higher financing margin, par-
financing through a third party. tially offset by a shift in mix toward lower margin used equipment
sales and a lower used equipment sales margin.

===== PAGE 65 =====
6644 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2011 increased $115 million versus 2010 as a result of: Financial Condition
• An increase in internal revenue of 13.6 percent primarily Balance Sheet
driven by an increase in used equipment sales revenue
($ in millions)
(up 19.7 percent to $1,528 million); partially offset by At December 31: 2012 2011
• A decline in external revenue of 6.1 percent (9 percent Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,380 $ 1,308
adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in used equipment
Net investment in sales-type
sales revenue (down 25.5 percent to $490 million), partially and direct financing leases 10,008 9,209
offset by an increase in financing revenue (up 2.0 percent to Equipment under operating leases
$1,612 million).
External clients (a) 1,273 1,567
The increase in external financing revenue was due to a higher aver- Internal clients (b)(c) 25 219
age asset balance and an increase in remarketing lease revenue. Client loans 13,121 11,363
Global Financing gross profit in 2011 increased 4.7 percent com- Total client financing assets 24,428 22,358
pared to 2010 due to higher used equipment sales and financing Commercial financing receivables 7,755 7,130
gross profit. The gross profit margin increased 1.2 points primarily Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c) 4,328 4,586
due to a higher used equipment sales margin.
Other receivables 459 334
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 1.1 percent in 2012
Other assets 533 712
versus 2011, following an increase of 2.8 percent in 2011 versus 2010.
Total assets $38,882 $36,427
The increase in 2012 was driven by decreases in SG&A expense
Intercompany payables (b) $ 6,802 $ 6,213
($61 million) and financing receivables provisions ($16 million),
Debt (d) 24,501 23,332
partially offset by the decrease in gross profit ($55 million). The
increase in 2011 was driven by the increase in gross profit ($122 Other liabilities 4,084 3,633
million), partially offset by increases in financing receivables provi- Total liabilities 35,388 33,178
sions ($51 million) and SG&A expense ($13 million). The increase in Total equity 3,494 3,249
financing receivables provisions in 2011 was due primarily to the Total liabilities and equity $38,882 $36,427
economic environment in Europe. At December 31, 2012, the overall
(a) Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products
allowance for credit losses coverage rate was 1.2 percent, a decrease purchased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s
of 0.1 points versus 2011. consolidated results.
(b) Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore
The increase in return on equity from 2011 to 2012 was driven by
does not appear on page 72.
higher after-tax income, and the decrease in return on equity from (c) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the
2010 to 2011 was driven by a higher average equity balance. value in the table using Global Financing debt.
(d) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. A
portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, or
related to intercompany mark-up embedded in the Global Financing assets. See
table on page 67.
Sources and Uses of Funds
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but
also include non-IBM equipment, software and services to meet
IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are
primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for sys-
tems products as well as loans for systems, software and services
with terms generally from one to seven years. Global Financing’s
client loans are primarily for software and services and are unsecured.
These loans are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associ-
ated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate
risks in the loan agreements which include covenants to protect
against credit deterioration during the life of the obligation. Client
financing also includes internal activity as described on page 24.

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of Allowance for Credit Losses
IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory financing
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 ($ in millions)
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and are Allowance Additions/ December 31,
January 1, 2012 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2012
also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate the
$350 $(19 ) $26 $(1 ) $355
associated risk.
In addition to the actions described above, in certain circum- * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during
the period.
stances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer credit
** Primarily represents translation adjustments.
risk to third parties.
At December 31, 2012, substantially all financing assets were IT The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved
related assets, and approximately 60 percent of the external port- decreased from 1.3 percent at December 31, 2011 to 1.2 percent
folio was with investment grade clients with no direct exposure to at December 31, 2012 primarily due to the disposition of receiv-
consumers or mortgage assets. ables previously reserved, and the increase in gross financing
receivables. Specific reserves increased 6.2 percent from $226
Originations
million at December 31, 2011 to $240 million at December 31, 2012.
The following are total financing originations.
Unallocated reserves decreased 7.3 percent from $124 million at
December 31, 2011, to $115 million at December 31, 2012. Global
($ in millions)
Financing’s bad debt expense was an increase of $26 million for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
2012, compared to an increase of $42 million for 2011. The higher
Client financing $16,277 $14,390 $12,748
bad debt expense in 2011 was attributed to the economic environ-
Commercial financing 36,944 35,282 32,366
ment in Europe.
Total $53,222 $49,673 $45,113
Residual Value
In 2012, new financing originations exceeded cash collections for
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and man-
both client and commercial financing. This resulted in a net increase
agement of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately
in total financing assets from December 31, 2011. The increase in
project future equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing
originations in both 2012 versus 2011 and 2011 versus 2010 was due
has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under
to improving external volumes in both client and commercial financ-
lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing con-
ing. Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed under
tinually monitors projections of future equipment values and
a loan facility and is not considered originations.
compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio.
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2012 was primarily
See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 86 for the
deployed to pay the intercompany payables and dividends to IBM.
company’s accounting policy for residual values.
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment
The following table presents external financing receivables excluding
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current clients.
residual values, and the allowance for credit losses.
Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced from equipment
returned at the end of a lease, represented 51.6 percent of Global
($ in millions)
Financing’s revenue in 2012 and 48.1 percent in 2011. The gross profit
At December 31: 2012 2011
margins on these sales were 53.6 percent and 54.8 percent in 2012
Gross financing receivables $30,621 $27,366
and 2011, respectively. The decrease in gross margin was driven by
Specific allowance for credit losses 240 226
a lower internal sales margin and a shift in mix toward lower margin
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 115 124
external sales, partially offset by a higher external sales margin.
Total allowance for credit losses 355 350
Net financing receivables $30,266 $27,016
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.2% 1.3%

===== PAGE 67 =====
6666 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed for sales-type leases were $776 million and $821 million for the
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases financing transactions originated during the years ended December
at December 31, 2011 and 2012. In addition, the table presents the 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. In 2012, the residual value guarantee
residual value as a percentage of the related original amount program resulted in the company recognizing approximately $601
financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value million of revenue that would otherwise have been recognized in
assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, 2012 is expected future periods as operating lease revenue. If the company had
to be returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed chosen to not participate in a residual value guarantee program in
residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guar- 2012 and prior years, the 2012 impact would be substantially miti-
antees of the future value of the equipment to be returned at end of gated by the effect of prior year asset values being recognized as
lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are also operating lease revenue in the current year. The aggregate asset
obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees values associated with the guarantees of direct financing leases
are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by were $199 million and $44 million for the financing transactions
accounting standards in the determination of lease classifications originated during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011,
for the covered equipment and provide protection against risk of respectively. The associated aggregate guaranteed future values
loss arising from declines in equipment values for these assets. at the scheduled end of lease were $53 million and $43 million for
The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease the financing transactions originated during the years ended
payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The cost of guarantees
lease as a sales-type lease, a direct financing lease or an operating was $5 million and $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2012
lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees and 2011, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2012 Balance
2016 and
At December 31: 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 745 $ 794 $166 $255 $228 $144
Operating leases 296 259 120 75 48 16
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 1,041 $ 1,053 $286 $330 $276 $160
Related original amount financed $18,635 $18,744
Percentage 5.6% 5.6%
Debt Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by
At December 31: 2012 2011 other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures Global
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.0x 7.2x Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense
relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to Operations” on pages 63 and 64 and in note T, “Segment Informa-
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans tion,” on pages 134 to 138.
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on page
the company to substantially match the term and currency underly- 70, the external debt-related interest expense supporting Global
ing the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from
Both assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing Balance cost of financing to interest expense.
Sheet on page 64.

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides additional information on total company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes internal loans and
leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The company believes these
assets should be appropriately leveraged in line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2012 December 31, 2011
Global Financing Segment $24,501 $23,332
Debt to support external clients $21,583 $20,051
Debt to support internal clients 2,919 3,281
Non-Global Financing Segments 8,767 7,987
Debt supporting operations 11,686 11,269
Intercompany activity (2,919) (3,281)
Total company debt $33,269 $31,320
Liquidity and Capital Resources Looking Forward
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is sup- Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and funding
ported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access to capacity which enables the company to be well positioned in the
capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was primarily current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new financing
deployed to pay intercompany payables and dividends to the com- volumes are primarily IBM products and services financed to the
pany in order to maintain an appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. company’s clients and business partners, and substantially all
financing assets are IT related assets which provide a stable base
Return on Equity
of business for future growth. Global Financing’s offerings are com-
($ in millions) petitive and available to clients as a result of the company’s
At December 31: 2012 2011 borrowing cost and access to the capital markets. Overall, Global
Numerator Financing’s originations will be dependent upon the demand for IT
Global Financing after-tax income (a)* $1,362 $1,338 products and services as well as client participation rates.
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
Denominator
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted
Average Global Financing equity (b)** $3,322 $3,286
period where IBM could not access the capital markets would likely
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b) 41.0% 40.7%
lead to a slowdown in originations.
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a
consolidated basis. tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters. company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, combined
with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate gross
margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provision
for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply rigorous
credit policies in both the origination of new business and the evalu-
ation of the existing portfolio.
As discussed on pages 65 and 66, Global Financing has histori-
cally been able to manage residual value risk both through insight
into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its remarketing
business.
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the
key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with prod-
uct and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent management
of the business going forward, even during periods of uncertainty
with respect to the global economy.

===== PAGE 69 =====
6688 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial informa- Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
tion presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management. adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
United States of America, applying certain estimates and judgments reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
as required. purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, accepted in the United States of America.
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the control of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accor-
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we dance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the com-
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication pany are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective func- management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reason-
tioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company to able assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest ethical unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distrib- Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
uted to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
internal programs to assure that they are understood and followed. of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial procedures may deteriorate.
reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in
Oversight Board (United States). Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon- Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the com-
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered pany’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as of
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to December 31, 2012.
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically
and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm,
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM manage-
ment, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and
financial reporting matters. Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 26, 2013
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer,
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
February 26, 2013

===== PAGE 70 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of
Directors of International Business
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State- A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
ments appearing on pages 70 through 138 present fairly, in all designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
material respects, the financial position of International Business of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2012 for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
and 2011 and the results of their operations and their cash flows for accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2012 in reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company main- and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
tained, in all material respects, effective internal control over the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
financial reporting as of December 31, 2012, based on criteria are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial state-
established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by ments in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
the Committee of Sponsoring Organ izations of the Treadway Com- and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
mission (COSO). The Company’s management is responsible for only in accordance with authorizations of management and direc-
these financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control tors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
over financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accom- use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a
panying Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial material effect on the financial statements.
Reporting appearing on page 68. Our responsibility is to express Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s inter- reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
nal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to procedures may deteriorate.
obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements
are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal con-
trol over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the New York, New York
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and February 26, 2013
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control
over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of inter-
nal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operat-
ing effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.

===== PAGE 71 =====
7700 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2012 2011 2010
Revenue
Services $ 59,453 $ 60,721 $56,868
Sales 43,014 44,063 40,736
Financing 2,040 2,132 2,267
Total revenue 104,507 106,916 99,870
Cost
Services 39,166 40,740 38,383
Sales 13,956 14,973 14,374
Financing 1,087 1,065 1,100
Total cost 54,209 56,778 53,857
Gross profit 50,298 50,138 46,014
Expense and other income
Selling, general and administrative 23,553 23,594 21,837
Research, development and engineering O 6,302 6,258 6,026
Intellectual property and custom development income (1,074) (1,108) (1,154)
Other (income) and expense (843) (20) (787)
Interest expense D&J 459 411 368
Total expense and other income 28,396 29,135 26,291
Income before income taxes 21,902 21,003 19,723
Provision for income taxes N 5,298 5,148 4,890
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855 $14,833
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution P $ 14.37 $ 13.06 $ 11.52
Basic P $ 14.53 $ 13.25 $ 11.69
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 1,155,449,317 1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388
Basic 1,142,508,521 1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 72 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2012 2011 2010
Net income $16,604 $15,855 $14,833
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (44) (693) 712
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 8 (14) 70
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (42) (231) 0
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 20 4 8
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (14) (241) 78
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 32 (266) 371
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (253) 511 203
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges (220) 245 573
Retirement-related benefit plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) — (28) 28
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (7,489) (5,463) (2,728)
Curtailments and settlements (2) 11 10
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (148) (157) (183)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,457 1,847 1,249
Total retirement-related benefit plans (5,182) (3,790) (1,624)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L (5,460) (4,479) (260)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income L 1,587 1,339 348
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L (3,874) (3,142) 87
Total comprehensive income $12,731 $12,713 $14,920
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 73 =====
7722 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2012 2011
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 10,412 $ 11,922
Marketable securities D 717 0
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $255 in 2012 and $256 in 2011) 10,667 11,179
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $288 in 2012 and $311 in 2011) F 18,038 16,901
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $17 in 2012 and $11 in 2011) 1,873 1,481
Inventories E 2,287 2,595
Deferred taxes N 1,415 1,601
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 4,024 5,249
Total current assets 49,433 50,928
Property, plant and equipment G 40,501 40,124
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 26,505 26,241
Property, plant and equipment—net G 13,996 13,883
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $66 in 2012 and $38 in 2011) F 12,812 10,776
Prepaid pension assets S 945 2,843
Deferred taxes N 3,973 3,503
Goodwill I 29,247 26,213
Intangible assets—net I 3,787 3,392
Investments and sundry assets H 5,021 4,895
Total assets $ 119,213 $ 116,433
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 4,948 $ 3,313
Short-term debt D&J 9,181 8,463
Accounts payable 7,952 8,517
Compensation and benefits 4,745 5,099
Deferred income 11,952 12,197
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,847 4,535
Total current liabilities 43,625 42,123
Long-term debt D&J 24,088 22,857
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations S 20,418 18,374
Deferred income 4,491 3,847
Other liabilities K 7,607 8,996
Total liabilities 100,229 96,197
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 50,110 48,129
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2012—2,197,561,159; 2011—2,182,469,838)
Retained earnings 117,641 104,857
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2012—1,080,193,483; 2011—1,019,287,274) (123,131) (110,963)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (25,759) (21,885)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 18,860 20,138
Noncontrolling interests A 124 97
Total equity 18,984 20,236
Total liabilities and equity $ 119,213 $ 116,433
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 74 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855 $ 14,833
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 3,392 3,589 3,657
Amortization of intangibles 1,284 1,226 1,174
Stock-based compensation 688 697 629
Deferred taxes 797 1,212 1,294
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (729) (342) (801)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) (2,230) (1,279) (489)
Retirement related (1,008) (1,371) (1,963)
Inventories 280 (163) 92
Other assets/other liabilities 733 (28) 949
Accounts payable (224) 451 174
Net cash provided by operating activities 19,586 19,846 19,549
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (4,082) (4,108) (4,185)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 410 608 770
Investment in software (635) (559) (569)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (4,109) (1,594) (6,129)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 3,142 3,345 7,877
Non-operating finance receivables—net (608) (291) (405)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (3,722) (1,811) (5,922)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 599 14 55
Net cash used in investing activities (9,004) (4,396) (8,507)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 12,242 9,996 8,055
Payments to settle debt (9,549) (8,947) (6,522)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net (441) 1,321 817
Common stock repurchases (11,995) (15,046) (15,375)
Common stock transactions—other 1,540 2,453 3,774
Cash dividends paid (3,773) (3,473) (3,177)
Net cash used in financing activities (11,976) (13,696) (12,429)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (116) (493) (135)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents (1,511) 1,262 (1,522)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 11,922 10,661 12,183
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 10,412 $ 11,922 $ 10,661
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 3,169 $ 4,168 $ 3,238
Interest paid on debt $ 1,009 $ 956 $ 951
Capital lease obligations $ 10 $ 39 $ 30
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 75 =====
7744 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2010
Equity, January 1, 2010 $41,810 $80,900 $(81,243) $(18,830) $ 22,637 $118 $ 22,755
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 14,833 14,833 14,833
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 87 87 87
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 14,920 $ 14,920
Cash dividends declared—common stock (3,177) (3,177) (3,177)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (34,783,386 shares) 3,579 3,579 3,579
Purchases (2,334,932 shares) and
sales (7,929,318 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (24) 501 477 477
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (117,721,650 shares) (15,419) (15,419) (15,419)
Changes in other equity 28 28 28
Changes in noncontrolling interests 8 8
Equity, December 31, 2010 $45,418 $92,532 $(96,161) $(18,743) $ 23,046 $126 $ 23,172
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2011
Equity, January 1, 2011 $45,418 $ 92,532 $ (96,161) $(18,743) $ 23,046 $126 $ 23,172
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 15,855 15,855 15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,142) (3,142) (3,142)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,713 $ 12,713
Cash dividends declared—common stock (3,473) (3,473) (3,473)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (20,669,785 shares) 2,394 2,394 2,394
Purchases (1,717,246 shares) and
sales (4,920,198 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (56) 231 175 175
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (88,683,716 shares) (15,034) (15,034) (15,034)
Changes in other equity 317 317 317
Changes in noncontrolling interests (29) (29)
Equity, December 31, 2011 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 76 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2012
Equity, January 1, 2012 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 16,604 16,604 16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,874) (3,874) (3,874)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,731 $ 12,731
Cash dividends declared—common stock (3,773) (3,773) (3,773)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (15,091,320 shares) 1,532 1,532 1,532
Purchases (2,406,007 shares) and
sales (2,746,169 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (48) (160) (208) (208)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (61,246,371 shares) (12,008) (12,008) (12,008)
Changes in other equity 448 448 448
Changes in noncontrolling interests 27 27
Equity, December 31, 2012 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 138 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 77 =====
7766 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note A. Revenue
Significant Accounting Policies The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable
Basis of Presentation
and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement,
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot-
delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and
notes of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or
collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until
the company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting
products have been shipped or services have been provided to the
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP).
client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain
acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers
lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from
specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied.
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts
The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
This is annotated where applicable.
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers,
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $11 million, $6 mil-
resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when the
lion and $9 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31,
reseller has: economic substance apart from the company, credit
2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, are included in the Consolidated
risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to the company
Statement of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item.
is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end user, the com-
pany has no further obligations related to bringing about resale or
Principles of Consolidation
delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM
The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, stock
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally majority owned.
rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported
Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves”
in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Net
included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K). Revenue
income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is
is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably and reliably
reported as described above in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
determined. The company bases its estimates on historical results
ings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included in
taking into consideration the type of client, the type of transaction
the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in
and the specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under
business entities in which the company does not have control, but
cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense only
has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and
if the company receives from the client an identifiable benefit suf-
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and
ficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value can be
the company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in
reasonably and reliably estimated. If the company does not receive
other (income) and expense. The accounting policy for other invest-
an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale
ments in equity securities is on pages 84 and 85 within “Marketable
whose fair value can be reasonably estimated, such payments are
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are
recorded as a reduction of revenue.
primarily accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is
Use of Estimates
a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered to
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most nota-
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that bly whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or has
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the company
and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported in adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, was
the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclo- involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, has lati-
sures. These estimates are based on management’s best tude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that the The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes
company may undertake in the future and on various other assump- assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
tions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In addition
As a result, actual results may be different from these estimates. See to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific
“Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 59 to 61 for a discussion revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements
of the company’s critical accounting estimates. and for each major category of revenue.

===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements Services
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist The company’s primary services offerings include information tech-
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on the nology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing, application
needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any combina- management services, consulting and systems integration, technol-
tion of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For example, ogy infrastructure and system maintenance, Web hosting and the
a client may purchase a server that includes operating system soft- design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s speci-
ware. In addition, the arrangement may include post-contract fications (design and build). These services are provided on a
support for the software and a contract for post-warranty mainte- time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price
nance service for the hardware. These types of arrangements can per measure of output contract and the contract terms range from
also include financing provided by the company. These arrange- less than one year to over 10 years.
ments consist of multiple deliverables, with the hardware and Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
software delivered in one reporting period and the software support contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided using
and hardware maintenance services delivered across multiple either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line basis over
reporting periods. In another example, a client may outsource the the term of the contract. Under the output method, the amount of
running of its datacenter operations to the company on a long-term, revenue recognized is based on the services delivered in the period.
multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers and/or soft- Revenue from application management services, technology
ware products from the company to upgrade or expand its facility. infrastructure and system maintenance and Web hosting contracts
The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous basis across is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
multiple reporting periods and the hardware and software products Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that a deliverable hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject to specific account- related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
ing guidance that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
such specific guidance. Examples of such arrangements may Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
include leased hardware which is subject to specific leasing guid- nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under
ance or software which is subject to specific software revenue the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs
recognition guidance on whether and/or how to separate multiple- incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs
deliverable arrangements into separate units of accounting to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original
(separability) and how to allocate the arrangement consideration estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward comple-
among those separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other tion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs,
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple-deliver- and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which
able arrangement is separated into more than one unit of accounting the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known by
if the following criteria are met: the company.
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its ser-
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone
vices contracts accounted for under the POC method in order to
basis; and
determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and prof-
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative
its require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that the
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the
contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remain-
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially
der of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC method
in the control of the company.
services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recog- recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income
nized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the earlier of $7,281 million and $7,363 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011,
of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered element respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and there is a Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the
relative selling price for all units of accounting in an arrangement, services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of
the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate units of $1,998 million and $2,166 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011,
accounting based on each unit’s relative selling price. The following respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in
revenue policies are then applied to each unit of accounting, as the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
applicable. Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, Smarter Planet the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue recognition policies Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months.
for multiple deliverable arrangements and for each major category
of revenue depending on the type of offering which can be com-
prised of services, hardware and/or software.

===== PAGE 79 =====
7788 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hardware If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being
system servers, storage solutions, retail store systems and the sale recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the
of semiconductors. The company also offers installation services earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered
for its more complex products. element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recog- there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an arrange-
nized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no ment, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate
unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final accep- units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE of fair value.
tance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties and There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE of fair value
remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunctory are of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the delivered
accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used to allocate the
from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line arrangement consideration. Under the residual method, the amount
basis over the term of the rental or lease. of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the total
arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair value of
Software the undelivered elements.
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is rec- The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have
ognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue recognition a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
license software is recognized on a straight-line basis over the multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software deliv-
period that the client is entitled to use the license. Revenue from erable and the non-software deliverables based on the relative
post-contract support, which may include unspecified upgrades on selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using the
a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of sell-
over the period such items are delivered. In multiple-deliverable ing price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the company
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental to cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the
the products or services as a whole (software multiple-deliverable deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliverable,
arrangements), software and software-related elements are accounted BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
for in accordance with software revenue recognition guidance.
Software-related elements include software products and services Financing
for which a software deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tan- Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing
gible products containing software components and non-software leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the effec-
components that function together to deliver the tangible product’s tive interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on a
essential functionality are not within the scope of software revenue straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
recognition guidance and are accounted for based on other appli-
cable revenue recognition guidance. Best Estimate of Selling Price
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met: VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish
• The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined
on the undelivered element(s); based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair separately.
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based When the company is unable to establish selling price using
on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange-
by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price
multiple-deliverable arrangement; and at which the company would transact a sale if the product or service
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the company
of the earnings process for that element(s). sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, and therefore
has established VSOE for its products and services offerings, the
company uses BESP to determine the relative selling price for a
product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement on an infre-
quent basis. An example of when BESP would be used is when the
company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does not
yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling the
new product on a stand-alone basis.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors Software Costs
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research,
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been
includes review and approval by the company’s management. In established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized
addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging
products and services, in addition to BESP. up to three years and are recorded in software cost within cost of
sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that unam-
Services Costs
ortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue.
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged to soft-
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. ware cost within cost of sales as incurred.
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method are chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs,
deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date, including software coding, installation, testing and certain data
as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the con- conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
tract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial line basis over periods up to two years and are recorded in selling,
phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subsequently general and administrative expense.
amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related
to the installation of systems and processes and are amortized on Product Warranties
a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, not to The company offers warranties for its hardware products that gener-
exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated ally range up to three years, with the majority being either one or
with outsourcing contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to the
straight-line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related
asset is contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard to
of the useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience and
clients in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in out- estimates of future spending, and applies this estimate to the rev-
sourcing arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line enue stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the current period
not to exceed the term of the contract. The company performs peri- are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is reviewed quar-
odic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract terly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining obligation based
transition and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the obligation
estimated minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract period. Adjustments are made when actual warranty claim experi-
to the unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted ence differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price support or
cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an maintenance contracts, including extended warranty contracts, are
impairment loss is recognized. recognized as incurred.
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,424 million
and $2,589 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs was
estimated at December 31, 2012 to be $819 million in 2013, $509
million in 2014, $430 million in 2015, $277 million in 2016 and $390
million thereafter.
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of
acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $51 million
and $65 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Amor-
tization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value
of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and was
estimated at December 31, 2012 to be $22 million in 2013, $19 million
in 2014, $9 million in 2015, $2 million in 2016 and less than $1 million
thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing contract is termi-
nated, the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse
the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unam-
ortized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized
in the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred
by the company to transition the services.

===== PAGE 81 =====
8800 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts Advertising and Promotional Expense
is recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as
a straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes in deferred incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are
income for extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty liability recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period
for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred.
expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, agency
Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables: and promotional expense, was $1,339 million, $1,373 million and
$1,337 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, and is recorded
Standard Warranty Liability in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
2012 2011 Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed
Balance at January 1 $ 407 $ 375
as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished
Current period accruals 394 435
product after technological feasibility has been established are capi-
Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience (15) 18
talized as an intangible asset. See “Software Costs” on page 79.
Charges incurred (392) (420)
Balance at December 31 $ 394 $ 407 Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income) property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets
($ in millions) and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties
2012 2011 are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based sales
Balance at January 1 $ 636 $ 670 and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees involve transfers
Revenue deferred for new extended in which the company earns the income over time, or the amount
warranty contracts 268 314 of income is not fixed or determinable until the licensee sells
Amortization of deferred revenue (301) (330) future related products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s
Other* 4 (19) revenue). Sales and other transfers typically include transfers of
IP whereby the company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee
Balance at December 31 $ 606 $ 636
received is fixed or determinable at the transfer date. The company
Current portion $ 289 $ 301
also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and
Noncurrent portion 317 335
income from these arrangements is recorded when earned. In addi-
Balance at December 31 $ 606 $ 636
tion, the company earns income from certain custom development
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments. projects for strategic technology partners and specific clients. The
company records the income from these projects when the fee is
Shipping and Handling realized and earned, is not refundable and is not dependent upon
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred the success of the project.
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Other (Income) and Expense
Expense and Other Income Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than
from Global Financing external business transactions), gains and
Selling, General and Administrative
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain real
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products
estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses,
and services are classified as selling expense and include such
gains and losses from the sale of businesses and amounts related
items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and travel.
to accretion of asset retirement obligations.
General and administrative expense includes such items as com-
pensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance
and office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense
includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit losses,
workforce rebalancing accruals for contractually obligated payments
to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, acquisi-
tion costs related to business combinations, amortization of certain
intangible assets and environmental remediation costs.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Business Combinations and Environmental
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are
The company accounts for business combinations using the acqui- preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
sition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, the program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill represents the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental
including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for
primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired
assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as an identifiable Asset Retirement Obligations
intangible asset. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated
applicable reporting units based on expected revenues. Identifiable with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are initially
intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs are
Amortization of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets
amortization of all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are sub-
expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, legal, sequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets.
accounting, valuation and other costs, are expensed in the periods Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-
in which the costs are incurred. The results of operations of acquired period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of
businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the
from the acquisition date. amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Impairment Defined Benefit Pension and
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
assets, are tested for impairment based on undiscounted cash flows The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans
and, if impaired, written down to fair value based on either discounted and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intan- benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Finan-
gible assets are tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for impairment cial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference
and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at
exist. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level which is the operat- December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension
ing segment, or a business, which is one level below that operating plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO),
segment (the “component” level) if discrete financial information is which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected
prepared and regularly reviewed by management at the segment to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already
level. Components are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the non-
have similar economic characteristics. pension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which rep-
Depreciation and Amortization resents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value of
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The plan assets represents the current market value of cumulative com-
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: pany and participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust
buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by
improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, 2 the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets
to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans,
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets,
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno- are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension post-
logical feasibility has been established are amortized over periods retirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postretire-
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods up to 2 years. ment benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value of
Other intangible assets are amortized over periods between 1 and benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of
7 years. plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated State-
ment of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 83 =====
8822 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit cost/ requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of
(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings and stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The company
includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, also grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including
amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses previ- Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share
ously recognized as a component of OCI and amortization of the Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that
net transition asset remaining in accumulated other comprehensive entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests,
income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost represents the actuarial present typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards
value of participant benefits earned in the current year. Interest cost is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s
represents the time value of money cost associated with the pas- stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. All
sage of time. Certain events, such as changes in the employee base, stock-based compensation cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and
plan amendments and changes in actuarial assumptions, result in RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
a change in the benefit obligation and the corresponding change in employees’ respective functions.
OCI. The result of these events is amortized as a component of net The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result
periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy of in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the
the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory tax rate
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Differences
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded in between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting
Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax
based on the employees’ respective functions. return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the tax deduction
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consolidated Statement
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction and
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a component no additional paid-in capital exists from previous awards).
of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are subse- Income Taxes
quently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of appli- taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
cable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized
differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are recog-
result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/ nized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured
(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allowances are
service granted in plan amendments. recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/ more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the allowance, management considers all available evidence for each
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future tax-
plans and use participant-specific information such as compensa- able income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies.
tion, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, When the company changes its determination as to the amount of
including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the
mortality rates. period in which such determination is made.
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the com-
Defined Contribution Plans pany’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. The by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the
charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of being
Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ respective realized upon settlement. The current portion of tax liabilities is
functions. included in taxes and the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is
included in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Stock-Based Compensation Position. To the extent that new information becomes available which
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock- causes the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy
based awards granted to employees. The company measures of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the income tax expense in the period in which such determination is
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a fair
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local func- value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of the
tional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars at underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each period.
year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments are recorded
in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-aver- as adjustments to interest expense and cost of financing in the
age rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency risk
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non- associated with recorded financial assets or liabilities, derivative fair
monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and value adjustments are recognized in other (income) and expense in
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approxi- the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value of
mate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the a derivative that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net
assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated in a of applicable taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of Com-
currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange prehensive Income. When net income is affected by the variability of
rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) the underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount of the gain
and expense. Income and expense items are translated at the or loss from the derivative that is deferred in AOCI is released to net
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. income and reported in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense or
These translation gains and losses are included in net income for other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
the period in which exchange rates change. ings based on the nature of the underlying cash flow hedged.
Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is measured on
Derivative Financial Instruments a spot-to-spot basis. The effective portion of changes in the fair value
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of of net investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative finan-
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid expenses cial instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded
and other current assets, investments and sundry assets, other as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Changes in the
accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. Classification fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative
of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based upon whether excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded in interest
the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months. expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge ceases
To qualify for hedge accounting, the company requires that the to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are included in
instruments be effective in reducing the risk exposure that they are net income each period until the instrument matures. When the
designated to hedge. For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or liability is no
designation criteria also require that it be probable that the under- longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as required under
lying transaction will occur. Instruments that meet established other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that are not desig-
accounting criteria are formally designated as hedges. These criteria nated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of derivatives
demonstrate that the derivative is expected to be highly effective that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value of the underlying
at offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge period (collectively,
exposure both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income each period and are
ongoing basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness and reported in other (income) and expense. When a cash flow hedging
measuring hedge ineffectiveness is formally documented at hedge relationship is discontinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must gener-
inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness and measures ally remain in AOCI until the item that was hedged affects earnings.
hedge ineffectiveness at least quarterly throughout the designated However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not
hedge period. occur by the end of the originally specified time period or within an
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a rec- must be reclassified into earnings immediately. The company reports
ognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm cash flows arising from derivative financial instruments designated as
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign fair value or cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of cash
currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of a flows from the underlying hedged items that these derivatives are
forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid hedging. Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives des-
related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge ignated as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows
attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign opera- Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges
tion. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash
that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge flows from investing activities. For currency swaps designated as
accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included in the com-
hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging pany’s debt risk management program as addressed in note D,
relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, which “Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 to 98), cash flows directly asso-
are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic offset ciated with the settlement of the principal element of these swaps
to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s). are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.

===== PAGE 85 =====
8844 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Instruments In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com-
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the com- pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base
pany uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet for several parameters that market participants would consider in
date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 94 for determining fair value:
further information. All methods of assessing fair value result in a
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial
general approximation of value, and such value may never actually
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
be realized.
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
Fair Value Measurement
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied
transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
in the credit default swap market.
• Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed
discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs
at the measurement date;
such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and
• Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs relate
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either
to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which are
directly or indirectly; and
available for the full term of the derivative.
• Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecur-
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such ring basis. These assets include equity method investments that are
data is available without undue cost and effort. recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the extent that
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies such assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be
items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets
value is based upon internally developed models that use current include available-for-sale equity investments that are deemed to
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than-
as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input using a model described above.
or value driver that is significant to the valuation. Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible finan-
The determination of fair value considers various factors includ- cial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value, on
ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not permitted
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses to be accounted for at fair value under other accounting standards.
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate This election is irrevocable. The company does not apply the fair
with the duration of the instrument. value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at
the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes,
in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale securities
are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are calculated
based on the specific identification method.

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in market Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
value has occurred, the company considers the duration that, and ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily
extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below its cost, the consists of an analysis based upon current information available
financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer or underly- about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
ing collateral of a security; and the company’s intent and ability to lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well
retain the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair as the current economic environment, collateral net of repossession
value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair value from amortized cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral depen-
cost for available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company dent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the collateral
intends to sell or would more likely than not be required to sell before when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the company
the expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are charged to determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates
other (income) and expense in the period in which the loss occurs. an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For
For debt securities that the company has no intent to sell and believes those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records
that it more likely than not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, a specific reserve.
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated
other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different
in OCI. The credit loss component recognized in other (income) and
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved.
expense is identified as the amount of the principal cash flows not
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default,
expected to be received over the remaining term of the debt security
term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could
as projected using the company’s cash flow projections.
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different from
the estimated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a
Inventories
significant change in the economic health of a particular client that
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the
represents a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio.
lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale of
inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating activities
Other Credit-Related Policies
in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual
Allowance for Credit Losses
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a
nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other accounts
product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
for which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables
amounts due according to original terms of the lease or loan agree-
is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
ment. Income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash
collections are first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
Any cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated based
recognized as interest income. Receivables may be removed from
on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and any specific,
non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client
known troubled accounts.
circumstances.
Financing Receivables Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets allowance.
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The com-
pany determines its allowances for credit losses on financing Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when
receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the
loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio into original billing date.
two classes: major markets and growth markets. Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all financ-
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its abil-
ing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment
ity to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment and
on a quarterly basis. The company considers any loan with an indi-
by considering the current fair market value of any other collateral.
vidually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the
The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. The allowance
level of impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status
for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales and customer
as appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services
loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital
and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit analysis to
lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that
evaluate the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions
the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are
are taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include
applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows:
covenants to protect against credit deterioration during the life of
the obligation.

===== PAGE 87 =====
8866 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets In July 2012, the FASB issued amended guidance that simplifies
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the how entities test indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at for impairment. After an assessment of certain qualitative factors, if
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses the it is determined to be more likely than not that an indefinite-lived
realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated increases intangible asset is impaired, entities must perform the quantitative
in specific future residual values are not recognized before realiza- impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test is optional. The
tion through remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific amended guidance was effective for annual and interim impairment
future residual values that are considered to be other-than-temporary tests performed for fiscal years beginning after September 15, 2012,
are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as with early adoption permitted. The company elected to adopt this
an adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and guidance for its 2012 impairment testing of indefinite-lived intan-
direct-financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net gible assets performed in the fourth quarter. There was no impact
investment and is recognized as a loss charged to financing income in the consolidated financial results.
in the period in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjust- In May 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance and disclosure
ment to unearned income to reduce future-period financing income. requirements for fair value measurements. These changes were
effective January 1, 2012 on a prospective basis. These amendments
Common Stock did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock In September 2011, the FASB issued additional disclosure
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea- requirements for entities which participate in multi-employer pension
sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury plans. The purpose of the new disclosures was to provide financial
stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a statement users with information about an employer’s level of par-
weighted-average basis. ticipation in these plans and the financial health of significant plans.
The new disclosures were effective beginning with the full year 2011
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock financial statements. The company does not participate in any mate-
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. rial multi-employer plans. There was no impact in the consolidated
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common financial results as the changes relate only to additional disclosures.
stock and participating securities according to dividends and dividend In September 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance that sim-
equivalents and their respective participation rights in undistributed plified how entities test goodwill for impairment. After an assessment
earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by dividing net of certain qualitative factors, if it is determined to be more likely than
income by the weighted-average number of common shares out- not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying
standing for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed amount, entities must perform the quantitative analysis of the goodwill
on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test(s) is optional. The
stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding guidance was effective January 1, 2012 with early adoption permitted.
during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential The company adopted this guidance for the 2011 goodwill impairment
common shares include outstanding stock options, stock awards and test. There was no impact in the consolidated financial results.
convertible notes. In June 2011, the FASB issued amended disclosure requirements
for the presentation of OCI and AOCI. OCI is comprised of costs,
expenses, gains and losses that are included in comprehensive
Note B.
Accounting Changes income but excluded from net income, and AOCI comprises the
aggregated balances of OCI in equity. The amended guidance elimi-
Standards Implemented nated the option to present period changes in OCI as part of the
In February 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) Statement of Changes in Equity. Under the amended guidance, all
issued additional guidance regarding reclassifications out of AOCI. period changes in OCI are to be presented either in a single continu-
The new guidance requires entities to report the effect of significant ous statement of comprehensive income, or in two separate, but
reclassifications out of AOCI on the respective line items in net consecutive financial statements. Only summary totals are to be
income unless the amounts are not reclassified in their entirety to included in the AOCI section of the Statement of Changes in Equity.
net income. For amounts that are not required to be reclassified in In December 2011, the FASB deferred the requirement to present
their entirety to net income in the same reporting period, entities are reclassifications from AOCI on the face of the Consolidated State-
required to cross-reference other disclosures that provide additional ment of Earnings. The changes were effective January 1, 2012 with
detail about those amounts. For the company, the new guidance is early adoption permitted. The company adopted the two statement
effective prospectively for all interim and annual periods beginning approach effective with its full year 2011 financial statements. There
January 1, 2013 with early adoption permitted. The company elected was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the amend-
to early adopt the guidance. There was no impact in the consoli- ments related only to changes in financial statement presentation.
dated financial results as the guidance related only to additional
disclosures. See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 107 to 110 for
further information.

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In December 2010, the FASB issued amended guidance to In January 2010, the FASB issued additional disclosure require-
clarify the acquisition date that should be used for reporting pro- ments for fair value measurements. According to the guidance, the
forma financial information for business combinations. If comparative fair value hierarchy disclosures should be disaggregated by class of
financial statements are presented, the pro-forma revenue and earn- assets and liabilities. A class is often a subset of assets or liabilities
ings of the combined entity for the comparable prior reporting within a line item in the statement of financial position. In addition,
period should be reported as though the acquisition date for all significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 of the fair value hierar-
business combinations that occurred during the current year had chy are required to be disclosed. These additional requirements
been completed as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual were effective January 1, 2010 for quarterly and annual reporting.
reporting period. The amendments in this guidance were effective These amendments did not have an impact in the consolidated
on a prospective basis for business combinations for which the financial results as this guidance relates only to additional disclo-
acquisition date was on or after January 1, 2011. There was no sures. Certain disclosure requirements relating to fair value
impact in the consolidated financial results as the amendments measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) were
relate only to additional disclosures. In addition, the company has deferred until January 1, 2011. These additional requirements also
had no acquisitions which required pro-forma financial information. did not have an impact in the consolidated financial results as they
In December 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the guid- related only to additional disclosures.
ance on goodwill impairment testing. The amendments modified
step 1 of the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero Note C.
or negative carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is Acquisitions/Divestitures
required to perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more
likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists. In making that Acquisitions
determination, an entity should consider whether there are any Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in the
adverse qualitative factors indicating that impairment may exist. The tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions are
amendments were effective January 1, 2011 and did not have an reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of
impact in the consolidated financial results. acquired cash and cash equivalents.
In July 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the disclosure
requirements about the credit quality of financing receivables and 2012
the allowance for credit losses. The purpose of the additional dis- In 2012, the company completed 11 acquisitions at an aggregate
closures was to enable users of financial statements to better cost of $3,964 million.
understand the nature of credit risk inherent in an entity’s portfolio
Kenexa Corporation (Kenexa)—On December 3, 2012, the com-
of financing receivables and how that risk is analyzed. For end-of-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Kenexa, a publicly
period balances, the new disclosures were required to be made in
held company, for cash consideration of $1,351 million. Kenexa, a
all interim and annual periods ending on or after December 15, 2010.
leading provider of recruiting and talent management solutions,
For activity during a reporting period, the disclosures were required
brings a unique combination of cloud-based technology and consult-
to be included in all interim and annual periods after January 1, 2011.
ing services that integrates both people and processes, providing
In January 2011, the FASB temporarily deferred the disclosures
solutions to engage a smarter, more effective workforce across their
regarding troubled debt restructurings which were included in the
most critical businesses functions. Goodwill of $1,014 million has
requirements of this amendment. Subsequently, in April 2011, the
been assigned to the Software ($771 million) and Global Technology
FASB issued additional guidance and clarifications to help creditors
Services (GTS) ($243 million) segments. As of the acquisition date, it
in determining whether a creditor has granted a concession, and
is expected that approximately 10 percent of the goodwill will be
whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficulties for purposes
deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life
of determining whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled debt
of the identified intangible assets acquired is 6.5 years.
restructuring. The new guidance and the previously deferred dis-
closures were effective July 1, 2011 applied retrospectively to Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed eight
January 1, 2011. Prospective application was required for any new other acquisitions: in the first quarter, Green Hat Software Limited
impairments identified as a result of this guidance. These changes (Green Hat), Emptoris Inc. (Emptoris) and Worklight, Inc. (Worklight),
did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results. all privately held companies, and DemandTec, Inc. (DemandTec),
a publicly held company; in the second quarter, Varicent Software
Inc. (Varicent), Vivisimo Inc. (Vivisimo) and Tealeaf Technology Inc.
(Tealeaf), all privately held companies; and in the third quarter,
Butterfly Software, Ltd. (Butterfly), a privately held company. Systems
and Technology (STG) completed two acquisitions: in the first quarter,
Platform Computing Corporation (Platform Computing), a privately
held company; and in the third quarter, Texas Memory Systems
(TMS), a privately held company. All acquisitions were for 100 percent
of the acquired companies.

===== PAGE 89 =====
8888 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2012.
2012 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Kenexa Acquisitions
Current assets $ 133 $ 278
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 98 217
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,014 1,880
Completed technology 3 to 7 169 403
Client relationships 4 to 7 179 194
In-process R&D N/A — 11
Patents/trademarks 1 to 7 39 37
Total assets acquired 1,632 3,020
Current liabilities (93) (143)
Noncurrent liabilities (188) (264)
Total liabilities assumed (281) (407)
Total purchase price $1,351 $2,613
N/A—Not applicable
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the company’s key business information necessary to drive new initiatives. Tealeaf
portfolio of product and services offerings. Green Hat helps custom- provides a full suite of customer experience management software,
ers improve the quality of software applications by enabling which analyzes interactions on websites and mobile devices. Butterfly
developers to use cloud computing technologies to conduct testing offers storage planning software and storage migration tools, helping
of a software application prior to its delivery. Emptoris expands the companies save storage space, operational time, IT budget and
company’s cloud-based analytics offerings that provide supply chain power consumption. Platform Computing’s focused technical and
intelligence leading to better inventory management and cost efficien- distributed computing management software helps clients create,
cies. Worklight delivers mobile application management capabilities integrate and manage shared computing environments that are
to clients across a wide range of industries. The acquisition enhances used in compute-and-data intensive applications such as simulations,
the company’s comprehensive mobile portfolio, which is designed to computer modeling and analytics. TMS designs and sells high-
help global corporations leverage the proliferation of all mobile performance solid state storage solutions.
devices—from laptops and smartphones to tablets. DemandTec For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of
delivers cloud-based analytics software to help organizations improve the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years.
their price, promotion and product mix within the broad context of These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line
enterprise commerce. Varicent’s software automates and analyzes basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,880 million has been
data across sales, finance, human resources and IT departments to assigned to the Software ($1,412 million), Global Business Services
uncover trends and optimize sales performance and operations. Vivi- (GBS) ($5 million), GTS ($21 million) and STG ($443 million) seg-
simo software automates the discovery of big data, regardless of its ments. As of the acquisition dates, it is expected that approximately
format or where it resides, providing decision makers with a view of 15 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On February 1, 2013, the company announced that it had entered The overall weighted-average life of the indentified intangible
into a definitive agreement to acquire the software portfolio of Star assets acquired was 6.9 years. These identified intangible assets
Analytics Inc., a privately held business analytics company based in will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives.
Redwood City, California. The combination of the company’s and Star Goodwill of $1,291 million was assigned to the Software ($1,277
Analytics software will advance the company’s business analytics million) and GBS ($14 million) segments. As of the acquisition dates,
initiatives. The acquisition is subject to customary closing conditions it was expected that approximately 25 percent of the goodwill would
and is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2013. be deductible for tax purposes.
On February 7, 2013, the company completed the acquisition of The table below reflects the purchase price related to these
StoredIQ Inc. (StoredIQ), a privately held company based in Austin, acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
Texas. StoredIQ will advance the company’s efforts to help clients December 31, 2011.
derive value from big data and respond more efficiently to litigation
2011 Acquisitions
and regulations, dispose of information that has outlived its purpose
and lower data storage costs. At the date of issuance of the financial ($ in millions)
statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete for Amortization Total
Life (in Years) Acquisitions
this acquisition.
Current assets $ 251
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 88
2011
In 2011, the company completed five acquisitions of privately held Intangible assets
companies at an aggregate cost of $1,849 million. Goodwill N/A 1,291
These acquisitions were completed as follows: in the second Completed technology 7 320
quarter, TRIRIGA, Inc. (TRIRIGA); and in the fourth quarter, i2, Algo- Client relationships 7 222
rithmics, Inc. (Algorithmics), Q1 Labs and Curam Software Ltd. Patents/trademarks 1 to 7 17
(Curam Software). TRIRIGA was integrated into the Software Total assets acquired 2,190
and GBS segments upon acquisition. All other acquisitions were
Current liabilities (191)
integrated into the Software segment upon acquisition. All acquisi-
Noncurrent liabilities (150)
tions reflected 100 percent ownership of the acquired companies.
Total liabilities assumed (341)
TRIRIGA is a provider of facility and real estate management
Total purchase price $1,849
software solutions, which help clients make strategic decisions
regarding space usage, evaluate alternative real estate initiatives, N/A—Not applicable
generate higher returns from capital projects and assess environ-
mental impact investments. The acquisition added advanced real
estate intelligence to the company’s smarter buildings initiative. i2
expanded the company’s Big Data analytics software for Smarter
Cities by helping both public and private entities in government, law
enforcement, retail, insurance and other industries access and ana-
lyze information they need to address crime, fraud and security
threats. Algorithmics provides software and services for improved
business insights at financial and insurance institutions to assess
risk and address regulatory challenges. Q1 Labs is a provider of
security intelligence software and accelerates efforts to help clients
more intelligently secure their enterprises by applying analytics to
correlate information from key security domains and creating security
dashboards for their organizations. Curam Software is a provider
of software and services which help governments improve the
efficiency, effectiveness and accessibility of social programs for
Smarter Cities.

===== PAGE 91 =====
9900 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2010
In 2010, the company completed 17 acquisitions at an aggregate Intelliden Inc. and Initiate Systems, Inc. (Initiate); in the second quar-
cost of $6,538 million. ter, Cast Iron Systems; in the third quarter, BigFix, Inc., Coremetrics
and Datacap; and in the fourth quarter, Unica Corporation (Unica),
Netezza Corporation (Netezza)—On November 10, 2010, the com-
a publicly held company, PSS Systems, OpenPages, Inc. (Open-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Netezza, for cash
Pages) and Clarity Systems. GTS completed an acquisition in the
consideration of $1,847 million. Netezza expanded the company’s
first quarter: the core operating assets of Wilshire Credit Corporation
business analytics initiatives to help clients gain faster insights into
(Wilshire). GBS also completed an acquisition in the first quarter:
their business information, with increased performance at a lower
National Interest Security Company, LLC, a privately held company.
cost of ownership. Netezza was integrated into the Software seg-
STG completed acquisitions of two privately held companies: in the
ment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table below,
third quarter, Storwize; and in the fourth quarter, BLADE Network
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. As of the acquisition
Technologies (BLADE). All acquisitions were for 100 percent of the
date, it was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible
acquired companies.
for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the
Lombardi is a leading provider of business process manage-
identified intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years.
ment software and services, and became part of the company’s
application integration software portfolio. Intelliden Inc. is a leading
Sterling Commerce—On August 27, 2010, the company completed
provider of intelligent network automation software and extended
the acquisition of 100 percent of Sterling Commerce, a wholly owned
the company’s network management offerings. Initiate is a market
subsidiary of AT&T, Inc., for cash consideration of $1,415 million.
leader in data integrity software for information sharing among
Sterling Commerce expanded the company’s ability to help clients
healthcare and government organizations. Cast Iron Systems, a
accelerate their interactions with customers, partners and suppliers
leading Software as a Service (SaaS) and cloud application integra-
through dynamic business networks using either on-premise or
tion provider, enhances the WebSphere business integration
cloud delivery models. Sterling Commerce was integrated into the
portfolio. BigFix, Inc. is a leading provider of high-performance
Software segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in
enterprise systems and security management solutions that revo-
the table below, was entirely assigned to the Software segment. As
lutionizes the way IT organizations manage and secure their
of the acquisition date, it was expected that none of the goodwill
computing infrastructure. Coremetrics, a leader in Web analytics
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average
software, expanded the company’s business analytics capabilities
useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years.
by enabling organizations to use cloud computing services to
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed acqui- develop faster, more targeted marketing campaigns. Datacap
sitions of 10 privately held companies and one publicly held strengthens the company’s ability to help organizations digitize,
company: in the first quarter, Lombardi Software, Inc. (Lombardi), manage and automate their information assets.
2010 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Sterling Other
Life (in Years) Netezza Commerce Acquisitions
Current assets $ 218 $ 196 $ 377
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 73 106 209
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,410 1,032 2,312
Completed technology 3 to 7 202 218 497
Client relationships 2 to 7 52 244 293
In-process R&D N/A 4 — 13
Patents/trademarks 1 to 7 16 14 27
Total assets acquired 1,975 1,810 3,728
Current liabilities (9) (129) (161)
Noncurrent liabilities (120) (266) (291)
Total liabilities assumed (128) (395) (452)
Total purchase price $1,847 $1,415 $3,277
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Unica, a leading provider of software and services used to auto- retain this ownership for a period of three years at which time
mate marketing processes, expanded the company’s ability to help Toshiba TEC will purchase the company’s equity interest for the
organizations analyze and predict customer preferences and initial acquisition value. This investment was recorded in investments
develop more targeted marketing campaigns. PSS Systems is a and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Posi-
leading provider of legal information governance and information tion and the payment was reflected within purchases of marketable
management software. OpenPages is a leading provider of software securities and other investments within cash flows from investing
that helps companies more easily identify and manage risk and activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
compliance activities across the enterprise through a single man- The company expects to close the next phase of the divestiture
agement system. Clarity Systems delivers financial governance in the first quarter of 2013 with subsequent closings expected in
software that enables organizations to automate the process of col- future periods. Overall, the company expects to recognize a total
lecting, preparing, certifying and controlling financial statements for pre-tax gain on the sale of approximately $500 million.
electronic filing. Wilshire’s mortgage servicing platform continues
the strategic focus on the mortgage services industry and 2011
strengthens the commitment to deliver mortgage business process During the fourth quarter of 2011, the company completed the
outsourcing solutions. National Interest Security Company strength- divestiture of the iCluster business to Rocket Software. iCluster,
ens the ability to deliver advanced analytics and IT solutions to the which was acquired in the Data Mirror acquisition in 2007, was
public sector. Storwize, a provider of in-line data compression appli- part of the Software business. This transaction was not material
ance solutions, helps the company to make it more affordable for to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
clients to analyze massive amounts of data in order to provide new During the second quarter of 2011, the company completed two
insights and business outcomes. BLADE provides server and top- divestitures related to subsidiaries of IBM Japan. The impact of
of-rack switches as well as software to virtualize and manage cloud these transactions was not material to the Consolidated Financial
computing and other workloads. Statements.
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life
2010
of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.4 years. These
On March 31, 2010, the company completed the sale of its activities
identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis
associated with the sales and support of Dassault Systemes’ (Das-
over their useful lives. Goodwill of $2,312 million was assigned to
sault) product lifecycle management (PLM) software, including
the Software ($1,653 million), GTS ($32 million), GBS ($252 million)
customer contracts and related assets to Dassault. The company
and STG ($375 million) segments. As of the acquisition dates, it
received net proceeds of $459 million and recognized a net gain
was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible for
of $591 million on the transaction in the first quarter of 2010. The
tax purposes.
gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain
Divestitures transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
2012
ment of Earnings and the net proceeds were reflected in proceeds
On April 17, 2012, the company announced that it had signed a
from disposition of marketable securities and other investments
definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for the sale of its Retail Store
within cash flow from investing activities in the Consolidated State-
Solutions business to Toshiba TEC. As part of the transaction,
ment of Cash Flows.
Toshiba TEC and the company also signed a multi-year business
partner agreement to integrate retail store solutions for Smarter
Commerce. The transaction price was $850 millon, and the com-
pany will receive approximately $800 million in cash, net of closing
date working capital adjustments.
Through December 31, 2012, the company completed the first
three phases of the sale. For the completed phases, the company
received net proceeds of $546 million, recorded a note receivable
of $251 million and recognized a net pre-tax gain of $446 million.
The gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain
transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings and the net proceeds are reflected within
divestitures of businesses, net of cash transferred within cash flows
from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows. In addition, in the third quarter, the company acquired a 19.9
percent ownership interest for $161 million in Toshiba Global Com-
merce Solutions Holding Corporation, the new holding company
that Toshiba TEC established for the business. The company will

===== PAGE 93 =====
9922 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note D.
Financial Instruments
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at
December 31, 2012 and 2011.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $3,694 $— $3,694
Commercial paper — 2,098 — 2,098
Money market funds 1,923 — — 1,923
Other securities — 30 — 30
Total 1,923 5,823 — 7,746(6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 717 — 717(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 2 8 — 10
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 34 — — 34
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 604 — 604
Foreign exchange contracts — 305 — 305
Equity contracts — 9 — 9
Total — 918 — 918 (7)
Total assets $1,959 $7,466 $— $9,424 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 496 $— $ 496
Equity contracts — 7 — 7
Total liabilities $ — $ 503 $— $ 503 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) Commercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position at December 31, 2012 are $333 million and $585 million, respectively.
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2012 are $426 million and $78 million, respectively.
(6) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $262 million each.

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit* $ — $1,931 $— $1,931
Commercial paper * — 777 — 777
Money market funds 1,886 — — 1,886
U.S. government securities — 2,750 — 2,750
Canada government securities* — 983 — 983
Other securities — 8 — 8
Total 1,886 6,449 — 8,335(5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2) 1 7 — 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (2) 69 14 — 83
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts — 783 — 783
Foreign exchange contracts — 510 — 510
Equity contracts — 7 — 7
Total — 1,300 — 1,300 (6)
Total assets $1,956 $7,770 $— $9,726 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 523 $— $ 523
Equity contracts — 8 — 8
Total liabilities $ — $ 531 $— $ 531 (6)
* Represents a change from the 2011 Annual Report to reflect Canada government securities of $983 million previously reported in Commercial paper, and a reduction of $151
million in Time deposits and certificates of deposit due to certain holdings which were out of the scope of this disclosure.
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2011 are $546 million and $754 million, respectively.
(4) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2011 are $365 million and $166 million, respectively.
(5) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(6) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $324 million each.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was
December 31, 2012 and 2011. immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements,
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value fair value hierarcy.
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Long-Term Debt
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial liabili- an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted
ties with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured market price is not available, an expected present value technique
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarcy. similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value.
The carrying amount of long-term debt is $24,088 million and
Loans and Long-Term Receivables $22,857 million and the estimated fair value is $27,119 million and
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur- $27,383 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. If mea-
rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar sured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt
credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, (including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the
2012 and 2011, the difference between the carrying amount and fair value hierarcy.

===== PAGE 95 =====
9944 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is not materially
different from carrying value, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent
debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered available-for-sale and re cord ed at fair value in the Consolidated Statement
of Finan cial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2012: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 8 $2 $— $10
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $31 $4 $ (1 ) $34
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2011: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 7 $ 1 $— $ 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $58 $27 $ (2 ) $83
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, Derivative Financial Instruments
2012, the company believes that unrealized losses on debt and The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is
available-for-sale equity securities are temporary and do not repre- a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the
sent an other-than-temporary impairment. normal course of business, the company is exposed to the impact
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity securities were as of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a
follows: lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and client
credit risk. The company limits these risks by following established
($ in millions) risk management policies and procedures, including the use of
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the
Proceeds $112 $405 $16 currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest rate expo-
Gross realized gains (before taxes) 45 232 6 sures, derivatives are used to better align rate movements between
Gross realized losses (before taxes) (1) (0) (0) the interest rates associated with the company’s lease and other
financial assets and the interest rates associated with its financing
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale debt debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the related cost of debt.
and equity securities that have been included in other comprehen- For foreign currency exposures, derivatives are used to better
sive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses reclassified manage the cash flow volatility arising from foreign exchange rate
from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) to net income fluctuations.
were as follows: As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will
($ in millions)
fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the counter-
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011
party credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering into
Net unrealized gains/(losses)
contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions based
arising during the period $ 17 $ (7)
upon their overall credit profile. The company’s established policies
Net unrealized (gains)/losses
and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions
reclassified to net income* (25) (143)
include reviewing and establishing limits for credit exposure and
* Includes writedowns of $2.0 million and $0.3 million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. continually assessing the creditworthiness of counterparties. The
right of set-off that exists under certain of these arrangements
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale debt
enables the legal entities of the company subject to the arrange-
securities were less than one year at December 31 , 2012.
ment to net amounts due to and from the counterparty reducing
the maximum loss from credit risk in the event of counterparty default.

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
with most of its major counterparties. These arrangements require futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps,
the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. Treasury securi- depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a
ties) when the derivative fair values exceed contractually established party to leveraged derivative instruments.
thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed or can vary based on A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
credit default swap pricing or credit ratings received from the major by underlying risk, follows.
credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instru-
ments under these collateralized arrangements that were in a Interest Rate Risk
liability position at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $94 million and Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
$131 million, respectively, for which no collateral was posted at The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. Full collateralization to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-effec-
of these agreements would be required in the event that the com- tive financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the
pany’s credit rating falls below investment grade or if its credit underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, as applicable, overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to con-
pursuant to the terms of the collateral security arrangements. The vert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e.,
aggregate fair value of derivative instruments in net asset posi- fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt issu-
tions as of December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $918 million and ances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December
$1,300 million, respectively. This amount represents the maximum 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of the company’s inter-
exposure to loss at the reporting date as a result of the counter- est rate swaps was $4.3 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively. The
parties failing to perform as contracted. This exposure was weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments at
reduced by $262 million and $324 million at December 31, 2012 December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011 was approximately 5.1
and 2011, respectively, of liabilities included in master netting years and 5.5 years, respectively.
arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, at December
31, 2012 and 2011, this exposure was reduced by $69 million and Forecasted Debt Issuance
$466 million of cash collateral, respectively, received by the com- The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
pany. In addition to cash collateral, the company held $31 million in issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
non-cash collateral, in U.S. Treasury securities at December 31, starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest
2012. Per accounting guidance, non-cash collateral is not recorded payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps
on the Statement of Financial Position. are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have
The company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at
in master netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or December 31, 2012 and 2011.
payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral At December 31, 2012 and 2011, net gains of approximately
against the fair values of the related derivative instruments. No $1 million and net losses of approximately $5 million (before taxes),
amount was recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2012 respectively, were recorded in AOCI in connection with cash flow
and December 31, 2011 for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The hedges of the company’s borrowings. Within these amounts less
amount recognized in accounts payable for the obligation to return than $1 million of gains and $6 million of losses, respectively, are
cash collateral totaled $69 million and $466 million at December expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 months,
31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The company restricts the use of providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying
cash collateral received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports transactions.
it in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated at Foreign Exchange Risk
December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011. Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the (Net Investment)
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt
exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign sub-
with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as sidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as the changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional cur-
derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon maturity rency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. dollar.
which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the under- The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign
lying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss potential exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At
on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these hedging December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of derivative
relationships by de-designating the derivative instrument in order to instruments designated as net investment hedges was $3.3 billion
manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as accounting and $5.0 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining
hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset the changes maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was
in the fair value of the de-designated instruments from the date of approximately 0.4 years for both periods.
de-designation until maturity.

===== PAGE 97 =====
9966 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions Equity Risk Management
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional cur- The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
rency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments for market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the cur- expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not
rency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward con- including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the
tracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
of time over which the company is hedging its exposure to the vari- derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market
ability in future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2012 and indices or the total return on the company’s common stock. They
2011, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported
cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
$10.7 billion and $10.9 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average At December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional amount of deriva-
remaining maturity of 0.7 years at both year-end dates. tive instruments in economic hedges of these compensation
At December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011, in connection obligations was $1.2 billion and $1.0 billion, respectively.
with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions,
the company recorded net losses of $138 million and net gains of Other Risks
$88 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. Within these The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common
amounts $79 million of losses and $191 million of gains, respectively, stock in connection with various investments that are deemed
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement
months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the under- provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of
lying anticipated transactions. these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 2011.
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign cur-
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay
rency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company employs
amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes credit
cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency denom-
default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. These
inated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional currency
derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are recorded
of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for as cash flow
at fair value with gains and losses reported in other (income) and
hedges. The maximum length of time over which the company
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company
hedges its exposure to the variability in future cash flows is approxi-
did not have any derivative instruments relating to this program out-
mately three years. At December 31, 2012 and December 31, 2011,
standing at December 31, 2012 and 2011.
no instruments relating to this program were outstanding.
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash
of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to
convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the com-
pany uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of
the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than
one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
ment of Earnings. At December 31, 2012 and 2011, the total notional
amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign
currency exposure was $12.9 billion and $13.6 billion, respectively.

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the derivative and non-derivative instrument related risk management activity as of
December 31, 2012 and 2011 as well as for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Balance
Sheet Sheet
At December 31: Classification 2012 2011 Classification 2012 2011
Designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Interest rate contracts current assets $ 47 $ 50 and liabilities $ — $ —
Investments and
sundry assets 557 733 Other liabilities — —
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets 135 407 and liabilities 267 273
Investments and Other
sundry assets 5 — liabilities 78 155
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $744 $1,190 derivative liabilities $ 345 $ 428
Not designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets $142 $ 82 and liabilities $ 152 $ 84
Investments and Other
sundry assets 23 21 liabilities — 11
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Equity contracts current assets 9 7 and liabilities 7 8
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $174 $ 110 derivative liabilities $ 159 $ 103
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ 578 $ —
Long-term debt N/A N/A 3,035 1,884
Total $918 $1,300 $4,116 $2,415
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 99 =====
9988 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings
Line Item Recognized on Derivatives(1) Attributable to Risk Being Hedged(2)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $ 65 $271 $241 $ 59 $(117) $ (70)
Interest expense 55 205 160 50 (89) (46)
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments (1)
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (311) 352 299 N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 110 42 105 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Warrants and expense — 10 — N/A N/A N/A
Total $ (81) $880 $805 $108 $(206) $(116)
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings Effective Portion Ineffectiveness and Amounts
Effective Portion Recognized in OCI Line Item Reclassified from AOCI Excluded from Effectiveness Testing(3)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Interest expense $ (6) $ (8) $ (8) $ — $ — $ —
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts 32 (266) 371 and expense 237 (247) (54) 3 (3) (4)
Cost of sales 7 (182) (92) — — —
SG&A expense 16 (74) (49) — — —
Instruments in net investment hedges(4)
Foreign exchange contracts (26) 45 178 Interest expense — 0 0 11 (9) (3)
Total $ 6 $(221) $549 $253 $(511) $(203) $14 $(12) $ (7)
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under
these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated
hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, there Note E.
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings represent- Inventories
ing hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of
($ in millions)
hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an
At December 31: 2012 2011
underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur (for
Finished goods $ 475 $ 589
cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course
Work in process and raw materials 1,812 2,007
of business.
Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 83 for Total $2,287 $2,595
additional information on the company’s use of derivative financial
instruments.

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note F.
Financing Receivables
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allowances The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
for credit losses, including residual values. lateral for non-recourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged
as collateral for borrowings were $650 million and $410 million at
($ in millions) December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These borrowings are
At December 31: 2012 2011 included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 104 and 105.
Current The company did not have any financing receivables held for
Net investment in sales-type sale as of December 31, 2012 and 2011.
and direct financing leases $ 3,862 $ 3,765
Commercial financing receivables 7,750 7,095 Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Client loan receivables 5,395 5,195 The following tables present financing receivables on a gross basis,
Installment payment receivables 1,031 846 excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual value, by port-
Total $18,038 $16,901 folio segment and by class, excluding current commercial financing
Noncurrent receivables and other miscellaneous current financing receivables
Net investment in sales-type at December 31, 2012 and 2011. The company determines its allow-
and direct financing leases $ 6,107 $ 5,406 ance for credit losses based on two portfolio segments: lease
Commercial financing receivables 5 34 receivables and loan receivables, and further segments the portfolio
Client loan receivables 5,966 4,925 into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
Installment payment receivables 733 410
($ in millions)
Total $12,812 $10,776
Major Growth
At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets Total
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates Financing receivables
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms Lease receivables $ 7,036 $2,138 $ 9,174
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-type
Loan receivables 9,666 3,670 13,336
and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual values
Ending balance $16,701 $5,808 $22,510
of $794 million and $745 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011,
Collectively evaluated for impairment $16,570 $5,684 $22,254
respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of $728 million
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 131 $ 125 $ 256
and $733 million, and net of the allowance for credit losses of $114
Allowance for credit losses:
million and $118 million at those dates, respectively. Scheduled
maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at December 31, Beginning balance at
January 1, 2012
2012, expressed as a percentage of the total, are approximately:
Lease receivables $ 79 $ 40 $ 118
2013, 42 percent; 2014, 29 percent; 2015, 18 percent; 2016, 9 percent;
and 2017 and beyond, 3 percent. Loan receivables 125 64 189
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit Total $ 203 $ 104 $ 307
losses of $46 million and $53 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, Write-offs (14) (1) (15)
respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts receivable Provision (9) 38 28
financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and non-IBM products. Other 0 (2) (2)
Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable financing Ending balance at
generally range from 30 to 90 days. December 31, 2012 $ 180 $ 138 $ 318
Client loan receivables, net of allowance for credit losses of $155 Lease receivables $ 59 $ 55 $ 114
million and $126 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively, Loan receivables $ 121 $ 84 $ 204
are loans that are provided primarily to clients to finance the pur-
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 69 $ 29 $ 98
chase of software and services. Separate contractual relationships
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 111 $ 109 $ 220
on these financing arrangements are for terms ranging generally
from one to seven years.
Installment payment receivables, net of allowance for credit
losses of $39 million and $51 million at December 31, 2012 and
2011, respectively, are loans that are provided primarily to clients
to finance hardware, software and services ranging generally from
one to three years.
Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables
financing contracts are priced independently at competitive market
rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms of these
separate financing agreements.

===== PAGE 101 =====
110000 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Impaired Loans
($ in millions)
Major Growth The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated
At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets Total reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment,
Financing receivables loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following
Lease receivables $ 6,510 $1,921 $ 8,430 tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31, 2012
Loan receivables 9,077 2,552 11,629 and 2011.
Ending balance $15,587 $4,472 $20,060
($ in millions)
Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,321 $4,370 $19,692
Recorded Related
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 266 $ 102 $ 368 At December 31, 2012: Investment Allowance
Allowance for credit losses: Major markets $ 88 $ 77
Beginning balance at Growth markets 72 65
January 1, 2011
Total $160 $143
Lease receivables $ 84 $ 42 $ 126
Loan receivables 150 76 226
($ in millions)
Total $ 234 $ 119 $ 353 Recorded Related
Write-offs (68) (16) (84) At December 31, 2011: Investment Allowance
Major markets $110 $ 70
Provision 39 5 44
Growth markets 62 53
Other (1) (4) (5)
Total $172 $123
Ending balance at
December 31, 2011 $ 203 $ 104 $ 307
Lease receivables $ 79 $ 40 $ 118 ($ in millions)
Loan receivables $ 125 $ 64 $ 189 Interest
Income
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 82 $ 15 $ 96 Average Interest Recognized
Recorded Income on Cash
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 122 $ 89 $ 211 For the year ended December 31, 2012: Investment Recognized Basis
Major markets $ 90 $0 $0
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evalu-
Growth markets 65 0 0
ated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually
Total $156 $0 $0
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected cash
flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential
loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss ($ in millions)
Interest
is probable, the company records a specific reserve. In addition, the
Income
company records an unallocated reserve that is calculated by apply- Average Interest Recognized
Recorded Income on Cash
ing a reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that For the year ended December 31, 2011: Investment Recognized Basis
have been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon
Major markets $142 $2 $0
credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan)
Growth markets 90 0 0
and loss history.
Total $232 $3 $0
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
Credit Quality Indicators
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing
The company’s credit quality indicators are based on rating agency
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31, 2012
data, publicly available information and information provided by
and 2011.
customers, and are reviewed periodically based on the relative
level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system
($ in millions)
that maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown
At December 31: 2012 2011
on the following page. Moody’s does not provide credit ratings to
Major markets $ 27 $ 46
the company on its customers.
Growth markets 21 20
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each class
Total lease receivables $ 47 $ 66
of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2012 and
Major markets $ 67 $ 75
2011. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to
Growth markets 25 24
Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are considered
Total loan receivables $ 92 $ 99 non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do not reflect
Total receivables $139 $165 mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer credit risk
to third parties.

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Lease Receivables Lease Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 646 $ 86 Aaa – Aa3 $ 697 $ 139
A1 – A3 1,664 223 A1 – A3 1,459 306
Baa1 – Baa3 2,285 776 Baa1 – Baa3 2,334 654
Ba1 – Ba2 1,367 450 Ba1 – Ba2 1,118 457
Ba3 – B1 552 418 Ba3 – B1 534 252
B2 – B3 399 127 B2 – B3 260 97
Caa – D 124 58 Caa – D 108 15
Total $7,036 $2,138 Total $6,510 $1,921
Loan Receivables Loan Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets At December 31, 2011: Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 887 $ 148 Aaa – Aa3 $ 971 $ 185
A1 – A3 2,286 382 A1 – A3 2,034 407
Baa1 – Baa3 3,139 1,333 Baa1 – Baa3 3,255 869
Ba1 – Ba2 1,878 773 Ba1 – Ba2 1,559 607
Ba3 – B1 758 718 Ba3 – B1 744 335
B2 – B3 548 218 B2 – B3 362 129
Caa – D 170 99 Caa – D 151 20
Total $9,666 $3,670 Total $9,077 $2,552
At December 31, 2012, the industries which made up Global Financing’s At December 31, 2011, the industries which made up Global Financing’s
receivables portfolio consist of: Financial (38 percent), Government receivables portfolio consist of: Financial (39 percent), Government
(16 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services (15 percent), Manufacturing (13 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services
(7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications (6 percent) and (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications (6 percent) and
Other (4 percent). Other (5 percent).
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2012: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 8 $ 7,028 $ 7,036 $ 5
Growth markets 11 2,127 2,138 8
Total lease receivables $20 $ 9,154 $ 9,174 $13
Major markets $27 $ 9,639 $ 9,666 $ 8
Growth markets 36 3,634 3,670 31
Total loan receivables $63 $13,273 $13,336 $39
Total $82 $22,428 $22,510 $52
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.

===== PAGE 103 =====
110022 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2011: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 6 $ 6,504 $ 6,510 $ 6
Growth markets 9 1,911 1,921 6
Total lease receivables $16 $ 8,415 $ 8,430 $12
Major markets $23 $ 9,054 $ 9,077 $ 7
Growth markets 22 2,530 2,552 19
Total loan receivables $46 $11,584 $11,629 $26
Total $62 $19,998 $20,060 $38
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
Troubled Debt Restructurings Note H.
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or after Investments and Sundry Assets
January 1, 2011 and determined that there were no troubled debt
($ in millions)
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2012.
At December 31: 2012 2011
Deferred transition and setup costs
Note G. and other deferred arrangements* $1,630 $1,784
Property, Plant and Equipment Derivatives—noncurrent ** 585 753
Alliance investments
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2012 2011 Equity method 120 131
Land and land improvements $ 747 $ 786 Non-equity method 226 127
Buildings and building improvements 9,610 9,531 Prepaid software 306 233
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 27,731 26,843 Long-term deposits 318 307
Plant and other property—gross 38,088 37,160 Other receivables 204 208
Less: Accumulated depreciation 25,234 24,703 Employee benefit-related 439 493
Plant and other property—net 12,854 12,457 Prepaid income taxes 459 261
Rental machines 2,414 2,964 Other assets 735 598
Less: Accumulated depreciation 1,271 1,538 Total $5,021 $4,895
Rental machines—net 1,142 1,426 * Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to
Total—net $13,996 $13,883 Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,”
on page 79 for additional information.
** See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 94 through 98 for the fair value of all
derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Note I.
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset balances
by major asset class.
($ in millions)
Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2012: Amount Amortization Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $1,527 $ (665) $ 861
Client relationships 2,103 (961) 1,142
Completed technology 2,709 (1,112) 1,597
In-process R&D 28 — 28
Patents/trademarks 281 (127) 154
Other* 31 (27) 3
Total $6,679 $(2,892) $3,787

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Total amortization was $1,284 million and $1,226 million for the
Gross Net years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The aggre-
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2011: Amount Amortization Amount gate amortization expense for acquired intangibles assets (excluding
Intangible asset class capitalized software) was $709 million and $634 million for the years
Capitalized software $1,478 $ (678) $ 799 ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. In addition, in 2012
the company retired $641 million of fully amortized intangible assets,
Client relationships 1,751 (715) 1,035
impacting both the gross carrying amount and accumulated amor-
Completed technology 2,160 (746) 1,414
tization by this amount.
In-process R&D 18 — 18
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
Patents/trademarks 207 (88) 119
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated
Other* 29 (22) 7
Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at
Total $5,642 $(2,250) $3,392 December 31, 2012:
* O ther intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems. ($ in millions)
Capitalized Acquired
The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased $395 million Software Intangibles Total
during the year ended December 31, 2012, primarily due to intangible 2013 $501 $729 $1,230
asset additions resulting from acquisitions, partially offset by amor- 2014 277 626 903
tization. There was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2015 83 498 581
2012 and 2011. 2016 — 458 458
2017 — 340 340
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2012 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2012
Global Business Services $ 4,313 $ 5 $ (0) $ (2) $ 42 $ 4,357
Global Technology Services 2,646 264 — (0) 6 2,916
Software 18,121 2,182 (30) (6) 137 20,405
Systems and Technology 1,133 443 (0) (14) 6 1,568
Total $26,213 $2,894 $(30) $(22) $192 $29,247
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2011 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2011
Global Business Services $ 4,329 $ 14 $ (0) $(10) $ (20) $ 4,313
Global Technology Services 2,704 — (1) (2) (55) 2,646
Software 16,963 1,277 10 (2) (127) 18,121
Systems and Technology 1,139 — (6) — (0) 1,133
Total $25,136 $1,291 $ 2 $(13) $(203 ) $26,213
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2012 and 2011 were related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, 2011
or December 31, 2010, respectively, and were still subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition
date or when information becomes available. There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded in 2012 or 2011, and the company has no
accumulated goodwill impairment losses.

===== PAGE 105 =====
110044 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note J.
Borrowings
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at Decem-
At December 31: 2012 2011
ber 31, 2012 and 2011 was 0.1 percent, respectively. The weighted-
Commercial paper $1,800 $2,300
average interest rates for short-term loans was 1.8 percent and 1.2
Short-term loans 1,789 1,859
percent at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Long-term debt—current maturities 5,593 4,306
Total $9,181 $8,463
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2012 2011
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2012):
2.79% 2013 – 2014 $ 7,131 $ 8,615
1.46% 2015 – 2016 5,807 2,414
5.29% 2017 –2021 7,457 8,600
1.88% 2022 1,000 500
7.00% 2025 600 600
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.875% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 83 187
5.60% 2039 745 1,545
4.00% 2042 1,107 —
7.00% 2045 27 27
7.125% 2096 316 322
25,656 24,192
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2012, in parentheses):
Euros (3.6%) 2013 – 2019 2,338 1,037
Japanese yen (0.7%) 2013 – 2014 878 1,123
Swiss francs (3.8%) 2015 – 2020 178 173
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 502 —
Other (4.6%) 2013 – 2017 107 177
29,660 26,702
Less: net unamortized discount 865 533
Add: fair value adjustment* 886 994
29,680 27,161
Less: current maturities 5,593 4,306
Total $24,088 $22,857
* The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the debt’s
carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2012 2011
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $24,049 3.43% $18,547 4.38%
Floating-rate debt* 5,631 1.91% 8,614 1.54%
Total $29,680 $27,161
* Includes $4,252 million in 2012 and $5,898 million in 2011 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D,
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 98.)
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt outstand- Interest on Debt
ing at December 31, 2012, are as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
($ in millions)
Cost of financing $ 545 $553 $555
Total
Interest expense 470 402 365
2013 $ 5,561
Net investment derivative activity (11) 9 3
2014 3,791
Interest capitalized 18 9 5
2015 2,677
Total interest paid and accrued $1,022 $973 $928
2016 3,058
2017 4,531
Refer to the related discussion on page 136 in note T, “Seg ment
2018 and beyond 10,042 Infor mation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing
Total $29,660 segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 92 to 98
for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in
Debt Exchange the company’s debt risk management program.
In the second quarter of 2012, the company completed an exchange
Lines of Credit
of approximately $6 million of principal of its 7.125 percent deben-
tures due 2096, $104 million of principal of its 8.00 percent notes In 2011, the company renewed its five-year, $10 billion Credit Agree-
due in 2038 and $800 million of principal of its 5.600 percent senior ment (the “Credit Agreement”), which expires on November 10,
notes due in 2039 for approximately $1,107 million of 4.00 percent 2016. In 2012, the company extended the term of the global credit
senior notes due in 2042 and cash of approximately $121 million. facility by one year to November 10, 2017. The total expense
The exchange was completed to retire high coupon debt in the cur- recorded by the company related to this facility was $5.3 million in
rent favorable interest rate environment. 2012, $5.0 million in 2011 and $6.2 million in 2010. The Credit Agree-
The debt exchange was accounted for as a non-revolving debt ment permits the company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow
modification in accordance with accounting guidance, and therefore up to $10 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary
it did not result in any gain or loss recorded in the Consolidated Borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the company. The com-
Statement of Earnings. Cash payments will be amortized over the pany may also, upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of
life of the new debt. Administrative fees with third parties in relation the additional banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement,
to the exchange were expensed as incurred. increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an
additional $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agree-
ment, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay
and reborrow amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time
during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under the
Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as
further described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement
contains customary representations and warranties, covenants,
events of default, and indemnification provisions. The company
believes that circumstances that might give rise to breach of these
covenants or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement,
are remote. As of December 31, 2012, there were no borrowings by
the company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Inter-
est rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit
vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.

===== PAGE 107 =====
110066 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note K.
Other Liabilities
($ in millions)
In response to changing business needs, the company periodically
At December 31: 2012 2011
takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost
Income tax reserves $2,527 $3,989
competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent contractually
Executive compensation accruals 1,542 1,388
obligated future payments associated with these activities are
Disability benefits 890 835
reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the previous table.
Derivative liabilities 78 166
In addition, the company executed certain special actions
Special actions 430 347 as follows: (1) the second quarter of 2005 associated with Global
Workforce reductions 473 366 Services, primarily in Europe, (2) the fourth quarter of 2002 associ-
Deferred taxes 448 549 ated with the acquisition of the PricewaterhouseCoopers consulting
Environmental accruals 216 249 business, (3) the second quarter of 2002 associated with the
Noncurrent warranty accruals 167 163 Microelectronics Division and the rebalancing of the company’s
Asset retirement obligations 127 166 workforce and leased space resources, (4) the 2002 actions associ-
ated with the hard disk drive business for reductions in workforce,
Other 709 777
manufacturing capacity and space, (5) the actions taken in 1999,
Total $7,607 $8,996
and (6) the actions that were executed prior to 1994.
The table below provides a roll forward of the current and noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. The current liabilities
presented in the table are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(in millions)
Liability Liability
as of as of
January 1, Other December 31,
2012 Payments Adjustments* 2012
Current
Workforce $ 33 $(32) $27 $ 28
Space 4 (4) 1 2
Total current $ 38 $(36) $28 $ 30
Noncurrent
Workforce $344 $ — $85 $430
Space 3 — (3) 0
Total noncurrent $347 $ — $83 $430
* The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, remeasurement of actuarial assumptions, foreign currency
translation adjustments and interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees not probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO
who are no longer working for the company who were granted environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in
annual payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect
Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $229 million and
required payments will continue until the former employee begins $262 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Estimated
receiving pension benefits or passes away. The space accruals are environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the con-
for ongoing obligations to pay rent for vacant space that could not solidated financial position or consolidated results of the company’s
be sublet or space that was sublet at rates lower than the committed operations in future periods. However, estimates of future costs are
lease arrangement. The length of these obligations varies by lease subject to change due to protracted cleanup periods and changing
with the longest extending through 2014. environmental remediation regulations.
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec- As of December 31, 2012, the company was unable to estimate the
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily
number of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject to
facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-encapsulated
for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts asbestos that the company would remediate only if it performed major
have been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are renovations of certain existing buildings. Because these conditional

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
obligations have indeterminate settlement dates, the company could each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may
not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At
will continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each future December 31, 2012, $8,652 million of Board common stock repur-
reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once sufficient chase authorization was still available. The company plans to
additional information becomes available. The total amounts accrued purchase shares on the open market or in private transactions from
for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the time to time, depending on market conditions.
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, were $171 million and
$187 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part
Note L. of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur-
Equity Activity chase plan: 15,091,320 shares in 2012, 20,669,785 shares in 2011
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 and 34,783,386 shares in 2010.The company issued 2,746,169
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which treasury shares in 2012, 4,920,198 treasury shares in 2011 and
1,117,367,676 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2012 and 7,929,318 treasury shares in 2010, as a result of exercises of stock
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by non-
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2012. U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s stock-based
compensation plans, 2,406,007 common shares at a cost of $468
Stock Repurchases million, 1,717,246 common shares at a cost of $289 million and
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM 2,334,932 common shares at a cost of $297 million in 2012, 2011
common stock. The company repurchased 61,246,371 common and 2010, respectively, were remitted by employees to the company
shares at a cost of $12,008 million, 88,683,716 common shares at in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding requirements.
a cost of $15,034 million and 117,721,650 common shares at a cost These amounts are included in the treasury stock balance in the
of $15,419 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively. These Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the Consolidated
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of Statement of Changes in Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2012: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (44) $ 10 $ (34)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 8 $ (4) $ 4
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (42) 17 (25)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 20 (8) 12
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 32 $ (27) $ 5
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (7) (6) (13)
SG&A expense (16) 4 (12)
Other (income) and expense (237) 91 (146)
Interest expense 6 (3) 3
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (220) $ 59 $ (161)
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period $(7,489) $2,327 $(5,162)
Curtailments and settlements (2) 0 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (148) 59 (89)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 2,457 (874) 1,583
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(5,182) $1,513 $(3,669)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(5,460) $1,587 $(3,874)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 109 =====
110088 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2011: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (693) $ (18) $ (711)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (231) 88 (143)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (241) $ 91 $ (150)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (266) $ 105 $ (162)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 182 (61) 121
SG&A expense 75 (23) 52
Other (income) and expense 247 (3) 244
Interest expense 8 (95) (88)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 245 $ (77) $ 167
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (28) $ 7 $ (22)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (5,463) 1,897 (3,566)
Curtailments and settlements 11 (3) 7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (157) 62 (94)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,847 (619) 1,227
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(3,790) $1,343 $(2,448)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(4,479) $1,339 $(3,142)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2010: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 712 $ (69) $ 643
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 70 $ (24) $ 46
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 0 (0) (0)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 8 (3) 5
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 78 $ (27) $ 51
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 371 $ (120) $ 251
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 92 (32) 60
SG&A expense 49 (17) 33
Other (income) and expense 54 (17) 37
Interest expense 8 (3) 5
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 573 $ (188) $ 385
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 28 $ (8) $ 20
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,728) 1,016 (1,712)
Curtailments and settlements 10 (3) 7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (183) 67 (116)
Amortization of net gains/(losses) 1,249 (441) 808
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(1,624) $ 632 $ (992)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (260) $ 348 $ 87
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 120 to 134 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 111 =====
111100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2009 $(481) $1,836 $(20,297) $ 113 $(18,830)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 251 643 (1,684) 51 (739)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income 134 0 692 0 826
Total change for the period 385 643 (992) 51 87
December 31, 2010 (96) 2,478 (21,289) 164 (18,743)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (162) (711) (3,581) (7) (4,461)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income 329 0 1,133 (143) 1,319
Total change for the period 167 (711) (2,448) (150) (3,142)
December 31, 2011 71 1,767 (23,737) 13 (21,885)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 5 (34) (5,164) 16 (5,177)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (167) 0 1,495 (25) 1,303
Total change for the period (161) (34) (3,669) (9) (3,874)
December 31, 2012 $ (90) $1,733 $(27,406) $ 4 $(25,759)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
Note M.
Contingencies and Commitments
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit,
clients in more than 170 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has
or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, inves- been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably esti-
tigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time to time mated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such
in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader in liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010
the information technology industry and, as such, has been and will were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and associ- In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com-
ated products and offerings, including claims of copyright and patent pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of
infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com-
addition, the company enforces its own IP against infringement, pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other
through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide relations considerations.
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related to With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and
contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and other that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example,
benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, product the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the com-
liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environ- pany’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining
mental matters. These actions may be commenced by a number of claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this note,
different parties, including competitors, clients, current or former the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible
employees, government and regulatory agencies, stockholders and losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts
representatives of the locations in which the company does busi- accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations
ness. Some of the actions to which the company is party may involve and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to
particularly complex technical issues, and some actions may raise predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s
novel questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions in which experience that damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are
these matters arise. unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not
meaningful indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the
company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of
other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and
proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status of

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal theo- On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf
ries, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of information of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one
important to the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, inves- another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the moderniza-
tigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made tion of social service program processing in Indiana. The State
with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing terminated the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and the
reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the State is seeking damages. IBM believes the State’s claims against
aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discus- it are without merit and is seeking payment of termination amounts
sions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews by specified in the contract. Trial began in late February 2012 in Marion
counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter. County, Indiana Superior Court and concluded in early April. On July
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in 18, 2012, the court rejected the State’s claims in their entirety and
any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a awarded IBM $52 million plus interest and costs. In August 2012, the
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, State of Indiana filed a notice of appeal. IBM also intends to appeal
results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of vari- certain portions of the court’s ruling.
ables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; The company was named as a co-defendant in numerous pur-
the structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of ported class actions filed on and after March 18, 2011 in federal and
the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in the state courts in California in connection with an information technol-
Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and cir- ogy outsourcing agreement between Health Net, Inc. and IBM. The
cumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional matters were consolidated in the United States District Court for the
factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, Eastern District of California, and plaintiffs filed a consolidated com-
it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results plaint on July 15, 2011. The consolidated complaint alleges that the
of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period company violated the California Confidentiality of Medical Informa-
by the resolution of one or more of these matters. tion Act in connection with hard drives that are unaccounted for at
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters one of Health Net’s data centers in California; plaintiffs have been
involving the company. notified by Health Net that certain of their personal information is
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 believed to be contained on those hard drives. Plaintiffs seek dam-
in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM). ages, as well as injunctive and declaratory relief. IBM has also
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff received a request for information regarding this matter from the
is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP rights, California Attorney General. On January 12, 2012, the court granted
and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, interference IBM’s motion to dismiss the complaint for lack of standing, and on
with contract and breach of contract with regard to the company’s February 22, 2012, the case against IBM was dismissed.
distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of code to Linux. The IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceedings
company has asserted counterclaims, including breach of contract, in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the IBM UK
violation of the Lanham Act, unfair competition, intentional torts, Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative beneficiaries
unfair and deceptive trade practices, breach of the General Public of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a declaration that
License that governs open source distributions, promissory estop- it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the UK Trust that it
pel and copyright infringement. Motions for summary judgment were was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future accruals for most
heard in March 2007, and the court has not yet issued its decision. participants and in implementing the company’s new retirement
On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and policy. The trial in the High Court began in February 2013. In addi-
all proceedings in this case were stayed. On August 25, 2009, the tion, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 290 individual actions
U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware approved the brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined benefits
appointment of a Trustee of SCO. The court in another suit, the SCO plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege constructive
Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury found dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the Employ-
that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; the judge ment Tribunal in Southampton UK and are currently stayed pending
subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to recognize Novell’s resolution of the above-referenced High Court proceedings.
waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent for breach of UNIX
license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of
Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal
of this matter. In November 2011, SCO filed a motion in Federal Court
in Utah seeking to reopen the SCO v. IBM case.

===== PAGE 113 =====
111122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In a separate but related proceeding, in March 2011, the Trustee The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after
of the IBM UK Trust was granted leave to initiate a claim before the January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York,
High Court in London against IBM UK and one member of the UK county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com-
Trust membership, seeking an order modifying certain documents plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including for
and terms relating to retirement provisions in IBM UK’s largest negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. Plain-
defined benefit plan (the C Plan) dating back to 1983. The trial of tiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim damages in
these proceedings began in May 2012 and finished in early June. unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries and property
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued its ruling, damages allegedly arising out of the presence of groundwater con-
holding that the 1983 Trust Deeds and Rules should be modified to tamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater contaminants into
allow certain categories of current IBM UK employees who are certain structures in which plaintiffs reside or resided, or conducted
members of the C Plan to retire from the age of 60 (rather than from business, allegedly resulting from the release of chemicals into the
the age of 63) without actuarial reduction of their defined benefit environment by the company at its former manufacturing and devel-
pension. In a supplementary ruling on December 13, 2012, the Court opment facility in Endicott. These complaints also seek punitive
declined to similarly modify the Trust Deeds and Rules for former damages in an unspecified amount.
employees who were C Plan members and who left the company The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
prior to retirement. On February 7, 2013, the Court issued an order brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the
agreed to by all parties, under which there will be no appeals of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
October 2012 and December 2012 judgments. As a result of the Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to
October 2012 ruling, IBM recorded an additional pre-tax retirement- CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to
related obligation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012. participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership
In March 2011, the company announced that it has agreed to of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investiga-
settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange tions, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several
Commission (SEC) relating to activities by employees of IBM Korea, current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits,
LG IBM, IBM (China) Investment Company Limited and IBM Global administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local
Services (China) Co., Ltd., during the period from 1998 through environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims con-
2009, allegedly in violation of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of cerning certain current or former operating sites.
1977. As part of the settlement, IBM has consented to the entry of The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and
a judgment relating to the books and records and internal control governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many
provisions of the securities laws. IBM has also agreed to pay a total other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is
of $10 million, categorized by the SEC as follows: (i) $5.3 million, involved in various challenges with Brazilian authorities regarding
representing profits gained as a result of the conduct alleged in the non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters.
SEC’s complaint, (ii) prejudgment interest on that amount of $2.7 These matters include claims for taxes on the importation of com-
million, and (iii) a civil penalty of $2 million. The settlement is subject puter software. In November 2008, the company won a significant
to court approval. case in the Superior Chamber of the federal administrative tax court
in Brazil, and in late July 2009, the company received written con-
firmation regarding this decision. The total potential amount related
to the remaining matters for all applicable years is approximately
$575 million. The company believes it will prevail on these matters
and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability.

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Commitments Note N.
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities Taxes
include unused amounts of $4,719 million and $4,040 million at
($ in millions)
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. A portion of these amounts
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
was available to the company’s business partners to support their
Income before income taxes
working capital needs. In addition, the company has committed
U.S. operations $ 9,668 $ 9,716 $ 9,140
to provide future financing to its clients in connection with client
Non-U.S. operations 12,234 11,287 10,583
purchase agreements for approximately $1,513 million and $1,866
million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. Total income before income taxes $21,902 $21,003 $19,723
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor
The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of
follows:
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
($ in millions)
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect
U.S. operations $2,582 $2,141 $2,000
to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of
Non-U.S. operations 2,716 3,007 2,890
contracts entered into by the company, under which the company
Total provision for income taxes $5,298 $5,148 $4,890
customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless against losses
arising from a breach of representations and covenants related
The components of the provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdic-
to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP rights, specified
tion are as follows:
environmental matters, third-party performance of nonfinancial
contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these
($ in millions)
circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in
U.S. federal
the particular contract, the procedures of which typically allow the
Current $1,361 $ 268 $ 190
company to challenge the other party’s claims. While typically
Deferred 403 909 1,015
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual maximum
1,764 1,177 1,205
on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these
U.S. state and local
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim,
and in some instances, the company may have recourse against Current 134 429 279
third parties for certain payments made by the company. Deferred 289 81 210
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 423 510 489
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the con- Non-U.S.
ditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts Current 3,006 3,239 3,127
and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Histori- Deferred 105 222 69
cally, payments made by the company under these agreements
3,111 3,461 3,196
have not had a material effect on the company’s business, financial
Total provision for income taxes 5,298 5,148 4,890
condition or results of operations.
Provision for social security,
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
real estate, personal property
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these and other taxes 4,331 4,289 4,018
financial guarantees was $65 million and $56 million at December Total taxes included in net income $9,629 $9,437 $8,908
31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees
recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is
not material.

===== PAGE 115 =====
111144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s Deferred Tax Liabilities
effective tax rate is as follows:
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2012 2011
Leases $2,216 $2,149
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
Depreciation 1,378 1,421
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
Goodwill and intangible assets 957 796
Foreign tax differential (11) (10) (10)
Software development costs 542 466
State and local 1 2 2
Retirement benefits 257 551
Other (1) (2) (2)
Other 1,158 1,121
Effective rate 24% 25% 25%
Gross deferred tax liabilities $6,508 $6,504
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili-
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and
ation above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $706 million,
foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S.
as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $929 million.
statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of
Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least two
non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercom-
years or are available for 10 years or more.
pany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2012 principally applies
changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated
to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, in the
with each of these items.
opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire unutilized.
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the IRS commenced its audit of the
However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carry-
company’s U.S. tax returns for the years 2008 through 2010. The
forwards are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation
company anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end
allowance will reduce income tax expense.
of 2013.
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2012
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities
increased by $97 million in 2012 to $5,672 million. A reconciliation of
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate.
the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities
as follows:
that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
were as follows:
($ in millions)
2012 2011 2010
Deferred Tax Assets
Balance at January 1 $5,575 $5,293 $ 4,790
($ in millions) Additions based on tax positions
At December 31: 2012 2011* related to the current year 401 672 1,054
Retirement benefits $ 5,870 $ 5,169 Additions for tax positions
Share-based and other compensation 1,666 1,598 of prior years 215 379 1,768
Deferred income 1,018 834 Reductions for tax positions
of prior years (including impacts
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 954 914
due to a lapse in statute) (425) (538) (1,659)
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 681 752
Settlements (94) (231) (660)
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 586 608
Balance at December 31 $5,672 $5,575 $ 5,293
Depreciation 456 474
Other 1,384 1,479 The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
Gross deferred tax assets 12,615 11,828 and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain
Less: valuation allowance 1,187 912 tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related matters and state
Net deferred tax assets $11,428 $10,916 issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits
for tax positions of prior years are primarily attributable to the con-
* Reclassed to conform with 2012 presentation.
clusion of the company’s various U.S., state and non-U.S. income
tax examinations and various non-U.S. matters, as well as impacts
due to lapses in statutes of limitation.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of a non- Note O.
U.S. taxing authority with respect to certain foreign tax losses. The Research, Development
tax benefit of these losses, approximately $1,475 million, had been and Engineering
included in unrecognized tax benefits within 2010 additions for tax
RD&E expense was $6,302 million in 2012, $6,258 million in 2011
positions of prior years. The tax benefit of these losses total $1,386
and $6,026 million in 2010.
million as of December 31, 2012. The 2012 decrease was driven by
The company incurred expense of $6,034 million, $5,990 million
currency and has been included in the 2012 reductions for tax posi-
and $5,720 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively, for scientific
tions of prior years. In April 2011, the company had received
research and the application of scientific advances to the develop-
notification that the appeal was denied. In June 2011, the company
ment of new and improved products and their uses, as well as
filed a lawsuit challenging this decision. The next court hearing is
services and their application. Within these amounts, software-
scheduled for March 2013. No final determination has been reached
related expense was $3,078 million, $3,097 million and $3,028
on this matter.
million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
The liability at December 31, 2012 of $5,672 million can be
Expense for product-related engineering was $268 million,
reduced by $573 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with the
$267 million and $306 million in 2012, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state
income taxes and timing adjustments. The net amount of $5,099
million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s effective
tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2011 and 2010 were
$5,090 million and $4,849 million, respectively.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included
in income tax expense. During the year ended December 31, 2012,
the company recognized $134 million in interest expense and penalties;
in 2011, the company recognized $129 million in interest expense and
penalties, and in 2010, the company recognized a $15 million ben-
efit in interest expense and penalties. The company has $533 million
for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31,
2012, and had $461 million accrued at December 31, 2011.
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits associ-
ated with certain positions may be significantly reduced. The
potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is
primarily associated with the anticipated resolution of the com-
pany’s U.S. income tax audit for 2008 through 2010, as well as
various non-U.S. audits. Specific positions that may be resolved,
and may reduce the amount of unrecognized tax benefits, include
transfer pricing matters, tax incentives and credits as well as vari-
ous other foreign tax matters. The company estimates that the
unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2012 could be reduced
by approximately $1,700 million.
With limited exception, the company is no longer subject to U.S.
federal, state and local or non-U.S. income tax audits by taxing
authorities for years through 2007. The years subsequent to 2007
contain matters that could be subject to differing interpretations of
applicable tax laws and regulations related to the amount and/or
timing of income, deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome
of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes that ade-
quate amounts of tax and interest have been provided for any
adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $44.4 billion
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31,
2012, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these earn-
ings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodically
repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it does not
incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the deferred tax
liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings is not
practicable.

===== PAGE 117 =====
111166 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note P.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic 1,142,508,521 1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 10,868,426 14,241,131 16,189,053
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 2,072,370 2,575,848 2,377,133
Assuming dilution 1,155,449,317 1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $16,604 $15,855 $14,833
Less—net income applicable to contingently issuable shares (1) 0 0
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $16,603 $15,855 $14,833
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.37 $ 13.06 $ 11.52
Basic $ 14.53 $ 13.25 $ 11.69
There were no stock options outstanding in 2012, 2011 and 2010 that were considered antidilutive and not included in the diluted earnings
per share calculation.
Note Q.
Rental Expense and
Lease Commitments
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and fixed rental commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related
assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was $1,767 mil- to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions and spe-
lion in 2012, $1,836 million in 2011 and $1,727 million in 2010. Rental cial actions taken through 1994, and in 1999, 2002 and 2005
expense in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent (previously reserved), sublease income commitments and capital
increases is recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. lease commitments. These amounts reflect activities primarily related
Contingent rentals are included in the determination of rental to office space, as well as manufacturing facilities.
expense as accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum
($ in millions)
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Beyond 2017
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,466 $1,268 $1,044 $746 $535 $747
Vacant space $ 21 $ 13 $ 7 $ 3 $ 1 $ 0
Sublease income commitments $ 26 $ 16 $ 11 $ 9 $ 4 $ 1
Capital lease commitments $ 13 $ 12 $ 11 $ 8 $ 10 $ 6

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Note R.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over the employee awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
requisite service period. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the
on page 82 for additional information. number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or
The following table presents total stock-based compensation formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant. All
cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. awards for senior management are approved by the Committee. All
awards for employees other than senior management are approved
($ in millions) by senior management pursuant to a series of delegations that were
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 approved by the Committee, and the grants made pursuant to these
Cost $ 132 $ 120 $ 94 delegations are reviewed periodically with the Committee. Awards
Selling, general and administrative 498 514 488 that are given as part of annual total compensation for senior man-
Research, development agement and other employees are made on specific cycle dates
and engineering 59 62 48 scheduled in advance. With respect to awards given in connection
Other (income) and expense (1) — (1) with promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval
Pre-tax stock-based of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date of
compensation cost 688 697 629 the promotion or the date of hire.
Income tax benefits (240) (246) (240)
Total stock-based Stock Options
compensation cost $ 448 $ 450 $ 389 Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high
awards at December 31, 2012 and 2011 was $1,101 million and $1,169 and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards, which
million, respectively, and is expected to be recognized over a generally vest 25 percent per year, are fully vested four years from
weighted-average period of approximately three years. the date of grant and have a contractual term of 10 years.
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date
cost at December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and
assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options include
Incentive Awards
the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen- future events or the value ultimately realized by employees who
sation and Management Resources Com mittee of the Board of receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indicative
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans prin- of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value made
cipally include stock options, restricted stock units, performance by the company.
share units or any combination thereof. During the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under company did not grant stock options.
the company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 2012.
In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previous plans,
if and when those awards were canceled, could be reissued under
the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million additional
awards were considered authorized to be issued under the com-
pany’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2012. There were 121.2
million unused shares available to be granted under the Plans as
of December 31, 2012.

===== PAGE 119 =====
111188 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
2012 2011 2010
Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $ 90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728 $ 98 73,210,457
Options exercised 86 (9,080,170) 98 (18,144,309) 101 (33,078,316)
Options canceled/expired 75 (192,431) 107 (391,097) 108 (934,413)
Balance at December 31 $ 94 11,389,721 $ 90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728
Exercisable at December 31 $ 94 11,389,721 $ 90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728
The shares under option at December 31, 2012 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted-Average
Weighted- Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$85 and under $ 83 3,222,177 $ 350,989,003 0.9
$86 – $105 97 7,532,868 709,980,689 1.9
$106 and over 106 634,676 54,314,359 1.1
$ 94 11,389,721 $1,115,284,051 1.6
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an Exercises of Employee Stock Options
additional 0.9 million stock-based awards, consisting of stock The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended
options and restricted stock units, outstanding at December 31, December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $1,005 million, $1,269 million
2012, as a result of the company’s assumption of stock-based and $1,072 million, respectively. The total cash received from
awards previously granted by the acquired entities. The weighted- employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for the
average exercise price of these awards was $68 per share. years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was approximately
$785 million, $1,786 million and $3,347 million, respectively. In con-
nection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the
company for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010
were $341 million, $412 million and $351 million, respectively.
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury
shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2012 and 2011 were
approximately 1,080 million and 1,019 million shares, respectively.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, the company currently grants its employees stock awards. These awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock
Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs).
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010.
RSUs
2012 2011 2010
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $129 12,218,601 $110 11,196,446 $102 13,405,654
RSUs granted 184 2,635,772 154 5,196,802 122 3,459,303
RSUs released 117 (4,338,787) 106 (3,508,700) 98 (5,102,951)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 139 (674,125) 122 (665,947) 105 (565,560)
Balance at December 31 $148 9,841,461 $129 12,218,601 $110 11,196,446
PSUs
2012 2011 2010
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $122 3,686,991 $111 3,649,288 $107 3,476,737
PSUs granted at target 185 1,004,003 154 1,055,687 117 1,239,468
Additional shares earned above target* 102 550,399 118 230,524 103 463,913
PSUs released 102 (1,998,746) 118 (1,189,765) 103 (1,486,484)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 131 (70,446) 118 (58,743) 108 (44,346)
Balance at December 31** $151 3,172,201 $122 3,686,991 $111 3,649,288
* Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the company’s
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately
to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a received by the employee depends on the company’s performance
one- to five-year period. For RSUs awarded on or after January 1, against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period.
2008, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair value of each
is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s PSU is determined on the grant date, based on the company’s stock
stock price adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents, and
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at assumes that performance targets will be achieved. Over the per-
December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 is the same as the period over formance period, the number of shares of stock that will be issued
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which is adjusted upward or downward based upon the probability of
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during achievement of performance targets. The ultimate number of shares
the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $486 mil- issued and the related compensation cost recognized as expense
lion, $803 million and $421 million, respectively. The total fair value will be based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to
of RSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, the specified targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during
2012, 2011 and 2010 was $509 million, $373 million and $503 mil- the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $186
lion, respectively. As of December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, there million, $165 million and $145 million, respectively. Total fair value of
was $938 million, $1,021 million and $865 million, respectively, of PSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31,
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The 2012, 2011 and 2010 was $203 million, $141 million and $153 million,
company received no cash from employees as a result of employee respectively.
vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs,
2012, 2011 and 2010. In the second quarter of 2011, the company the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
granted equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010 were $454 million, $283 million
to about 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were and $293 million, respectively.
made under the Plans and vest in December 2015.

===== PAGE 121 =====
112200 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first method
Pur chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits based
purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 5 per- on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-specific
cent discount off the average market price on the day of purchase factors. The second method is a cash balance formula that calcu-
through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensa- lates benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual salary, as
tion. Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by well as an interest crediting rate.
the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for offering peri- Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
ods during which shares may be purchased and continues as long December 31, 2007 for all participants.
as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP partici-
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
pants are restricted from purchasing more than $25,000 of common
Executive Reten tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
Employees purchased 1.6 million, 1.9 million and 2.4 million
based on average earnings, years of service and age at termination of
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 2012,
employment.
2011 and 2010, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31,
the company on its common stock also include cash dividends on
2007 for all participants.
the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are
paid on full and fractional shares and can be reinvested in the ESPP. Defined Contribution Plans
The company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered out- IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
standing and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to
for purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share. participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined-
Approximately 3.8 million, 5.4 million and 7.2 million shares were contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code.
available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2012, 2011 Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible
and 2010, respectively. employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions up
to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to January
Note S. 1, 2005, and up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for those hired
Retirement-Related Benefits on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employees receive
automatic contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent
Description of Plans
of eligible compensation based on their eligibility to participate in
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees receive automatic
plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a supplemental contributions and matching contributions after the completion of
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension one year of service. Further, through June 30, 2009, IBM contributed
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical transition credits to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus Plan accounts.
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents. The amount of the transition credits was based on a participant’s
age and service as of June 30, 1999.
U.S. Plans The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and
Defined Benefit Pension Plans participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All
IBM Personal Pension Plan contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections.
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen- There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in company
sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts out of
IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) company stock to another investment choice, other than excessive
plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January trading rules applicable to such investments. Effective January 1,
1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal 2013, matching and automatic contributions are made once annually
Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred at the end of the year. In order to receive such contributions each year,
to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as a participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year.
the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions However, if a participant separates from service prior to December
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of 15, and has completed certain service and/or age requirements,
participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, then the participant will be eligible to receive such matching and
provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans. automatic contributions following separation from service.

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Execu tive U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, defined The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to
401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution plan. eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance
Employees who are eligible to participate in the 401(k) Plus Plan and for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company estab-
whose eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS com- lished a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who were more
pensation limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees who were within
Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide ben- five years of retirement eligibility are covered under the company’s
efits that would be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan prior retiree health benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or
if the compensation limits did not apply. the prior retiree health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping cost to the company for retiree health benefits.
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are not
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts eligible for company subsidized nonpension postretirement benefits.
in investments which mirror the primary investment options available
under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) are also Non-U.S. Plans
eligible to receive company match and automatic contributions on Most subsidiaries and branches outside the United States sponsor
eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on com- defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover sub-
pensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code pay limit stantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds under
once they have completed one year of service. Through June 30, various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities under
2009, eligible participants also received transition credits. Amounts group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Benefits
deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company contributions under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on years
are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during a
Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contri- fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual
butions are made once annually at the end of the year. In order to credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S.
receive such contributions each year, a participant must be defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments
employed on December 15 of the plan year. However, if a participant within the various countries.
separates from service prior to December 15, and has completed In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries spon-
certain service and/or age requirements, then the participant will sor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide medical
be eligible to receive such matching and automatic contributions and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible depen-
following separation from service. dents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. retirees.
However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local government-
sponsored and -administered programs.

===== PAGE 123 =====
112222 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Defined benefit pension plans $(526) $(774) $(949) $1,040 $ 734 $ 541 $ 515 $ (40) $ (408)
Retention Plan 18 15 14 — — — 18 15 14
Total defined benefit
pension plans (income)/cost $(507) $(759) $(935) $1,040 $ 734 $ 541 $ 533 $ (25) $ (394)
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
and Non-U.S. plans $ 857 $ 875 $ 882 $ 621 $ 608 $ 527 $1,478 $1,483 $1,409
Excess 401(k) 29 30 20 — — — 29 30 20
Total defined contribution plans cost $ 885 $ 905 $ 902 $ 621 $ 608 $ 527 $1,506 $1,513 $1,430
Nonpension postretirement
benefit plans cost $ 268 $ 269 $ 281 $ 82 $ 76 $ 66 $ 350 $ 345 $ 347
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $ 646 $ 415 $ 248 $1,743 $1,418 $1,134 $2,389 $1,832 $1,382
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011
U.S. Plans
Underfunded plans
Qualified PPP $ 54,907 $52,318 $53,630 $51,218 $ (1,277) $ (1,100)
Excess PPP 1,576 1,462 — — (1,576) (1,462)
Retention Plan 327 305 — — (327) (305)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 5,282 5,273 433 38 (4,849) (5,235)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 62,092 $59,358 $54,063 $51,256 $ (8,029) $ (8,102)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $ 6,944 $13,169 $ 7,889 $16,011 $ 945 $ 2,843
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 12 7 12 7 0 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $ 6,956 $13,175 $ 7,901 $16,018 $ 945 $ 2,843
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $ 35,956 $24,659 $30,169 $19,351 $ (5,788) $ (5,308)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 6,418 5,033 — — (6,418) (5,033)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 1,007 894 107 105 (900) (789)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $ 43,381 $30,587 $30,276 $19,456 $(13,106) $(11,131)
Total overfunded plans $ 6,956 $13,175 $ 7,901 $16,018 $ 945 $ 2,843
Total underfunded plans $105,473 $89,944 $84,338 $70,712 $(21,134) $(19,232)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2012, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 94 percent funded compared to the benefit
obligations, with the U.S. qualified PPP 98 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined benefit pension plans
were 86 percent funded.

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 125 represent financial information plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding defined postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S.
contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. Nonp ension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the Reten- The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/
tion Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the Consoli-
postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans consists of all dated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 443 $ 505 $ 508
Interest cost 2,196 2,456 2,601 1,779 1,843 1,841
Expected return on plan assets (4,043) (4,043) (4,017) (2,303) (2,521) (2,461)
Amortization of transition assets — — — (0) (0) (0)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 10 10 10 (154) (162) (174)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,331 818 471 1,027 957 712
Curtailments and settlements — — 1 0 1 27
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — 247 111 89
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (507) $ (759) $ (935) $ 1,040 $ 734 $ 541
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Service cost $ 36 $ 33 $ 33 $14 $ 11 $ 9
Interest cost 200 236 262 64 67 59
Expected return on plan assets — — — (9) (10) (9)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) — — (14) (4) (4) (5)
Recognized actuarial losses 32 — — 17 13 12
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 — —
Total net periodic cost $268 $269 $281 $82 $ 76 $66
* The 2012 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $162 million related to the IBM UK pension litigation. See page 125 for additional information.

===== PAGE 125 =====
112244 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $54,085 $51,293 $ 42,861 $42,584 $ 5,273 $ 5,123 $ 901 $ 872
Service cost — — 443 505 36 33 14 11
Interest cost 2,196 2,456 1,779 1,843 200 236 64 67
Plan participants’ contributions — — 47 53 200 228 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net 0 (0) 26 (48) 2 (0) 0 (1)
Actuarial losses/(gains) 3,810 3,551 6,365 812 104 244 76 47
Benefits paid from trust (3,184) (3,121) (1,987) (1,995) (551) (623) (6) (7)
Direct benefit payments (97) (95) (454) (462) (35) (32) (27) (27)
Foreign exchange impact — — 77 (423) — — (24) (60)
Medicare/Government subsidies — — — — 53 65 — —
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 161 (8) — — 21 —
Benefit obligation at December 31 $56,810 $54,085 $ 49,319 $42,861 $ 5,282 $ 5,273 $1,019 $ 901
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $51,218 $50,259 $ 35,362 $35,722 $ 38 $ 35 $ 112 $ 120
Actual return on plan assets 5,596 4,080 3,742 1,052 0 0 10 13
Employer contributions — — 557 728 746 397 1 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 40 (27) — — — (0)
Plan participants’ contributions — — 47 53 200 228 — —
Benefits paid from trust (3,184) (3,121) (1,987) (1,995) (551) (623) (6) (7)
Foreign exchange impact — — 305 (537) — — (8) (15)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — (8) 367* — — 10 —
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 $53,630 $51,218 $ 38,058 $35,362 $ 433 $ 38 $ 119 $ 112
Funded status at December 31 $ (3,180) $ (2,866) $(11,261) $ (7,499) $(4,849) $(5,235) $ (900) $(789)
Accumulated benefit obligation** $56,810 $54,085 $ 48,369 $42,063 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to a 2011 government ruling allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. Beginning June
2011, the assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three year period, with approximately $200 million returned during 2012. The remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31,
2012 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011
Prepaid pension assets $ 0 $ 0 $ 944 $ 2,843 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits (102) (96) (356) (304) (239) (437) (20) (22)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefit obligations (3,078) (2,770) (11,849) (10,038) (4,610) (4,798) (880) (768)
Funded status—net $(3,180) $(2,866) $(11,261) $ (7,499) $(4,849) $(5,235) $(900) $(789)

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and the
changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-related
benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011 2012 2011
Net loss at January 1 $18,561 $15,865 $18,309 $17,580 $734 $492 $211 $180
Current period loss/(gain) 2,258 3,514 4,905 1,696 104 241 75 45
Curtailments and settlements — — 2 (11) — — — —
Amortization of net loss included
in net periodic (income)/cost (1,331) (818) (1,027) (957) (32) — (17) (13)
Net loss at December 31 $19,488 $18,561 $22,188 $18,309 $806 $734 $269 $211
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 139 $ 149 $ (768) $ (958) $ — $ — $ (10) $ (14)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — — 28 — — (0) (0)
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 154 162 — — 4 4
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 130 $ 139 $ (614) $ (768) $ — $ — $ (6) $ (10)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ (0) $ (0) $ — $ — $ 0 $ 1
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — (0) (0)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ (0) $ (0) $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $19,618 $18,701 $21,574 $17,541 $806 $734 $263 $202
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 107 to 110 for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic
(income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2013.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,804 $1,693 $33 $26
Prior service costs/(credits) 9 (132) — (4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities 0 (0) — 0
During the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010, the Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
company paid $22 million, $16 million and $22 million, respectively, Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage premiums periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada, Luxembourg and use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years
the UK). of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of
No significant amendments of retirement-related benefit plans which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
occurred during the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011 that assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
had a material effect in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
against IBM United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom
Holdings Limited, both wholly-owned subsidiaries of the company,
in litigation involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a
result of the ruling, the company recorded an additional pre-tax
retirement-related obligation of $162 million in the third quarter of
2012 in selling, general and administrative expense in the Consoli-
dated Statement of Earnings. See note M, “Contingencies and
Commitments,” on pages 111 and 112 for additional information.

===== PAGE 127 =====
112266 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for retirement-
related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 4.20% 5.00% 5.60% 4.28% 4.33% 4.84%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets 8.00% 8.00% 8.00% 6.26% 6.41% 6.56%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.43% 2.37% 2.92%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.60% 4.20% 5.00% 3.23% 4.28% 4.33%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.51% 2.43% 2.37%
* Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2012 2011 2010 2012 2011 2010
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.90% 4.80% 5.40% 7.37% 7.75% 7.92%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 9.01% 9.07% 9.16%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.30% 3.90% 4.80% 6.43% 7.37% 7.75%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/cost
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. and and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions
certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate resulted in a decrease in 2012 net periodic income of $258 million,
bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from the a decrease in 2011 net periodic income of $171 million and a
company’s expected benefit obligation payments are then matched decrease in 2010 net periodic income of $40 million. The changes
to the yield curve to derive the discount rates. In other non-U.S. in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase in the PBO
countries, where the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are of $3,414 million and $4,216 million at December 31, 2012 and 2011,
not generally as well developed, a portfolio of long-term govern- respectively.
ment bonds is used as a base, to which a credit spread is added For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes in
to simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdic- the discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net peri-
tion of each plan, as the benchmark for developing the respective odic cost for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010
discount rates. and resulted in an increase in the APBO of $252 million and $359
million at December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets Interest Crediting Rate
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets. interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long- cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting
term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the benefits
strategies as described on page 128. These rates of return are devel- that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based
oped by the company and are tested for reasonableness against on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury
historical returns. The use of expected long-term returns on plan Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
assets may result in recognized pension income that is greater or For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.1 percent
less than the actual returns of those plan assets in any given year. for the year ended December 31, 2012, from 1.3 percent for the year
Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed ended December 31, 2011, resulted in an increase in 2012 net periodic
to approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in income of $10 million. The change in the interest crediting rate to
a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely matches 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2011, from 1.4 percent
the pattern of the services provided by the employees. Differences for the year ended December 31, 2010, resulted in an increase in
between actual and expected returns are recognized as a compo- 2011 net periodic income of $4 million. The change in the interest
nent of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized as a component crediting rate to 1.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2010,
of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy from 2.8 percent for the year ended December 31, 2009, resulted in
of the plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts an increase in 2010 net periodic income of $62 million.
exceed certain thresholds provided by accounting standards. The
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair
value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the com-
expected return on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost. pany reviews external data and its own historical trends for
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. How-
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent ever, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect on
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2012, 2011 plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan which
and 2010 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The company
periodic (income)/cost. assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2013 will be 7.0 per-
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company cent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend rate will
maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely pay- decrease to 5 percent over the next four years. A one percentage
ments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2012, point increase or decrease in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate
2011 and 2010, the expected long-term return on plan assets and would not have had a material effect on 2012, 2011 and 2010 net
the actual return on those assets were not material. periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of December 31, 2012
and 2011.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
Healthcare Legislation
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com pany,
based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate of The expected effects of the U.S. healthcare reform legislation
compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit enacted in March 2010 were incorporated into the remeasurements
pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all of the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at December 31,
participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on life expec- 2012 and 2011. The impact was insignificant as a result of the terms
tancy and death rates for different types of participants. Mortality of the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants.
rates are periodically updated based on actual experience.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and mea-
sured at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting
Policies,” on page 84. Because of the inherent uncertainty of
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market
transactions.

===== PAGE 129 =====
112288 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Investment Policies and Strategies Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed
future obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations income management, including duration, interest rate management
will be settled depends on future events, including the retirement and credit exposure, cash equitization and to manage currency and
dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obliga- commodity strategies.
tions are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
current economic environment and other pertinent factors described described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-average
on pages 125 to 127. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strat- target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 35 percent equity securi-
egy balances the requirement to generate returns, using potentially ties, 54 percent fixed income securities, 2 percent real estate and
higher yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to 9 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation
control risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed decisions made by the company’s management. The table on page
income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in 129 details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other
equity values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher
to become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on percentage allocation to fixed income is required to manage sol-
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concen- vency and funding risks. In others, the responsibility for managing
tration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio the investments typically lies with a board that may include up to 50
among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into percent of members elected by employees and retirees. This can
account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, result in slight differences compared with the strategies previously
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. As a result, described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid
the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 43 percent equity assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan
securities, 47 percent fixed income securities, 5 percent real estate and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management,
and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the alloca- credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
tion decisions made by the company’s management and is similar The company’s defined benefit pension plans include invest-
to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 129 details the ments in certain European government securities. At December
actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types of invest- 31, 2012, the U.S. plan held $847 million and the non-U.S. plans
ments in the Qualified PPP portfolio. held approximately $11 billion in European sovereign debt invest-
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and ments, primarily in AAA-rated securities. Investments in government
investment professionals who are employees of the company. They are debt securities in Italy, Spain and Ireland were de minimis in the U.S.
bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s man- plan and represented less than 1 percent of total non-U.S. plan
agement and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among assets. The plans hold no direct investments in government debt
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing securities of Greece and Portugal.
security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies. underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $6,946 million a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit
of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private market assets payments.
consisting of private equities and private real estate investments,
which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As of December
31, 2012, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,509 million in commit-
ments for future investments in private markets to be made over a
number of years. These commitments are expected to be funded
from plan assets.

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2012.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $15,161 $ 1 $ — $15,163 $6,395 $ — $ — $ 6,395
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 96 2,556 — 2,652 138 7,641 — 7,779
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 12,945 6 12,951 — 8,978 76 9,054
Corporate bonds (e) — 8,499 11 8,510 — 1,878 5 1,883
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 922 45 968 — 9 — 9
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 155 804 267 1,226 78 8,018 — 8,096
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,019 — 1,019
Cash and short-term investments (g) 244 3,198 — 3,442 134 373 — 507
Hedge funds — 1,402 756 2,159 — 646 — 646
Private equity (h) — — 4,085 4,085 — — 353 353
Private real estate (h) — — 2,861 2,861 — — 609 609
Derivatives (i) (6) 62 — 56 0 856 — 857
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 12 907 — 919
Subtotal 15,650 30,390 8,032 54,072 6,757 30,325 1,042 38,124
Other (k) — — — (442) — — — (66)
Fair value of plan assets $15,650 $30,390 $8,032 $53,630 $6,757 $30,325 $1,042 $38,058
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $113 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $40 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $6 million, representing 0.01 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $2 million
representing 0.004 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $433 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $119 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair
value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 131 =====
113300 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2011.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $13,618 $ 11 $ — $13,629 $6,426 $ — $ — $ 6,427
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 32 1,877 — 1,909 240 7,751 — 7,991
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 15,105 29 15,134 — 8,479 96 8,575
Corporate bonds (e) — 7,387 12 7,398 — 1,409 39 1,447
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 838 45 883 — 36 — 36
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 262 715 246 1,223 72 7,136 — 7,209
Insurance contracts — — — — — 988 — 988
Cash and short-term investments (g) 286 2,390 — 2,675 145 361 — 506
Hedge funds — 1,140 713 1,853 — 417 — 417
Private equity (h) 0 — 4,098 4,098 — — 262 262
Private real estate (h) — — 2,790 2,790 — — 580 580
Derivatives (i) 10 (15) — (6) (2) 866 — 864
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 9 114 — 123
Subtotal 14,207 29,446 7,932 51,586 6,890 27,557 977 35,425
Other (k) — — — (368) — — — (62)
Fair value of plan assets $14,207 $29,446 $7,932 $51,218 $6,890 $27,557 $977 $35,362
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $132 million, representing 0.3 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $35 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $13 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $38 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy.
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $112 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair
value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2012
and 2011 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2012 $ 29 $12 $45 $246 $713 $4,098 $2,790 $7,932
Return on assets held at end of year 0 0 1 21 56 855 202 1,135
Return on assets sold during the year 0 2 1 — 14 (334) (41) (359)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (1) (2) (9) — (26) (533) (90) (660)
Transfers, net (22) (1) 8 — — — — (15)
Balance at December 31, 2012 $ 6 $11 $45 $267 $756 $4,085 $2,861 $8,032
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2011 $ — $ — $ 56 $221 $624 $4,251 $2,634 $7,786
Return on assets held at end of year (0) 0 (1) 25 (35) 348 131 468
Return on assets sold during the year 0 (0) (0) — 5 (30) 39 14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 12 5 (16) — (7) (471) (14) (492)
Transfers, net 17 7 6 — 127* — — 157
Balance at December 31, 2011 $29 $12 $ 45 $246 $713 $4,098 $2,790 $7,932
* Due to an increase in the redemption term during 2011, the asset was transferred from Level 2 to Level 3.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2012
and 2011 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2012 $ 96 $ 39 $262 $580 $ 977
Return on assets held at end of year 3 (1) 9 (5) 6
Return on assets sold during the year 3 1 9 0 14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (26) (29) 62 14 21
Transfers, net (2) (5) (0) (3) (10)
Foreign exchange impact 1 (0) 11 23 34
Balance at December 31, 2012 $ 76 $ 5 $353 $609 $1,042
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2011 $ — $11 $176 $533 $720
Return on assets held at end of year 3 2 30 11 46
Return on assets sold during the year (0) (0) (2) (3) (5)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 100 28 65 44 237
Transfers, net — — (0) 0 0
Foreign exchange impact (7) (2) (7) (6) (22)
Balance at December 31, 2011 $ 96 $39 $262 $580 $977

===== PAGE 133 =====
113322 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Valuation Techniques Expected Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to Defined Benefit Pension Plans
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valua- It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions
tion techniques during 2012 and 2011. sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New The company contributed $557 million and $728 million in cash
York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are typically to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $60 million and
valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the administrator $70 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during the
of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The cash
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual cost
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding. These included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consoli-
assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 depending on dated Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for
availability of quoted market prices. participants in multi-employer plans other than its own employees.
The fair value of fixed income securities is typically estimated As a result, the company’s participation in multi-employer plans has
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char- no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as In 2013, the company is not legally required to make any con-
Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded. depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. during the year.
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S.
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and raises
assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related benefit
periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine plans. The additional funding requirements by the Act apply to plan
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by
investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation methodology is the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which
applied consistently from period to period. revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price plans may smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months.
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are At December 31, 2012, no mandatory contribution was required
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. for 2013.
Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing In 2013, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for exam- defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
ple, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign $700 million, which will be mainly contributed to defined benefit
exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 pension plans in Japan, the UK and Switzerland. This amount
depending on availability of quoted market prices. represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial
market performance in 2013 could increase the legally mandated
minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly or
daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also
elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount based
on market conditions or other factors.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $693 million and $362 million to the non-
pension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended
December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These contribution
amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on page
133. The 2012 amount includes a $400 million voluntary cash con-
tribution to the U.S. non-pension postretirement benefit plan. This
advanced funding will be utilized to fund post-2012 benefit payments
for Medicare-eligible prescription drugs.

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments have been
estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2012 and include benefits attributable to
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2013 $ 3,303 $104 $ 1,993 $ 378 $ 5,778
2014 3,342 106 2,040 373 5,861
2015 3,407 108 2,011 382 5,908
2016 3,438 112 2,049 389 5,988
2017 3,418 113 2,073 400 6,004
2018–2022 17,436 597 11,071 2,252 31,356
The 2013 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants, as well
as the expected receipt of the company’s share of the Medicare subsidy described below. These payments have been estimated based on
the same assumptions used to measure the plan’s APBO at December 31, 2012.
($ in millions)
Less: IBM
Share of Total
Expected Net Expected Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan Medicare U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Subsidy Payments Payments Payments Payments
2013 $ 462 $(24) $ 438 $ 8 $ 34 $ 480
2014 447 (26) 421 8 38 467
2015 446 (26) 420 8 41 470
2016 437 (25) 412 9 44 465
2017 429 (24) 405 10 48 463
2018–2022 1,979 (21) 1,958 55 305 2,318
The 2013 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement the remaining subsidy of $151 million to the plan in order to reduce
benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets contributions required by the participants. The company received
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current total subsidies of $53 million and $36 million for prescription drug-
liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. related coverage during the years ended December 31, 2012 and
2011, respectively, which were utilized to reduce the company contri-
Medicare Prescription Drug Act butions to the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan.
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement The company has included the impact of its portion of the sub-
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company is expected to con- sidy in the determination of net periodic cost and APBO for the U.S.
tinue to receive a federal subsidy of approximately $298 million to nonpension postretirement benefit plan at and for the years ended
subsidize the prescription drug coverage provided by the U.S. non- December 31, 2012, 2011 and 2010. The impact of the subsidy
pension postretirement benefit plan, which is expected to extend resulted in a reduction in APBO of $134 million and $93 million at
until 2018. Approxi mately $147 million of the subsidy will be used by December 31, 2012 and 2011, respectively. The impact of the subsidy
the company to reduce its obligation and cost related to the U.S. resulted in a reduction in 2012, 2011 and 2010 net periodic cost of
nonpension postretirement benefit plan. The company will contribute $35 million, $37 million and $19 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 135 =====
113344 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of plan
assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on page 124.
($ in millions)
2012 2011
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $99,184 $83,799 $83,777 $70,570
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 98,263 83,677 83,184 70,512
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 6,944 7,889 13,169 16,011
Note T.
Segment Information
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-
Global Tech nol ogy Services, Global Business Services, Software, length value of providing the services. The Global Services
Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The segments segments enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to
represent components of the company for which separate financial market rates with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of
information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief equipment used in services engagements. All internal transaction
executive officer in determining how to allocate resources and evalu- prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
ate performance. The segments are determined based on several The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technology, to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a
delivery channels and similar economic characteristics. result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the
Information about each segment’s business and the products segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting,
the “Description of Business” section on pages 23 and 24, and in Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources, and Billing and
“Segment Details,” on pages 26 through 31 in the Management Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
Discussion. on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used by management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based
Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are pri- on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared
marily sourced internally from Systems and Technology and expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the
Software. For providing IT services that are used internally, Global segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination of
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover cost, internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and measurement system
utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior management,
both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2012
External revenue $40,236 $18,566 $25,448 $ 17,667 $2,013 $103,930
Internal revenue 1,166 719 3,274 676 2,060 7,896
Total revenue $41,402 $19,286 $28,722 $18,343 $4,073 $111,826
Pre-tax income $ 6,961 $ 2,983 $10,810 $ 1,227 $2,034 $ 24,015
Revenue year-to-year change (1.7)% (4.0)% 1.8% (7.5)% (2.9)% (2.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 10.8% (0.8)% 8.4% (24.9)% 1.1% 4.8%
Pre-tax income margin 16.8% 15.5% 37.6% 6.7% 49.9% 21.5%
2011
External revenue $40,879 $19,284 $24,944 $ 18,985 $2,102 $106,194
Internal revenue 1,242 797 3,276 838 2,092 8,246
Total revenue $42,121 $20,081 $28,219 $19,823 $4,195 $114,440
Pre-tax income $ 6,284 $ 3,006 $ 9,970 $ 1,633 $2,011 $ 22,904
Revenue year-to-year change 6.6% 5.6% 10.9% 5.6% 2.8% 7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 14.3% 18.1% 5.3% 12.2% 2.8% 9.5%
Pre-tax income margin 14.9% 15.0% 35.3% 8.2% 47.9% 20.0%
2010
External revenue $38,201 $18,223 $22,485 $ 17,973 $2,238 $ 99,120
Internal revenue 1,313 798 2,950 804 1,842 7,707
Total revenue $39,514 $19,021 $25,436 $18,777 $4,080 $106,827
Pre-tax income $ 5,499 $ 2,546 $ 9,466 $ 1,456 $1,956 $ 20,923
Revenue year-to-year change 2.0% 2.6% 5.7% 9.8% 0.1% 4.2%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 0.3% 1.8% 13.8% 12.1% 13.5% 8.3%
Pre-tax income margin 13.9% 13.4% 37.2% 7.8% 48.0% 19.6%

===== PAGE 137 =====
113366 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
($ in millions) Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property and
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 equipment including the assets associated with the outsourcing
Revenue business, accounts receivable, goodwill, acquired intangible assets,
Total reportable segments $111,826 $114,440 $106,827 deferred services arrangement transition costs and maintenance parts
Other revenue and adjustments 577 722 750 inventory. Global Business Services assets are primarily goodwill
and accounts receivable. Software assets are mainly goodwill,
Elimination of internal transactions (7,896) (8,246) (7,707)
acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Systems and
Total IBM consolidated revenue $104,507 $106,916 $ 99,870
Technology assets are primarily plant, property and equipment,
goodwill, manufacturing inventory and accounts receivable. Global
($ in millions) Financing assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 under operating leases.
Pre-tax income To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
Total reportable segments $24,015 $22,904 $20,923 ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment
Amortization of acquired assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets
intangible assets (703) (629) (512) is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
Acquisition-related charges (36) (46) (46) ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system
Non-operating retirement- and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 137. In those cases,
related (costs)/income (538) 72 414 there will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax
Elimination of internal transactions (1,197) (1,243) (957) income and segment assets.
Unallocated corporate amounts* 361 (56) (98) Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
Total IBM consolidated are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be con-
pre-tax income $21,902 $21,003 $19,723 sistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ pre-tax
* The 2012 amount includes the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions divestiture. income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income reflect
The 2011 amount includes gains related to the sale of Lenovo common stock. occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are not specifi-
cally identified by the management reporting system. Capital
Immaterial Items expenditures that are reported by each segment also are consistent
with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
Investment in Equity Alliances
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense associated
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and
with the Global Financing business, including the intercompany
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments
financing activities discussed on page 24, as well as the income
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial
from investment in cash and marketable securities. The explanation
results of the segments.
of the difference between cost of financing and interest expense for
segment presentation versus presentation in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings is included on page 66 of the Management
Discussion.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2012
Assets $15,884 $8,022 $26,291 $8,232 $38,882 $97,310
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,597 75 1,157 786 853 4,470
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,760 42 618 1,106 708 4,233
Interest income — — — — 1,942 1,942
Interest expense — — — — 410 410
2011
Assets $15,475 $8,078 $23,926 $7,649 $36,427 $91,557
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,713 83 1,062 737 1,145 4,739
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,838 56 469 1,032 930 4,325
Interest income — — — — 2,139 2,139
Interest expense — — — — 538 538
2010
Assets $15,560 $8,007 $22,625 $7,287 $35,813 $89,292
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,632 75 992 784 1,417 4,900
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,511 52 463 1,163 1,246 4,434
Interest income — — — — 2,116 2,116
Interest expense — — — — 548 548
* Segment pre-tax income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.

===== PAGE 139 =====
113388 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue includes
circuit and component design services and technology and manu-
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2012 2011 2010 facturing consulting services. See “Description of the Business,”
beginning on page 21 for additional information.
Assets
Total reportable segments $ 97,310 $ 91,557 $ 89,292
($ in millions)
Elimination of internal transactions (4,943) (5,407) (5,515)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
Unallocated amounts
Global Technology Services
Cash and marketable securities 9,779 10,575 10,113 Services $31,161 $31,746 $29,367
Notes and accounts receivable 3,769 3,526 3,762 Maintenance 7,343 7,515 7,250
Deferred tax assets 5,194 4,865 4,494 Systems 1,574 1,478 1,409
Plant, other property
Software 159 140 175
and equipment 2,555 2,918 3,067
Global Business Services
Pension assets 945 2,837 3,060
Services $18,216 $18,956 $17,858
Other 4,604 5,562 5,178
Software 208 211 236
Total IBM consolidated assets $119,213 $116,433 $113,452
Systems 142 118 129
Software
Major Clients Software $23,144 $22,921 $20,882
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s Services 2,304 2,022 1,603
total revenue in 2012, 2011 or 2010. Systems and Technology
Servers $11,980 $12,362 $11,619
Geographic Information Storage 3,411 3,619 3,420
The following provides information for those countries that are Microelectronics OEM 1,572 1,975 1,938
10 percent or more of the specific category. Retail Store Solutions 357 753 674
Microelectronics Services 346 277 321
Revenue*
Global Financing
($ in millions) Financing $ 1,471 $ 1,612 $ 1,580
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010
Used equipment sales 542 490 659
United States $ 36,270 $ 37,041 $35,581
Japan 10,697 10,968 10,701
Note U.
Other countries 57,540 58,906 53,589
Subsequent Events
Total IBM consolidated revenue $104,507 $106,916 $99,870
On January 2, 2013, the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
was signed into law extending several business tax provisions
through 2013. Certain of these provisions were reinstated retroac-
Plant and Other Property-Net
tively to January 1, 2012. Accounting guidance requires that the
($ in millions) effects of new legislation be recognized upon enactment. Accord-
At December 31: 2012 2011 2010 ingly, the 2012 retroactive impact of the legislation, which is a tax
United States $ 6,555 $ 6,271 $ 6,134 benefit of approximately $135 million, will be included in the com-
Other countries 6,299 6,186 6,298 pany’s first-quarter 2013 tax provision.
Total $12,854 $12,457 $12,432 On January 29, 2013, the company announced that the Board
of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.85 per common
share. The dividend is payable March 9, 2013 to shareholders of
Revenue by Classes of
record on February 8, 2013.
Similar Products or Services
On February 5, 2013, the company issued $1 billion of 5-year
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of
fixed-rate bonds with a 1.25 percent coupon, and $1 billion of 2-year
products or services within the company’s reportable segments.
floating-rate bonds priced at three month London Interbank Offered
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services,
Rate (LIBOR) minus two basis points.
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software,
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support are
reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, educa-
tion, training and other product-related services are reported as
Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics original
equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from the sale

===== PAGE 140 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008
Revenue $104,507 $106,916 $ 99,870 $ 95,758 $103,630
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855 $ 14,833 $ 13,425 $ 12,334
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 17,627 $ 16,318 $ 15,023 $ 13,452 $ 12,293
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.37 $ 13.06 $ 11.52 $ 10.01 $ 8.89
Basic $ 14.53 $ 13.25 $ 11.69 $ 10.12 $ 9.02
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 15.25 $ 13.44 $ 11.67 $ 10.03 $ 8.86
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 3,773 $ 3,473 $ 3,177 $ 2,860 $ 2,585
Per share of common stock 3.30 2.90 2.50 2.15 1.90
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 4,082 $ 4,108 $ 4,185 $ 3,447 $ 4,171
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 81.6% 71.2% 66.8% 80.4% 48.7%
At December 31: 2012 2011 2010 2009 2008
Total assets $119,213 $116,433 $113,452 $109,022 $109,524
Net investment in property, plant and equipment 13,996 13,883 14,096 14,165 14,305
Working capital 5,807 8,805 7,554 12,933 6,568
Total debt 33,269 31,320 28,624 26,099 33,926
Total equity 18,984 20,236 23,172 22,755 13,584
* R efer to page 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the years 2008 through 2010.
Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2012 and 2011.

===== PAGE 141 =====
114400 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2012 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $24,673 $25,783 $24,747 $29,304 $104,507
Gross profit $11,118 $12,281 $11,732 $15,167 $ 50,298
Net income $ 3,066 $ 3,881 $ 3,824 $ 5,833 $ 16,604
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 3,265 $ 4,077 $ 4,155 $ 6,129 $ 17,627
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 2.61 $ 3.34 $ 3.33 $ 5.13 $ 14.37**
Basic $ 2.65 $ 3.38 $ 3.36 $ 5.19 $ 14.53**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.78 $ 3.51 $ 3.62 $ 5.39 $ 15.25**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.75 $ 0.85 $ 0.85 $ 0.85 $ 3.30
Stock prices+
High $209.12 $210.69 $208.32 $211.79
Low 177.34 187.00 181.85 184.78
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2011 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $24,607 $26,666 $26,157 $29,486 $106,916
Gross profit $10,858 $12,385 $12,173 $14,722 $ 50,138
Net income $ 2,863 $ 3,664 $ 3,839 $ 5,490 $ 15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,990 $ 3,777 $ 3,954 $ 5,597 $ 16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 2.31 $ 3.00 $ 3.19 $ 4.62 $ 13.06**
Basic $ 2.34 $ 3.04 $ 3.23 $ 4.68 $ 13.25**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.41 $ 3.09 $ 3.28 $ 4.71 $ 13.44**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.65 $ 0.75 $ 0.75 $ 0.75 $ 2.90
Stock prices+
High $166.05 $172.87 $185.21 $194.56
Low 147.05 162.33 157.54 173.29
* Refer to page 61 of the company’s first-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on April 24, 2012, pages 75 and 76 of the company’s second-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on July 31, 2012,
pages 75 and 76 of the company’s third-quarter 2012 Form 10-Q filed on October 30, 2012 and page 43 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-
GAAP information for the quarterly periods of 2012 and 2011. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year
2012 and 2011.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
+ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.

===== PAGE 142 =====
Performance Graph 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Comparison of Five-Year Cumulative Total Return for IBM,
S&P 500 Stock Index and S&P Information Technology Index
The adjacent graph compares the five-year cumulative total returns 200
for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative return of
certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact that IBM is
a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the SEC’s rules
require the use of that index. Under those rules, the second index 170
used for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-busi-
ness index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index.
IBM is also included in this index.
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial 140
year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons
assume that all dividends are reinvested.
110
80
50
07 08 09 10 11 12
(U.S. Dollar) 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $79.24 $125.67 $143.62 $183.01 $193.87
S & P 500 Index 100.00 63.00 79.67 91.67 93.61 108.59
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 56.86 91.96 101.32 103.77 119.15

===== PAGE 143 =====
114422 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Board of Directors
Alain J.P. Belda Shirley Ann Jackson Virginia M. Rometty
Managing Director President Chairman, President and
Warburg Pincus LLC Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Chief Executive Officer
IBM
William R. Brody Andrew N. Liveris
President Chairman, President and Joan E. Spero
Salk Institute for Biological Studies Chief Executive Officer Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
The Dow Chemical Company Columbia University School of
Kenneth I. Chenault International and Public Affairs
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer W. James McNerney, Jr.
American Express Company Chairman, President and Sidney Taurel
Chief Executive Officer Senior Advisor
Michael L. Eskew The Boeing Company Capital Royalty L.P.
Retired Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer James W. Owens Lorenzo H. Zambrano
United Parcel Service, Inc. Retired Chairman and Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer Chief Executive Officer
David N. Farr Caterpillar Inc. CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Emerson Electric Co.
Senior Leadership
Rodney C. Adkins Bruno V. Di Leo Allen Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Systems and Technology Group Sales and Distribution Software Solutions Group
Colleen F. Arnold Jon C. Iwata Virginia M. Rometty
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Chairman, President and
Application Management Services Marketing and Communications Chief Executive Officer
James P. Bramante James J. Kavanaugh Linda S. Sanford
Senior Vice President Vice President and Controller Senior Vice President
Growth Markets Enterprise Transformation
John E. Kelly III
Michelle H. Browdy Senior Vice President and Director Timothy S. Shaughnessy
Vice President, Assistant Research Senior Vice President
General Counsel and Secretary GTS Services Delivery
Robert J. LeBlanc
Erich Clementi Senior Vice President Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President Middleware Software Group Senior Vice President
Global Technology Services Global Business Services
Mark Loughridge
Michael E. Daniels Senior Vice President and Robert C. Weber
Senior Vice President Chief Financial Officer Senior Vice President
Finance and Enterprise Transformation Legal and Regulatory Affairs,
Robert F. Del Bene and General Counsel
Vice President and Treasurer J. Randall MacDonald
Senior Vice President
Human Resources
Steven A. Mills
Senior Vice President
and Group Executive
Software and Systems

===== PAGE 144 =====
Stockholder Information 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services Annual Meeting
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
April 30, 2013, at 10 a.m. in the Von Braun Center, 700 Monroe Street SW,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,
Huntsville, Alabama.
Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico Literature for IBM Stockholders
should call (781) 575-2727 The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,
by e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by
IBM on the Internet
early May, August and November.
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM An audio recording of the 2012 Annual Report will be available for
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address. sight-impaired stockholders in June 2013.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values and
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its innovative
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC. strategies for transforming communities through global citizenship.
The Report Summary is available in printed form and downloadable
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information
at www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate Responsibility Report
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
is online with downloadable sections at www.ibm.com/responsibility.
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material
General Information
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor).
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the online through the Internet at this site.
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States,
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM
stock certificates for safe keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations,
1 New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, 1 New Orchard
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.

===== PAGE 145 =====
144
International Business Machines Corporation
1 New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AIX, Algorithmics, BigFix, Cast Iron, Coremetrics, DemandTec, Emptoris,
i2, IBM, IBM SmartCloud, iCluster, Initiate Systems, Jazz, Lombardi,
Lotus, Netezza, OpenPages, Power, POWER7+, Power Systems,
PureSystems, Rational, Smarter Analytics, Smarter Cities, Smarter
Commerce, Smarter Planet, Sterling Commerce, Storwize, System x,
System z, Tealeaf, Tivoli, TRIRICA, Unica, Vivisimo, Watson, WebSphere,
Worklight, XIV and zEnterprise are trademarks or registered trademarks
of International Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned
subsidiaries. Jeopardy! is a registered trademark of Jeopardy Productions,
Inc. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States,
other countries, or both. Oracle is a registered trademark of Oracle
Corporation. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open Group in
the United States and other countries. Other company, product and
service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-03
yellennoD
RR
:gnitnirP
hcabmU
sneJ
:yhpargotohP
yregruS
ngiseD
ehT
:noitartsullI
.cnI
,srentraP
ASV
:ngiseD

===== PAGE 146 =====
