

===== PAGE 1 =====
What will we
make of
this moment?
2013 IBM Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
What will we make of this moment—as businesses,
as individuals, as societies?
What will we make with a planet generating unprecedented
amounts of data? What will we create from—and with—global
networks of consumers, workers, citizens, students, patients?
How will we make use of powerful business and technology
services available on demand? How will we engage with an
emerging global culture, defined not by age or geography,
but by people determined to change the practices of business
and society?
To capture the potential of this moment, IBM is executing a bold
agenda. It is reshaping your company, and we believe it will
reshape our industry. In this letter I will describe the actions
we have taken and are taking, and the changed company
that is emerging from this transformation. I believe that if you
understand our strategy, you will share our confidence in
IBM’s prospects—for the near term, for this decade and beyond.
Let’s start with the phenomenon of our age—data.

===== PAGE 3 =====
A planet of data
Today, every discussion about changes in technology, business
and society must begin with data. In its exponentially increasing
volume, velocity and variety, data is becoming a new natural
resource. It promises to be for the 21st century what steam power
was for the 18th, electricity for the 19th and hydrocarbons for
the 20th. This is what we mean by enterprises, institutions and
our planet becoming smarter.
“ Traditional computing systems, which
Thanks to a proliferation of devices and the infusion of technology
only do what they are programmed into all things and processes, the world is generating more
than 2.5 billion gigabytes of data every day, and 80 percent of
to do, simply cannot keep up with
it is “unstructured”—everything from images, video and audio
Big Data in constant motion. For that, to social media and a blizzard of impulses from embedded
sensors and distributed devices.
we need a new paradigm.”
This is the driver of IBM’s first strategic imperative: To make
markets by transforming industries and professions with data.
The market for data and analytics is estimated at $187 billion by
2015. To capture this growth potential, we have built the world’s
broadest and deepest capabilities in Big Data and analytics—both
technology and expertise. We have invested more than $24 billion,
including $17 billion of gross spend on more than 30 acquisitions.
We have 15,000 consultants and 400 mathematicians. Two-
thirds of IBM Research’s work is now devoted to data, analytics
and cognitive computing. IBM has earned 4,000 analytics
patents. We have an ecosystem of 6,000 industry partners and
1,000 university partnerships around the world developing new,
analytics-related curricula.
IBM provides the full array of capabilities our clients need to
extract the value of Big Data. They can mine multiple structured
and unstructured data sets across their business. They can

===== PAGE 4 =====
apply a range of analytics—from descriptive to predictive to rose 9 percent—led by Global Business Services and Software.
prescriptive. And importantly, they can capture the time value of This is already a nearly $16 billion business for us, and we have
data. This matters, because the battle for competitive advantage raised our expectations for it.
in this new world can be lost or won in fractions of a second.
An IT industry remade by cloud
Our data and analytics portfolio today is the deepest in the At the same time that industries and professions are being remade
industry. It includes decision management, content analytics, by data, the information technology infrastructure of the world is
planning and forecasting, discovery and exploration, business being transformed by the emergence of cloud computing—that
intelligence, predictive analytics, data and content management, is, the delivery of IT and business processes as digital services.
stream computing, data warehousing, information integration It is estimated that by 2016, more than one-fourth of the world’s
and governance. applications will be available in the cloud, and 85 percent of new
software is now being built for cloud.
This portfolio provides the basis for the next major era in
computing—cognitive systems. Traditional computing systems, This is driving IBM’s second strategic imperative: To remake
which only do what they are programmed to do, simply cannot enterprise IT infrastructure for the era of cloud.
keep up with Big Data in constant motion. For that, we need a new
paradigm. These new systems are not programmed; rather, they As important as cloud is, its economic significance is often
learn, from the vast quantities of information they ingest, from their misunderstood. That lies less in the technology, which is relatively
own experiences, and from their interactions with people. straightforward, than in the new business models cloud will
enable for enterprises and institutions. This is creating a market
IBM launched this era three years ago, when our Watson system that is expected to reach $250 billion by 2015.
defeated the two all-time champions on the quiz show Jeopardy!
Watson has since matured from a research grand challenge IBM today is the leader in enterprise cloud, a position we have
into a multifaceted business platform, enabled globally via the enhanced through investments of $7 billion on 15 acquisitions,
cloud. Earlier this year we launched the IBM Watson Group. most notably SoftLayer in 2013. We provide the full spectrum of
It will comprise 2,000 professionals, a $1 billion investment and cloud delivery models—infrastructure as a service, platform as a
an ecosystem of partners and developers that we expect to service, software as a service and business process as a service.
scale rapidly. In the process, we believe Watson will change IBM’s cloud capabilities are built on 1,500 cloud patents and
the nature of computing, as it is already beginning to change supported by thousands of cloud experts. Eighty percent of
the practice of healthcare, retail, travel, banking and more. Fortune 500 companies use IBM’s cloud capabilities.
Taken together, our investments in data and analytics are driving Our cloud foundation at the infrastructure level is SoftLayer, the
significant growth, with 40,000 service engagements to date, market’s premier public and private cloud environment, with “bare
growing by double digits. In 2013 our business analytics revenue metal” dedicated servers that provide unmatched compute power,

===== PAGE 5 =====
FPO
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 6 =====
deployed in real time, with hundreds of configuration options. Our of organizations are currently using or planning to use compos-
public cloud processes 5.5 million client transactions every day. able business services.
In terms of technology, security, flexibility and pricing, IBM surpasses Finally, enterprises will want—and need—to manage their data in
all our major competitors. And our rapidly growing roster of 30,000 the cloud with the same rigor as if it were on-premises. Companies
client engagements—including companies like Honda, Sun Life will do this in order to ensure auditability, visibility, change control,
Stadium, US Open Tennis and hundreds of top online games with access control and data loss protection. Indeed, data manage-
a user base exceeding 100 million—is a testament to that. ment will arguably be the single most important design point for
enterprise cloud environments, driven not only by security and
These companies and a growing number of others understand cost, but also by regulation.
that their customer-facing applications—which they deploy on
public clouds for reasons of cost, accessibility and speed—must To meet growing demand for greater speed, and legal requirements
be integrated with their core enterprise systems—such as finance, for compliance and data residency, IBM is aggressively expanding
inventory, manufacturing and human resources. This is why one its global cloud footprint. We currently have 25 data centers globally,
analyst predicts that by 2017, nearly 50 percent of large enterprises and the new $1.2 billion investment announced in January will
will use hybrid cloud environments that are part public, part private see the opening of 15 more, in the US, the UK, Australia, Brazil,
and integrated with back-end systems. Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Japan and Mexico.
It is also why a new class of “cloud middleware services” is The impact of our cloud investments shows up clearly in our
emerging to manage these complex environments. Last month results. IBM’s cloud business grew 69 percent in 2013, delivering
we announced several capabilities that will connect enterprise $4.4 billion of revenue. As we actively embrace cloud in order
data and applications to the cloud. IBM’s entire enterprise to deliver “IBM as a Service” to our clients, we expect to
software portfolio is becoming available to developers in an open, see significant benefits in client experience, revenue growth
composable business environment to build applications with and enterprise productivity.
flexibility and scalability. A “cloud first” approach is being
implemented in IBM software development labs globally. Engagement in a world of empowered individuals
The phenomena of data and cloud are changing the arena of
For line-of-business users looking to drive innovation—including global business and society. At the same time, proliferating mobile
heads of finance, marketing, human resources, procurement technology and the spread of social business are empowering
and other functions—we offer an unmatched array of more than people with knowledge, enriching them through networks and
100 software-as-a-service (SaaS) offerings. IBM’s SaaS offerings changing their expectations.
today support 24 of the top 25 companies in the Fortune 500.
Going forward, companies will continue to unlock the value This leads to IBM’s third strategic imperative: To enable
of these business applications. For example, nearly 70 percent “systems of engagement” for enterprises.

===== PAGE 7 =====
Complementing traditional back-office systems of record, We have strengthened our already clear leadership in enterprise-
enterprises are now taking a systematic approach to engagement class social business and in security. Our acquisitions in social
with all of their constituencies—customers, employees, partners, include Kenexa, which helps companies use behavioral science
investors and citizens. Indeed, 57 percent of companies now not just to connect with people, but to understand and build lasting
expect to devote more than a quarter of their IT spending to these engagement with them. And we have made a dozen acquisitions
new systems of engagement by 2016, nearly twice the level of in security, building a capability of more than 6,000 security experts,
12 months ago. 3,000 patents and 25 labs worldwide.
They are doing so because the way their customers and their Finally, IBM is leading by example in building modern enterprise
own workers expect to engage is undergoing profound change. systems of engagement and learning. Our social platform,
Seventy percent of people who contact a company via social Connections, has 300,000 IBM users and 200,000 communities.
media today expect a response within five minutes. Nearly There are more than 30,000 IBMers active on Client Collaboration
80 percent of adult smartphone users keep their phones with Hubs for our top 300 accounts. Last year, hundreds of thousands
them an average of 22 hours a day. This is why we launched of IBMers worldwide shaped the practices that define how we work.
IBM MobileFirst in 2013, and why we have made eight acquisitions And they are enhancing their skills daily through a massive open
to advance our mobile initiatives. We have 3,000 mobile experts, online learning system called THINK Academy.
and have been awarded hundreds of patents in mobile and
wireless technologies. In 2013, we achieved year-over-year growth of 69 percent in
mobile, 19 percent in security and 45 percent in social business.
When these individuals use their mobile devices to engage
with a company, they expect personalized service. Indeed, Our performance in 2013
80 percent of people are willing to trade their information for You can learn more about the IBM Strategy on pp. 10–23. This
a customized offering. is the context in terms of which to understand our performance
in 2013.
The good news is that this is increasingly possible, thanks to
social business and data analytics. But it’s not that simple. By many measures, it was a successful year for IBM. Our diluted
One only needs to follow the news to see rapidly rising concerns— operating earnings per share in 2013 were $16.28, a new record.
legitimate concerns—about data security and institutional trust. This marked 11 straight years of operating EPS growth. We grew
Two-thirds of US adults say they would not return to a business operating net income by 2 percent, to $18 billion.
that lost their confidential information. And the economic stakes
are enormous. One analyst estimates that by 2016, there could In 2013 we invested $3.1 billion for 10 acquisitions. We invested
be an additional $1 trillion of growth in global online retail—if the $3.8 billion in net capital expenditures. We invested $6.2 billion in
industry can enhance trust. R&D, while earning the most US patents for the 21st straight year.

===== PAGE 8 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 7
Generating Higher Value at IBM
A long-term perspective ensures IBM is well-positioned
to take advantage of major shifts occurring in technology,
business and the global economy.
1. W e continuously remix our business 2. T his generates significant profit and cash, which
toward higher-value, more profitable allows us to invest in future sources of growth and
markets and opportunities. provide strong returns to shareholders.
Segment Pre-tax Income Mix* Free Cash Flow Primary Uses of Cash Since 2000
($ in billions) ($ in billions) ($ in billions)
Operating Pre-tax Income Margin* N ex e p t e c n a d p i i t t u a r l e s
Hardware/Financing $59
Services
Software
21% $170
$108 $32
Net share Net
repurchases acquisitions**
10% $30
$165 Dividends
2000 2013 2000 2013
3. We deliver long-term value and performance At Least
$20
while achieving our 2015 operating EPS target
Operating EPS in 2015*
along the way.
$16.28
Key drivers:
Revenue Growth
A combination of base
revenue growth, a shift to
faster-growing businesses
and strategic acquisitions.
Operating Leverage
A shift to higher-margin
businesses and enterprise
productivity derived
from global integration
and process efficiencies.
Share Repurchase
Leveraging our strong cash
generation to return value
to shareholders by reducing
shares outstanding.
Operating Earnings Per Share* 2000 2013 2015
* Excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating retirement-related charges.
** Net acquisitions include cash used in acquisitions and from divestitures.

===== PAGE 9 =====
While making all these investments in IBM’s future capabilities,
we were able to return $17.9 billion to you in 2013—approximately
$13.9 billion through gross share repurchases and $4.1 billion
through dividends. Last year’s dividend increase was 12 percent,
marking the 18th year in a row in which we have raised our
dividend, and the 98th consecutive year in which we have
paid one.
However, we must acknowledge that while 2013 was an important
year of transformation, our performance did not meet our
“ Every generation of IBMers has the
expectations. Our operating pre-tax income was down 8 percent.
opportunity—and, I believe, the Our revenue in 2013, at $99.8 billion, was down 5 percent as
reported and 2 percent at constant currency.
responsibility—to invent a new IBM.
This is our time.” So, while we continue to remix to higher value, we must also
address those parts of our business that are holding us back.
We have two specific challenges, and we are taking steps to
address both.
The first involves shifting the IBM hardware business for new
realities and opportunities. We are accelerating the move
of our Systems product portfolio—in particular, Power and
storage—to growth opportunities and to Linux, following
the lead of our successful mainframe business. The modern
demands of Big Data, cloud and mobile require enterprise-
strength computing, and no other company can match IBM’s
ongoing capabilities and commitment to developing those
essential technologies.
We also announced, in January, an agreement to sell much of
our Intel-based x86 server business to Lenovo. This divestiture
is consistent with our continuing strategy of exiting lower-
margin businesses, such as PCs, hard-disk drives and retail
store solutions. But let me be clear—we are not exiting hardware.

===== PAGE 10 =====
IBM will remain a leader in high-performance and high-end I am deeply proud of the global IBM team for bringing us here,
systems, storage and cognitive computing, and we will continue and I am grateful to you, our shareholders, for your unwavering
to invest in R&D for advanced semiconductor technology. support. I hope you share our excitement about your company’s
path and the shared opportunity we have, together, to build
The second challenge involves the world’s growth markets. a brighter future on a smarter planet.
While IBM’s growth in Latin America and Middle East and
Africa was strong, enterprise spending slowed in other key
growth markets. We are intensifying focus on new growth
opportunities. Overall, the opportunity in the world’s growth
markets remains attractive.
Virginia M. Rometty
On being essential Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
As we have learned throughout our history, the key to success is
getting the big things right, innovating and investing accordingly,
and challenging our organization, operations and especially our
culture to adapt.
When you do all those things, you do more than stay abreast
of change. You lead it. You invent entirely new capabilities—
such as cognitive computing and Watson. You translate these
innovations into sustainable economic value—such as building
cloud infrastructure that is enterprise-class and societally robust.
And you make yourself a laboratory for the future—of work, of
engagement, of the modern enterprise.
The progress we are making on these strategic imperatives is
highly encouraging. No company in our industry is positioned
as strongly as 103-year-old IBM for the world now taking shape.
We are confident in our vision, our strategy and our prospects.
Every generation of IBMers has the opportunity—and, I believe, This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made
the responsibility—to invent a new IBM. This is our time. We to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. For information
about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating net income, operating pre-tax income,
are working to make this not just a successful business, but an operating pre-tax margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash flow, which are in each
case non-GAAP measures, see the company’s Forms 8-K submitted to the SEC on January 21, 2014
essential institution for our clients and the world in a new era. and February 28, 2013 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).

===== PAGE 11 =====
What we see shifting: Competitive advantage
will be created through data and analytics,
business models will be shaped by cloud, and
individual engagement will be powered by
mobile and social technologies.
Therefore, IBM is making a new future for our
clients, our industry and our company.
This is how.
The IBM Strategy.

===== PAGE 12 =====
The IBM Strategy 11
01
We are making markets by
transforming industries and
professions with data.
02
We are remaking enterprise IT
for the era of cloud.
03
We are enabling systems of
engagement for enterprises.
And leading by example.

===== PAGE 13 =====
12
01 We are
making markets
by transforming
industries
and professions
with data.

===== PAGE 14 =====
The IBM Strategy 13
WHAT WE SEE SHIFTING:
Data is becoming the world’s
new natural resource.
Today, every discussion about changes in technology, business and
society must begin with data. In its exponentially increasing volume,
velocity and variety, data is becoming a new natural resource.
It promises to be for the 21st century what steam power was for
the 18th, electricity for the 19th and hydrocarbons for the 20th.
1 trillion 2 5 billion
.
connected objects and devices o n gigabytes of data generated every day
the planet generating data by 2015
80%
of the world’s data is unstructured. Audio.
Video. Sensor data. Social media. All represent
new areas to mine for insights.

===== PAGE 15 =====
14
OUR POINT OF VIEW:
Data is the new basis
of competitive advantage.
Leaders will:
Drive business outcomes b y applying more sophisticated
analytics across more disparate data sources in more parts
of their organization.
Capture the time value of data by developing “speed of insight”
and “speed of action” as core differentiators.
Change the game in their industry or profession
with cognitive capability.
THEREFORE:
We have built the world’s
broadest and deepest
portfolio in data and analytics.
$24 $17 15000 40000
billion billion , ,
invested to date to of gross spend for Big Data analytics consultants client engagements to date
build IBM’s capabilities and analytics acquisitions, and 400 mathematicians
in Big Data and analytics, including more than
with $7 billion in organic 30 acquired companies
investment
$1 1000 500 2/3
billion ,
investment in Flash university partnerships, analytics patents of IBM Research is
technology, providing and 2,215 IBM generated each year focused on data, analytics
industry-leading speed Business Partners and cognitive computing
and efficiency to
enable data to be real-
time ready for analytics

===== PAGE 16 =====
The IBM Strategy 15
We are building Watson solutions
and technologies for the
era of cognitive computing.
In January 2014 we launched the IBM Watson Group
to bring cognitive capabilities—built on technologies
like machine learning, complex algorithms and natural
language processing—to enterprises, institutions
and individuals via the cloud.
Watson technology processes information by
understanding natural language, generating hypo-
theses based on evidence, and learning as it goes.
This means organizations and individuals can
more fully understand the data that surrounds them,
and use that data to make better decisions.
$1 2 000
billion ,
investment, including engineers, researchers,
$100 million to equip developers, designers
an ecosystem of entre- and sellers
preneurs and partners
We have significantly increased analytics revenue through
strategic investments, and new skills and capabilities.
Analytics Revenue
$16
billion
2013
2010
$11
billion

===== PAGE 17 =====
16
02 We are
remaking
enterprise IT
for the era
of cloud.

===== PAGE 18 =====
The IBM Strategy 17
WHAT WE SEE SHIFTING:
The emergence of cloud is
transforming IT and business
processes into digital services.
At the same time industries and professions are being remade
by data, the information technology infrastructure of the world is
being transformed by the emergence of cloud computing—that
is, the delivery of IT and business processes as digital services.
8 5%
1/4
of new software is now
being built for the cloud
of the world’s
applications will
be available in
the cloud by 2016
72%
of developers already
report that cloud-based
services or APIs are
part of the applications
they’re designing

===== PAGE 19 =====
18
OUR POINT OF VIEW:
Cloud demands—and enables—
new business models.
Leaders will:
Integrate public and private clouds with back-end
systems to create hybrid environments. This will create
demand for cloud middleware services.
Seek—or be required—to manage cloud environments
with the same rigor as an on-premises data center.
Use cloud to reinvent core business processes and
to innovate.
THEREFORE:
We have built the world’s most complete cloud
portfolio, delivering our clients’ technology
and business processes as digital services.
$7 1500+ 5 5 8 0%
billion , . million
i nvested to date to cloud patents client transactions of Fortune 500
build cloud capabilities processed daily through companies use IBM’s
IBM’s public cloud cloud capabilities
15 2 000 100+ 5000+
, ,
acquired companies, SoftLayer APIs to industry-leading Software private and hybrid cloud
including SoftLayer, provide a view of the as a Service (SaaS) engagements in more
for cloud infrastructure client’s environment offerings than 100 countries included
IBM Systems in 2013

===== PAGE 20 =====
The IBM Strategy 19
In 2014, we will expand our
cloud footprint and capabilities.
IBM is investing $1.2 billion to expand a massive network
of local cloud hubs for businesses worldwide, to meet
growing demands for capacity, choice, compliance and
data residency.
Markets planned 15
to open in 2014:
Australia (2) planned 2014
Brazil market expansions
Canada (2)
China (2) 40
France
Germany
total cloud data centers
India across five continents
Japan
Mexico
United Kingdom Connecting applications via the cloud
United States (2) “Cloud middleware services” are emerging to connect securely customer applications and
core enterprise systems such as finance, inventory or human resources via the cloud.
In 2014, we are opening up our entire enterprise software portfolio via BlueMix, a platform
to equip the tens of millions of corporate and web developers with an open environment
and tools to build enterprise-class cloud applications at consumer scale.
In 2013 we grew our cloud revenue 69 percent, and we exited the year
with a run rate for cloud “as a service” double that of 2012.
Cloud Revenue Cloud “as a Service”
Revenue Run Rate
$44 $2
. billion billion
2013 2013
2012 2012
$26 $1
. billion billion

===== PAGE 21 =====
20
03 We are
enabling systems
of engagement
for enterprises.
And we are leading
by example.

===== PAGE 22 =====
The IBM Strategy 21
WHAT WE SEE SHIFTING:
Social. Mobile. Security. They are empowering
people with knowledge, enriching them through
networks and changing expectations.
The phenomena of data and cloud are changing the arena of global
business and society. At the same time, rapidly growing mobile technology
and social business are giving birth to a new category of IT services and
capabilities, aimed at engagement with increasingly empowered individuals.
8 4% 70%
of Millennials say social and of Boomers agree
user-generated content has
an influence on what they buy
5
minutes
the response time users
expect from a company
once they have contacted
it via social media
84%
of smartphone users
check an app as soon
as they wake up
80%
of individuals are willing to
trade their information for
a personalized offering
2 /3
of US adults say they would
not return to a business that
lost their personal, confidential
information

===== PAGE 23 =====
22
OUR POINT OF VIEW:
A systematic approach to
engagement is now required.
Leaders will:
Use mobile and social to increase speed and
responsiveness —and meet customers, partners
and employees where they are.
Want to personalize every meaningful interaction.
Need to earn continuously the right to serve
customers —which demands privacy, security and trust.
THEREFORE:
We have built a portfolio that enables enterprises
and communities to engage customers, employees
and citizens securely.
6 000 4 300 #1 #1 7 10
, , and of
security experts, patents in mobile, m arket leader for enterprise top banks in the US,
3,000 mobile experts, social and security social software; market 9 of the top 10 in the UK and
2,800 social business technologies leader in security and 2 of the top 4 in Australia
experts vulnerability management* use IBM Security Solutions
8 12 25 15
billion
c ompanies acquired companies acquired security labs globally, security events monitored
for mobile capabilities for security technologies 10 security operations daily in 130 countries
like mobile messaging like web fraud detection, centers globally
for marketers and secure sophisticated malware,
mobile app delivery and device management
* IDC, Worldwide Enterprise Social Software 2013–2017 Forecast and 2012 Vendor Shares, Doc #241323, June, 2013
IDC, Worldwide Security and Vulnerability Management 2013–2017 Forecast and 2012 Vendor Shares, Doc #242465, August, 2013

===== PAGE 24 =====
The IBM Strategy 23
Our mobile, social And we are leading by example.
and security portfolio
generated double-
digit revenue growth
in 2013.
69%
growth in Mobile
Collectively developing insights
For more than a decade we’ve used Jams—large-scale online collaborations—
to collectively define our corporate values, generate new business ideas and rally
around opportunities for societal improvement. In 2013, IBMers worldwide shaped
nine practices that translate our values into consistent actions and behaviors. These
practices are now shaping our systems for hiring, learning and management.
45%
30000+ 300000
growth in Social Business , ,
IBMers active in Client Collaboration active IBM users on our
Hubs for our top 300 accounts Connections social platform
250000 200000
, ,
employees collaborated in an Connections communities
online Jam to shape nine practices established by employees for
that distinguish IBMers projects, areas of expertise
or general interests
19%
growth in Security

===== PAGE 25 =====
24 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012
Revenue $ 99,751 $104,507
Net income $ 16,483 $ 16,604
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 17,959 $ 17,627
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.94 $ 14.37
Basic $ 15.06 $ 14.53
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 16.28 $ 15.25
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 17,485 $ 19,586
Capital expenditures, net 3,768 4,307
Share repurchases 13,859 11,995
Cash dividends paid on common stock 4,058 3,773
Per share of common stock 3.70 3.30
At December 31: 2013 2012
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 11,066 $ 11,128
Total assets 126,223 119,213
Working capital 11,196 5,807
Total debt 39,718 33,269
Total equity 22,929 18,984
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 1,054 1,117
Market capitalization $197,772 $214,032
Stock price per common share $ 187.57 $ 191.55
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 431,212 434,246
* See page 46 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Financials 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED
Overview 26 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 26 A Significant Accounting Policies 84
Management Discussion Snapshot 27 B Accounting Changes 94
Description of Business 28 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 95
Year in Review 35 D Financial Instruments 100
Prior Year in Review 53 E Inventories 107
Other Information 63 F Financing Receivables 107
Looking Forward 63 G Property, Plant and Equipment 110
Liquidity and Capital Resources 65 H Investments and Sundry Assets 110
Critical Accounting Estimates 67 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 111
Currency Rate Fluctuations 70 J Borrowings 112
Market Risk 70 K Other Liabilities 114
Financing Risks 71 L Equity Activity 116
Cybersecurity 71 M Contingencies and Commitments 119
Employees and Related Workforce 72 N Taxes 121
Global Financing 72 O Research, Development and Engineering 123
P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 123
Report of Management 76 Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 124
R Stock-Based Compensation 124
Report of Independent Registered S Retirement-Related Benefits 127
Public Accounting Firm 77 T Segment Information 141
U Subsequent Events 146
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
Earnings 78
Comprehensive Income 79 Selected Quarterly Data 148
Financial Position 80
Cash Flows 81 Performance Graph 149
Changes in Equity 82
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 150
Stockholder Information 151

===== PAGE 27 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
The financial section of the International Business Machines In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results
Cor por ation (IBM or the company) 2013 Annual Report includes the of the business, the company separates business results into oper-
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State ments ating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings is a
and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State ments. This Over- non-GAAP measure that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-
view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective related charges and retirement-related costs, and their related tax
regarding the information contained in the financial section. impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amortiza-
tion of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related charges
Organization of Information such as in-process research and development, transaction costs,
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax charges
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the company’s related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related costs, the
financial results and certain factors that may affect its future company characterizes certain items as operating and others as
prospects from the perspective of the company’s management. non-operating. The company includes defined benefit plan and
The “Management Discussion Snaps hot,” on pages 27 and 28, nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, amortization
presents an overview of the key performance drivers in 2013. of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribution plans in
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 35, the Manage- operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related cost includes
ment Discussion contains the results of operations for each defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan
reportable segment of the business and a discussion of the interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial
company’s financial position and cash flows. Other key sections gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/settlements and
within the Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency costs and other
on pages 63 to 65, and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on costs. Non-operating costs are primarily related to changes in pen-
pages 65 to 67. sion plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a performance and the company considers these costs to be outside
stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section is the operational performance of the business.
included in the Management Discussion beginning on page 72. Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a view
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on pages of operating earnings as described above provides increased trans-
78 through 83. These statements provide an overview of the parency and clarity into both the operational results of the business
company’s income and cash flow performance and its financial and the performance of the company’s pension plans; improves
position. visibility to management decisions and their impacts on operational
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among performance; enables better comparison to peer companies; and
other items, the Notes contain the company’s accounting poli- allows the company to provide a long-term strategic view of the
cies (pages 84 through 93), acquisitions and divestitures (pages business going forward. For its 2015 road map, the company is utiliz-
95 through 99), detailed information on specific items within the ing an operating view to establish its objectives and track its
financial statements, certain contingencies and commitments progress. The company’s reportable segment financial results
(pages 119 to 121) and retirement-related benefits information reflect operating earnings, consistent with the company’s manage-
(pages 127 to 141). ment and measurement system.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have been
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally FORWARD-LOOKING AND
accepted in the United States (GAAP). CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant cur- Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute
rency” in the Management Discussion do not include operational forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking state-
rates. Certain financial results are adjusted based on a simple ment in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is
mathematical model that translates current period results in local made; the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any
currency using the comparable prior year period’s currency con- such statements. Forward-looking statements are based on the
version rate. This approach is used for countries where the company’s current assumptions regarding future business and
functional currency is the local country currency. This informa- financial performance; these statements, by their nature, address
tion is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking
without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors
thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business that could cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed
performance. See “Currency Rate Fluctuations” on page 70 for more fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s
additional information. filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), includ-
• Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report, ing the company’s 2013 Form 10-K filed on February 25, 2014.
certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT The company also continued to shift its investments to address
the key trends in information technology (IT)—social, mobile, big data/
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
analytics and cloud. Several years ago, the company identified and
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ established objectives for four key growth initiatives—Smarter Planet,
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change business analytics, cloud and growth markets—to address these
Revenue $ 99,751 $104,507 (4.6)%* trends. In 2013, across the business, Smarter Planet, business analyt-
ics and cloud had strong performance. Smarter Planet revenue grew
Gross profit margin 48.6% 48.1% 0.5 pts.
about 20 percent compared to 2012, with strength across all areas,
Total expense and other (income) $ 28,981 $ 28,396 2.1%
including Smarter Commerce, Smarter Cities, Social Business and
Total expense and other
industry solutions. The company believes that data, as a natural
(income)-to-revenue ratio 29.1% 27.2% 1.9 pts.
resource, will drive demand going forward, and that big data/analytics
Income before income taxes $ 19,524 $ 21,902 (10.9)%
will provide the basis for competitive differentiation. Business analyt-
Provision for income taxes 3,041 5,298 (42.6)%
ics revenue of $15.7 billion increased 9 percent year to year, led by
Net income $ 16,483 $ 16,604 (0.7)%
Global Business Services and Software. The company’s cloud solu-
Net income margin 16.5% 15.9% 0.6 pts.
tions address the full scope of client requirements including private
Earnings per share clouds, public clouds and hybrid clouds, as well as platform and
of common stock
software-as-a-solution (SaaS)-based solutions. In 2013, the company
Assuming dilution $ 14.94 $ 14.37 4.0%
delivered $4.4 billion of cloud-based solutions revenue, an increase
Weighted-average shares of 69 percent compared to 2012. In addition, within that content, $1.7
outstanding
billion was delivered as a service. Across the company’s performance,
Assuming dilution 1,103.0 1,155.4 (4.5)%
there is overlap between these initiatives. In total, software makes up
Assets** $126,223 $119,213 5.9% about half of that combined content. The software content improves
Liabilities** $103,294 $100,229 3.1% the company’s business mix and contributes to margin expansion.
Equity** $ 22,929 $ 18,984 20.8% Segment revenue was led by Software which increased 1.9 per-
cent (3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key branded
* (2.5) percent adjusted for currency.
** At December 31. middleware which increased 4.8 percent (6 percent adjusted for cur-
rency). The key growth initiatives fueled this performance. Global
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) Business Services returned to revenue growth at constant currency
earnings for 2013 and 2012. (down 0.9 percent as reported; up 3 percent adjusted for currency)
driven by the company’s investments in the Digital Front Office. While
($ in millions except per share amounts) revenue in Global Technology Services declined 4.2 percent (1 per-
Yr.-to-Yr.
cent adjusted for currency), revenue trajectory improved in the
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change second half and was stabilizing. Global Financing revenue improved
Net income as reported $16,483 $16,604 (0.7)% 0.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) versus 2012. The Soft-
Non-operating adjustments ware, Global Services and Global Financing businesses all grew
(net of tax) pre-tax income and expanded their pre-tax margin in 2013 compared
Acquisition-related charges 747 641 16.5 to 2012. Systems and Technology impacted the company’s overall
Non-operating retirement-related performance in 2013. Revenue decreased 18.7 percent (18 percent
costs/(income) 729 381 91.2 adjusted for currency) year to year driven by the back end of the
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $17,959 $17,627 1.9% mainframe product cycle and business model challenges specific
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) to Power Systems, Storage and System x. Pre-tax income in Systems
earnings per share $ 16.28 $ 15.25 6.8% and Technology decreased $1.7 billion compared to the prior year.
* S ee page 46 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) Revenue from the company’s growth markets underperformed
earnings. in 2013, particularly in the second half of the year. For the full year,
growth markets revenue decreased 4.9 percent as reported and
In 2013, the company reported revenue of $99.8 billion, expanded
2 percent at constant currency. Overall, the company believes that
gross and net income margins, and delivered diluted earnings per
the opportunity in the growth markets remains attractive, and it is
share growth of 4.0 percent as reported and 6.8 percent on an oper-
intensifying its efforts on new growth opportunities in these markets.
ating (non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $17.5 billion in cash
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.5 points versus
from operations and $15.0 billion in free cash flow driving shareholder
2012 to 48.6 percent. This was the tenth consecutive year of improve-
returns of $17.9 billion in gross common stock repurchases and divi-
ment in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
dends. In 2013, the company continued the transformation of its
of 49.7 percent increased 0.9 points compared to the prior year. The
portfolio to higher value expending $3.1 billion to acquire 10 compa-
increase in gross margin in 2013 was driven by margin improvements
nies to expand its capabilities in its key growth areas, in addition to
in the Global Services segments and an improved mix driven by Soft-
maintaining high levels of investment of $6.2 billion in research and
ware, partially offset by margin decreases in Systems and Technology.
development and $3.8 billion in net capital expenditures.

===== PAGE 29 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) increased 2.1 percent in 2013 Total assets increased $7,010 million ($9,337 million adjusted for
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and currency) from December 31, 2012 driven by:
other (income) increased 1.4 percent compared to the prior year. • Increases in prepaid pension assets ($4,607 million), goodwill
The year-to-year drivers were approximately: ($1,937 million) and total receivables ($1,202 million); partially
offset by
Total Operating • Decreases in deferred taxes ($687 million).
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
• Currency* (1) point (1) point
Total liabilities increased $3,065 million ($4,494 million adjusted for
• A cquisitions** 2 points 2 points
currency) from December 31, 2012 driven by:
• Base expense 1 point 1 point
• Increased total debt ($6,449 million) and increases
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. in deferred tax liabilities ($1,336 million); partially offset by
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. • Decreased retirement and nonpension postretirement
benefit obligations ($4,176 million) and decreases in
There were several items that had an impact on total expense and
compensation and benefits ($853 million).
other (income) year to year. Workforce rebalancing charges for 2013
were $1,064 million compared to $803 million in the prior year. Bad Total equity of $22,929 million increased $3,945 million from
debt expense increased $106 million year to year driven by higher December 31, 2012 as a result of:
specific account reserves. In addition, in 2012, the company recorded • Higher retained earnings ($12,401 million), decreased losses
a gain of $446 million related to the divestiture of the Retail Store in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) of
Solutions (RSS) business, and also recorded a charge of $162 million $4,157 million and increased common stock ($1,484 million);
related to a court ruling in the UK regarding one of IBM’s UK defined partially offset by
benefit pension plans. This charge was not included in the compa- • Increased treasury stock ($14,110 million) driven by share
ny’s operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income). Also, the repurchases.
company has a performance-based compensation structure. As a
result of certain parts of the business not performing as expected, The company generated $17,485 million in cash flow provided by
performance-related compensation in 2013 across both cost and operating activities, a decrease of $2,102 million when compared to
expense was down $777 million compared to the prior year. 2012, primarily driven by operational performance and a net increase
Pre-tax income decreased 10.9 percent and the pre-tax margin in the use of cash for taxes of $2,200 million primarily driven by an
was 19.6 percent, a decrease of 1.4 points versus 2012. Net income increase in cash tax payments. Net cash used in investing activities
decreased 0.7 percent and the net income margin was 16.5 percent, of $7,326 million was $1,679 million lower than 2012, primarily due
an increase of 0.6 points versus 2012. The effective tax rate for 2013 to a decrease in cash used associated with the net purchases and
was 15.6 percent, a decrease of 8.6 points versus the prior year sales of marketable securities and other investments ($1,232 million)
driven by an improvement in the ongoing tax rate and discrete tax and decreased net capital investments ($539 million). Net cash used
items, including audit settlements. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax in financing activities of $9,883 million was $2,094 million lower
income decreased 7.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) pre- compared to 2012, primarily due to increased proceeds from net
tax margin was 21.4 percent, a decrease of 0.7 points versus the debt ($4,708 million), partially offset by increased cash used for
prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) net income increased 1.9 percent gross common stock repurchases ($1,865 million).
and the operating (non-GAAP) net income margin of 18.0 percent In January 2014, the company disclosed that it is expecting GAAP
increased 1.1 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at least $17.00 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at
effective tax rate was 16.0 percent versus 24.0 percent in 2012 driven least $18.00 per diluted share for the full-year 2014. The company
by the same factors described above. also stated that in the first quarter of 2014 it expects to close the initial
Diluted earnings per share improved 4.0 percent year to year reflect- phase of the sale of its customer care business to SYNNEX and that
ing the benefits of the common stock repurchase program. In 2013, it also expects to take the majority of its workforce rebalancing
the company repurchased approximately 73 million shares of its actions for the year in the same period. As a result, the company
common stock. Diluted earnings per share of $14.94 increased $0.57 expects its first-quarter 2014 GAAP and operating (non-GAAP) earn-
from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share ings per share to be approximately 14 percent of the full year
of $16.28 increased $1.03 versus 2012 driven by the following factors: expectation, reflecting about half of the divestiture gain, the workforce
• Revenue decrease at actual rates $ (0.69) rebalancing charges and continued impacts from currency.
• Margin expansion $ 0.98 For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review”
• Common stock repurchases $ 0.74 section on pages 35 through 52.
At December 31, 2013, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
positions remained strong and were well positioned to support the Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with
business over the long term. Cash and marketable securities at the SEC on February 25, 2014 for a more detailed version of this
year end was $11,066 million, consistent with the year-end 2012 Des cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
balance. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows are:

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company creates value for clients and solves business prob- investing more than $1 billion to expand its global footprint to 40 data-
lems through integrated solutions that leverage information technology centers worldwide. IBM now has more than 100 SaaS offerings, and
and deep knowledge of business processes. IBM solutions typically IBM cloud supports 24 of the top 25 Fortune 500 companies. All of
create value by reducing a client’s operational costs or by enabling this drove $4.4 billion of revenue for cloud-based solutions in 2013.
new capabilities that generate revenue. These solutions draw from
an industry-leading portfolio of consulting, delivery and implementa- 3. Enable “Systems of Engagement” for Enterprises
tion services, enterprise software, systems and financing. and Lead by Example
Social, mobile and unprecedented access to data are changing how
Strategy individuals are understood and engaged. A new class of individual is
emerging: one that is empowered with knowledge, enriched by net-
IBM’s strategy is one of innovation, transformation and a constant
works and expects value in return for its information. Enterprises must
evolution to higher value. The company delivers innovative solutions,
create a systematic approach to engage this new class of individual
software and infrastructure to improve client outcomes. The company
and increase its speed and responsiveness by becoming mobile.
helps enterprises apply technology to capture new value across their
Interactions need to be personalized to offer more value. In addition,
entire organizations, and it provides a differentiated client experience
enterprises will benefit from securing information and increasing trust.
through a highly engaged and skilled global workforce and a broad
Therefore, IBM’s strategy is to enable “systems of engagement”
ecosystem of partners. The ultimate goal of this strategy is to deliver
for enterprises, and the company is leading by example. IBM has
on IBM’s purpose of making our company essential to clients,
acquired 20 companies related to mobile, social and security. IBMers
employees, partners, investors and communities.
are collaborating in more than 200,000 internal social communities
Three strategic imperatives shape our approach as we continu-
and 85 percent of IBM’s sellers use the company’s Sales Connect
ously transform IBM and align the company for higher value.
portal. In 2013, the company’s mobile, social and security portfolio
1. Make Markets by Transforming Industries and generated double-digit revenue growth with mobile increasing
Professions with Data 69 percent, security 19 percent and social business 45 percent.
The emergence of big data as the world’s new natural resource is the To capture the opportunities arising from these strategic impera-
phenomenon of our time. It is being fueled by the proliferation of mobile tives, IBM is focused on four key growth initiatives: Smarter Planet,
devices, the rise of social media and the infusion of technology into all Business Analytics, Cloud Computing and Growth Markets.
things and processes. Today, enterprises must harness data to create
competitive advantage. The value for enterprises increases as they Smarter Planet
apply more sophisticated analytics across more disparate data Smarter Planet is IBM’s strategy to lead in a technology-enabled
sources. Their real-time use of data will increasingly become a com- world that is more instrumented, interconnected and intelligent than
petitive differentiator. Enterprises will also need cognitive computing ever before, allowing people and organizations to address significant
capabilities as data continues to grow in all dimensions. Therefore, business and societal challenges. At the heart of this strategy are
IBM’s strategy is to make markets by transforming industries and pro- solutions that drive innovation and outcomes for clients—extending
fessions with data. The company has invested more than $22 billion, the boundaries of businesses, industries and communities. It is
including $15 billion on more than 30 acquisitions, to build its capabili- about helping the company’s clients become better at what they do
ties in big data and analytics. One third of IBM’s research is focused for their customers. IBM does this through advanced, integrated
on data, analytics and cognitive computing. The company is investing solutions based on capabilities such as analytics for business and
$1 billion in Watson solutions to build out the next era of cognitive physical systems, cloud computing, mobile, social business and
systems and services. In 2013, the company realized $15.7 billion in business process management.
business analytics revenue. The original target for this business was IBM continues to deepen its commitment to delivering on the
to achieve $16 billion in revenue in 2015—as a result of this perfor- promise of Smarter Planet for both line of business executives (CFOs,
mance, the company has taken its 2015 objective for business CHROs, CMOs, etc.) as well as IT executives across a broad range of
analytics revenue to $20 billion. industries. IBM’s industry-based approach and solutions are
grounded in a deep understanding of the distinct set of challenges
2. Remake Enterprise IT for the Era of Cloud and opportunities that are confronting companies and executives in
Enterprises are increasingly relying on cloud, which is being fueled various industries. Whether ‘smarter’ means helping a bank to retain
by abundant bandwidth, the emergence of standards and the more customers through world-class mobile solutions, a hospital
demand for consumability. They are benefitting from cloud by using group to deliver highly individualized care coordinated with social
it to transform their IT and business processes into digital services, services, a local government to anticipate and alleviate traffic conges-
to reinvent their core business processes and to drive innovation. tion before it happens, or a retail chain to provide a seamless customer
Enterprises are integrating public and private clouds with back-end experience across multiple channels, IBM is developing and investing
systems to create hybrid, dynamic environments. They will increas- in a portfolio of replicable industry solutions to help clients achieve
ingly need to manage their cloud environments with the same rigor their goals and drive important outcomes for their customers.
as an on-premise datacenter. Therefore, IBM’s strategy is to remake There are several areas of focus within the Smarter Planet strat-
enterprise IT for the era of cloud. The company has invested over $6 egy, including IBM’s Social Business, MobileFirst, Smarter Commerce
billion to acquire more than 15 companies related to cloud, and is and Smarter Cities initiatives.

===== PAGE 31 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM’s Social Business initiative helps clients integrate social IBM can serve new buyers and make new market segments by
capabilities across core business processes to drive measurable bringing IT to industries and professions that are being transformed
business results. The Social Business initiative can unlock the intrin- by data. The company has a unique set of offerings and deep exper-
sic knowledge of people within an organization to help companies tise related to big data and analytics to help organizations:
fuel customer-centric innovation, improve productivity and expand • Acquire, grow and retain customers by improving customer
sales, loyalty and advocacy. To capitalize on the new market oppor- interactions, building long-term, profitable relationships and
tunities that arise from a digital economy, IBM Social Business can realizing new value from customer sentiment.
let clients apply increasingly sophisticated analytics to gain action- • Create new business models by tapping into information and
able insight and to more effectively engage with customers. Behavioral, insight to identify and explore strategic options for growth.
human data is the newest form of data and can be used to build a • Transform financial management processes by improving
stronger, more agile workforce and reinvent human capital manage- enterprise agility, anticipating outcomes and driving business
ment by applying behavioral sciences across the talent lifecycle. The model innovation through a discipline of performance.
Social Business initiative is powered by world class IBM services and • Better monitor, predict and manage risk to build trust and
software, developed organically by IBM and through acquisitions. value amidst uncertainty, by having confidence in their data,
In 2013, the company launched IBM MobileFirst, a unified risk exposures and ability to make risk-aware actionable
approach to help clients and partners deliver best-in-class mobile decisions.
solutions, take advantage of more commercial opportunities and • Optimize operations and counter fraud and other threats to
provide a superior customer experience. IBM has a breadth of exper- reduce costs, increase efficiencies and productivity and
tise and technology to help organizations efficiently build and deploy improve public safety.
mobile applications, maintain visibility and control over their mobile • Improve IT economics by developing and enabling new value and
infrastructure, engage customers in context and transform the value agility at practically all levels of the organization and across lines
chain in ways that can drive growth and return on investment. The of business while helping keep costs low and profitability high.
company can help its clients achieve these goals through a complete
portfolio of IBM mobile software, services and industry expertise. The company’s approach to big data and analytics helps organiza-
Throughout 2013, IBM invested in core mobile enterprise capabilities tions to succeed in their industries. IBM recommends organizations
such as IBM Worklight and IBM Rational, while rounding out its port- do three things to be successful. First, build a culture that infuses
folio with strategic acquisitions such as Fiberlink, Trusteer, Xtify and analytics everywhere. Second, be proactive about the privacy, secu-
The Now Factory. Integrated with 270 patents in wireless innovations rity and governance of their data. Third, invest in the right platform
and strengthened by thousands of mobile specialists from IBM Mobile and solutions to harness and analyze all of their data for new insights
Enterprise Services and IBM Interactive, the company has already and outcomes.
helped more than 1,000 clients become more mobile enterprises. IBM is committed to continually innovating across the spectrum of
In addition to Social and Mobile, IBM’s deep commitment to big data and analytics capabilities, solutions, systems, research, ser-
building a smarter planet can be seen in the ongoing efforts around vices, deployment and skills. For example, in 2013, the company
Smarter Commerce and Smarter Cities. IBM’s Smarter Commerce announced a breakthrough dynamic in-memory database technology
model can integrate and transform how companies manage and called BLU Acceleration, predictive analytics for big data with IBM Ana-
adapt their buy, market, sell and service processes to place the lytic Catalyst, a PureData System for Hadoop that marries IBM’s
customer experience at the center of their business. IBM’s Smarter enterprise-class Hadoop distribution (InfoSphere BigInsights) with the
Cities initiative helps federal, state and local governments to make simplicity of an appliance, InfoSphere Data Privacy for Hadoop that pro-
better decisions, anticipate issues and coordinate resources across vides security and protection for sensitive big data, a Watson
agencies more effectively and deliver citizen-centric services that Engagement Advisor solution to help transform how brands and their
can drive sustainable economic growth. customers interact and new academic partnerships to help prepare
students for the expanding scope of careers in big data and analytics.
Business Analytics
Business Analytics is the category of software, systems and ser- Cloud Computing
vices that helps organizations take advantage of big data to make Cloud is a model for consuming and delivering business and IT
better and faster decisions and optimize processes. Big data services that can result in significant improvements in economies
includes both enterprise data, content and new data from both of scale and business agility and serve as a platform for business
structured and unstructured sources: in previously unimaginable transformation. IBM has developed a portfolio of solutions, services
volumes (petabytes), with huge variety (from blogs, tweets, pictures, and products that is helping thousands of clients adopt and leverage
videos and text), at high velocity (machine-to-machine data from the the transformative power of the cloud. IBM’s breadth of capabilities
Internet of things) and with decreasing veracity (from uncertain or gives the company a unique advantage to help clients think, build
incomplete sources). Big data and analytics are core to achieving and tap into the cloud. IBM has the deep industry expertise to help
the Smarter Planet strategy, helping data-savvy, insight-driven lead- clients transform business processes, industry optimized software
ers to infuse intelligence into business decisions, processes and solutions to support business processes, software development
client interactions for faster actions and better outcomes. platforms to create new cloud-based business applications and
standardized infrastructure to run these applications.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM offers a full array of cloud delivery models, including private with the Saudi Ministry of Health to help manage the risk of
clouds, public clouds and a hybrid cloud that includes a mix of both. infectious and communicable diseases across the Kingdom.
The company enables clients to build private, on-premises cloud- • Faced with rising fuel costs and a goal to reduce greenhouse
based environments that have the control, security and isolation emissions, Jet Airways, India’s premier international airline,
required for their most mission-critical workloads. IBM also offers turned to IBM to more accurately calculate, track and report air-
public cloud services, including the newly acquired SoftLayer plat- craft emissions and reduce fuel usage.
form that provides an infrastructure and ecosystem for middleware
IBM continues to build out its shared services facilities and talent to
and applications. IBM’s public cloud services can be simply provi-
support its clients in growth markets. In China, the company has
sioned as a self service, pay-as-you-go consumption model. IBM’s
increased its Big Data software skills, and it will leverage an IBM
software defined environments can provide a seamless integration
Integrated Managed Services Centre to capture the significant
across private and public cloud models, with interoperability, porta-
growth in cloud. In November 2013, IBM opened its first Africa
bility and scalability to help clients realize the full value of cloud.
Research Lab in Kenya, IBM’s 12th lab worldwide. The facility will
In the new era of computing, IBM’s plans to enable nearly every-
conduct applied and exploratory research into the challenges Africa
thing as a digital service. During 2013, IBM made several cloud-
faces, and deliver commercially viable solutions to help improve the
related strategic announcements, notably:
lives of people across the continent.
• IBM’s Watson technology is being made available as a
development platform in the cloud to enable a worldwide
Summary
community of software application providers to build
IBM’s strategy is one of innovation, transformation and a constant evo-
a new generation of apps infused with Watson’s cognitive
lution to higher value. The company has steadily remixed its portfolio
computing intelligence.
and business model to reflect its strategic beliefs and pursue its growth
• The acquisition of SoftLayer is enabling IBM to deliver
initiatives. IBM has a balanced history of exiting commodity businesses
industry-leading cloud solutions that offer the security,
that no longer fit the high-value model while investing in strategic
privacy and reliability of private clouds and the economy
acquisitions and organic capabilities. In 2013, the company invested
and speed of a public cloud.
$3.1 billion for acquisitions, $3.8 billion in net capital expenditures and
• New fast-start industry solutions, which are hosted on a private
$6.2 billion in research and development. The company has acquired
cloud using SoftLayer and offered as a managed service
more than 150 companies since 2000 to bolster its portfolio in areas
through Global Business Services, designed to meet growing
like big data and analytics, cloud and systems of engagement.
demand from clients for rapid deployment, implementation
As the company looks ahead to 2014 and beyond, it will continu-
and experimentation.
ously transform itself to take advantage of new opportunities and
• The acquisition of Xtify Inc., a leading provider of cloud-
pursue bold new plays in areas such as Watson solutions, new offer-
based mobile messaging tools that help organizations
ings for big data and analytics, the mobile enterprise and high-value
improve mobile sales, drive in-store traffic and engage
cloud services. IBM will continue to deliver differentiated client value
customers with personalized offers.
based on its sustained investments in research and development, its
• An open-standards IBM cloud platform that provides
engaged employee base, industry expertise, global reach, and the
capabilities to power the next generation of cloud and
breadth and depth of the company’s technologies and capabilities.
mobile application development and services.
Business Model
Growth Markets
IBM continues to invest in growth markets where many countries The company’s business model is built to support two principal goals:
and companies are embracing big data, mobile, social and cloud, helping enterprise clients to become more innovative, efficient and
often at faster rates than mature countries. In China, for example, competitive through the application of business insight and IT solu-
32 percent of consumers make their purchases online, compared tions; and providing long-term value to shareholders. The business
to only 14 percent of consumers globally. In Africa, 18 percent of the model has been developed over time through strategic investments
continent’s GDP is expected to be handled through mobile money in capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth
transfers by 2015, while in Singapore, citizens spend 40 minutes on and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
average each day on Facebook, compared to less than 25 minutes The company’s global capabilities include services, software,
in the United States. IBM is helping clients in growth markets capitalize systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad
on these trends. For example: mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
• In Mexico, IBM is using its analytics tools to enable grated solutions to the company’s clients.
Banorte-Ixe Bank to know and service its more than The business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously chang-
13 million customers as individuals. ing market and economic environment. The company continues to
• Using IBM’s Big Data technologies and predictive analytics, divest certain businesses and strengthen its position through strategic
Da Nang’s (Vietnam) traffic control center is better forecasting organic investments and acquisitions in higher-value areas. In addition,
and preventing potential congestion and better coordinating the company has transformed itself into a globally integrated enterprise
city responses to issues like accidents and adverse weather. which has improved overall productivity and is driving investment and
• In Saudi Arabia, the company developed a public health expanding participation in the world’s fastest growing markets.
solution for disease management that was implemented

===== PAGE 33 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
This business model, supported by the company’s financial building customized dedicated managed clouds, to allowing clients
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash to leverage standardized cloud infrastructure services from the Soft-
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term. Layer and SmartCloud Enterprise+ offerings, to creating hybrid
environments linking their private and public workloads together. This
Business Segments and Capabilities portfolio of cloud offerings spans across the GTS business lines.
The company’s major operations consists of five business seg-
Technology Support Services: delivers a complete line of support
ments: Global Technology Services and Global Business Services,
services from product maintenance through solution support to
which the company collectively calls Global Services, Software,
maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT infrastructures.
Systems and Technology and Global Financing.
Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
Global Services: is a critical component of the company’s strategy
dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across two
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to
primary business areas: Consulting and Application Management
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software
Services. These professional services deliver business value and
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client solu-
innovation to clients through solutions which leverage industry and
tion requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services
business process expertise. The role of GBS is to drive initiatives
segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourc-
that integrate IBM content and solutions and drive the progress of
ing and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services backlog
the company’s four primary growth initiatives. As clients transform
provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within Global
themselves in response to market trends like big data, social and
Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Technology
mobile computing, GBS is aligning its expertise and capabilities to
Services and Global Business Services.
address two interdependent categories of opportunity: Front Office
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra- Digitization, which describes the markets forming around new
structure and business process services, creating business value models of engagement with all audiences; and the Globally Inte-
for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services grated Enterprise, which describes the mandate to integrate data
within its global delivery model. By leveraging insights and experi- and processes in support of the new front-office programs, and
ence drawn from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with build far more flexible information applications.
applied innovation from IBM Research, clients gain access to leading-
edge, high-quality services with improved productivity, flexibility, GBS Capabilities
cost and outcomes. Consulting: delivering client value with solutions in Strategy and
Transformation, Application Innovation Services, Enterprise Applica-
GTS Capabilities tions and Smarter Analytics. Consulting is also focused on bringing
Strategic Outsourcing Services: delivers comprehensive IT out- to market client solutions that drive Front Office Digitization in
sourcing services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing Smarter Commerce, Cloud, Mobile and Social Business.
infrastructures to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk
Application Management Services: application management, main-
management and financial value. The company integrates long-
tenance and support services for packaged software, as well as
standing expertise in service management and technology with the
custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered through advanced
ability to exploit the power of new technologies from IBM systems
capabilities in areas such as application testing and modernization,
and software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization,
cloud application services, the company’s highly differentiated globally
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to
integrated capability model, industry knowledge and the standardiza-
achieve business objectives.
tion and automation of application management.
Global Process Services: delivers a range of offerings consisting of Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems
standardized through transformational solutions including process- software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate systems,
ing platforms and business process outsourcing. These services processes and applications across a standard software platform to
deliver improved business results to clients through the strategic improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain com-
change and/or operation of the client’s business processes, applica- petitive advantage within their industries. IBM middleware is designed
tions and infrastructure. on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate business
applications, developed by different methods and implemented at
Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project-
different times. Operating systems are the software engines that run
based and managed services that enable clients to transform and
computers. Approximately two-thirds of external Software segment
optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and
revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring license charges and
productivity, while reducing costs. The standardized portfolio is built
ongoing post-contract support. The remaining one-third relates
around key assets and patented software, and incorporates best
to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which clients pay one,
practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive quality
up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically, the sale of OTC
of delivery, security and compliance.
software includes one year of post-contract support. Clients can
Cloud Services: delivers a comprehensive set of cloud services rang- also purchase ongoing post-contract support after the first year,
ing from assisting clients with building their own private clouds, to which includes unspecified product upgrades and technical support.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Capabilities Leveraging powerful analytics and usage data, customers are pro-
WebSphere Software: delivers capabilities that enable organizations vided with the ability to have more compelling interactions with their
to run high-performance business applications. With these applica- clients and workforce, increasing touchpoints and deepening rela-
tions, clients can integrate and manage business processes across tionships. The mobile offerings provide the ability to increase
their organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond workforce productivity through enhanced collaboration, improved
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture (SOA), knowledge sharing and increased response speed.
and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social interactions,
Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with business
the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to extend their reach
solutions requiring advanced computing power and storage capa-
and optimize interactions with their key constituents. Smarter Com-
bilities. Approximately half of Systems and Technology’s server and
merce software helps companies better manage and improve each
storage sales transactions are through the company’s business
step of their value chain and capitalize on opportunities for profitable
partners; with the balance direct to end-user clients. In addition,
growth, efficiency and increased customer loyalty.
Systems and Technology provides leading semiconductor technol-
Information Management Software: enables clients to integrate, ogy, products and packaging solutions for IBM’s own advanced
manage and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety technology needs and for external clients.
of sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real value Systems and Technology Capabilities
out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. IBM’s Systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems
middleware and integrated solutions include advanced database designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific
management, information integration, data governance, enterprise computing needs. These systems—System z, Power Systems and
content management, data warehousing, business analytics and intel- System x—are typically the core technology in data centers that pro-
ligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics. vide required infrastructure for business and institutions. Also, these
systems form the foundation for IBM’s integrated offerings, such as
Watson Solutions: included within Information Management Soft-
IBM PureSystems, IBM Smart Analytics, IBM PureData System for
ware, Watson is the first commercially available cognitive computing
Analytics powered by Netezza, IBM SmartCloud Entry and IBM
platform that has the ability to interact in natural language, process-
BladeCenter for Cloud. IBM servers use both IBM and non-IBM micro-
ing vast amounts of big data, and learning from its interactions with
processor technology and operating systems. All IBM servers run
people and computers. As an advisor, Watson is able to sift through
Linux, a key open-source operating system, and the company is
and understand large amounts of data delivering insights with
expanding its Linux relevance further on the Power platform.
unprecedented speeds and accuracy.
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to
Tivoli Software: helps clients optimize the value they get from their
retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital infor-
infrastructures and technology assets through greater visibility, con-
mation. These solutions address critical client requirements for
trol and automation across their end-to-end business operations.
information retention and archiving, security, compliance and stor-
These asset management solutions foster integrated service deliv-
age optimization including data deduplication, availability and
ery for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint
virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and
and mobile device management, asset and facilities management,
tape storage systems, leveraging the breadth of IBM’s software
and storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software
offerings, and includes Flash storage and solutions.
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform that
enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise and Microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily
prevent security breaches. for use in IBM systems and storage products as well as delivering
semiconductors and related services to external clients.
Social Workforce Solutions: enables businesses to connect people
and processes for more effective communication and increased Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems, soft-
productivity through collaboration, messaging and social network- ware and services. Global Financing invests in financing assets,
ing software. By remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the objective
IBM’s social business offerings help organizations reap real ben- of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The primary focus
efits associated with social networking, as well as create a more on the company’s offerings and clients mitigates many of the risks nor-
efficient and effective workforce. mally associated with a financing company. Global Financing has the
benefit of both a deep knowledge of its client base and a clear insight
Rational Software: supports software development for both IT and
into the products and services that are being financed. This combina-
complex embedded system solutions, with a portfolio of products
tion allows Global Financing to effectively manage two of the major risks
and solutions supporting DevOps and Smarter Product Develop-
(credit and residual value) that are normally associated with financing.
ment, transforming the way lines of business, development and
operations work together to deliver innovation via software.
Global Financing Capabilities
Mobile Software: spans middleware and offers customers true end- Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal
to-end mobile solutions across platform and application clients for terms generally between one and seven years. Internal
development, mobile security, and mobile device management. financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term

===== PAGE 35 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s original
portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, occurs in
management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors:
arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions. • Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance
• Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receiv-
• Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive,
able financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products.
Chemical and Petroleum, Electronics
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: as equipment is returned at • Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail,
the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished Travel and Trans portation
and sold or leased to new or existing clients both externally and • Communications: Telecommunications,
internally. Externally remarketed equipment revenue represents Media and Entertain ment, Energy and Utilities
sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equip- • General Business: Cross-sector representation of intermediate-
ment revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold sized large enterprises as well as mid-market clients
internally to Systems and Technology and Global Services. Systems
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
and Technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate the
Global Financing to external clients.
company from its competitors. IBM annually invests approximately
IBM Worldwide Organizations $6 billion for R&D, focusing on high-growth, high-value opportunities.
IBM Research works with clients and the company’s business units
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s delivery
through 12 global labs on near-term and mid-term innovations. It
of value to its clients:
contributes many new technologies to IBM’s portfolio every year
• Sales and Distribution
and helps clients address their most difficult challenges. IBM
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property
Research also explores the boundaries of science and technol-
• Enterprise Transformation
ogy—from nanotechnology to future systems, big data analytics,
• Integrated Supply Chain
secure clouds and to IBM Watson, a ‘‘cognitive’’ learning system.
Sales and Distribution IBM Research also focuses on differentiating IBM’s services
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 175 businesses, providing new capabilities and solutions. It has the
countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribution world’s largest mathematics department of any public company,
of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization man- enabling IBM to create unique analytic solutions and actively engage
ages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based with clients on their toughest challenges.
operating units focused on delivering client value. Within these units, In 2013, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of con- company for the 21st consecutive year. IBM’s 6,809 patents
sultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to improve awarded in 2013 represent a diverse range of inventions poised to
clients’ business performance. These teams deliver value by under- enable significant innovations that will position the company to com-
standing the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring together pete and lead in strategic areas such as Watson, cloud computing
capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of Business and big data analytics. These inventions also will advance the new
Partners to develop and implement solutions. era of cognitive systems where machines will learn, reason and inter-
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s act with people in more natural ways. It was the most U.S. patents
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for ever awarded to one company in a single year.
local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and The company continues to actively seek intellectual property
timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other
units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership.
IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by lever- Some of IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in
aging industry skills with marketing, Inside Sales and local Business IBM products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM
Partner resources. products and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s
The company continues to invest to capture the long-term oppor- various proprietary intellectual property rights are important to its
tunity in markets around the world that have market growth rates success, IBM believes its business as a whole is not materially
greater than the global average—countries within Southeast Asia, dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular group
Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Latin America. The company’s of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number of
major markets include the G7 countries of Canada, France, Germany, patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products.
Italy, Japan, the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK)
plus Austria, the Bahamas, Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Enterprise Transformation
Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Nether- A key element of the company’s strategy is becoming a Smarter
lands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. Enterprise. The transformation to a Smarter Enterprise is built on the
foundation of internal transformation undertaken in the recent past,
where IBM standardized business processes, drove enterprisewide

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
transformation governance, implemented a global operating model, Integrated Supply Chain
instrumented data, and connected employees to drive collaboration IBM has an extensive integrated supply chain, procuring materials and
across geographic and functional boundaries. services globally. In 2013, the company also managed approximately
The Smarter Enterprise is enabled through application of $20 billion in procurement spending for its clients through the Global
analytics, social, mobile and cloud tools, approaches and technolo- Process Services organization. The supply, manufacturing and logistics
gies. Analytics enable data-driven insights for faster, smarter and sales transaction support operations are integrated in one operat-
decision making. Social tools encourage peer-to-peer interactions, ing unit that has optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and
and allow data to be shared within and outside IBM in a social way. streamlining internal processes has improved sales force productivity
Mobile technology allows workers to work seamlessly from any- and operational effectiveness and efficiency. Supply chain resiliency
where. Cloud infrastructure and services enable application delivery. enables IBM to reduce its risk during marketplace changes.
Collectively these enablers allow IBM to make decisions differently, The company continues to derive business value from its own
create value differently and deliver value differently, thereby improv- globally integrated supply chain providing a strategic advantage for
ing employee engagement and client experience and ultimately the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its supply
driving better business performance. The company primarily rein- chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business trans-
vests the benefits of its enterprise transformation initiatives in formation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients’
remixing its spending profile and resources to its higher growth, end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
higher margin initiatives, in addition to improving profitability. The company has expanded its use of analytics to measure,
manage and fine tune its supply chain operations, which will help
reshape its operations and create value for clients.
YEAR IN REVIEW
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2013 versus 2012 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-
length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items; see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 141 to 146 for
additional information.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $38,551 $ 40,236 (4.2)% (1.4)%
Gross margin 38.1% 36.6% 1.5 pts.
Global Business Services 18,396 18,566 (0.9)% 2.6%
Gross margin 30.9% 30.0% 0.9 pts.
Software 25,932 25,448 1.9% 2.9%
Gross margin 88.8% 88.7% 0.1 pts.
Systems and Technology 14,371 17,667 (18.7)% (17.9)%
Gross margin 35.6% 39.1% (3.5) pts.
Global Financing 2,022 2,013 0.4% 2.8%
Gross margin 45.6% 46.5% (0.9 ) pts.
Other 478 577 (17.1)% (16.4)%
Gross margin (195.6)% (71.6)% (124.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $99,751 $104,507 (4.6)% (2.5)%
Total consolidated gross profit $48,505 $ 50,298 (3.6)%
Total consolidated gross margin 48.6% 48.1% 0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 388 375 3.5%
Acquisition-related charges 5 1 NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 629 264 138.1%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $49,527 $ 50,938 (2.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 49.7% 48.7% 0.9 pts.
N M—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 37 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
In 2013, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services business analytics and cloud, and is continuing to invest to expand
(GTS) and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered $56,947 million its capabilities in these areas. Total outsourcing revenue of $26,157
of revenue, grew pre-tax income 2.5 percent and expanded pre-tax million decreased 5.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and
margin 1.0 points. GBS returned to revenue growth in 2013, at con- total transactional revenue of $23,678 million decreased 1.0 percent
stant currency, leveraging the investments made in the Digital Front as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency year to
Office practices. GTS revenue performance improved during the year. The estimated Global Services backlog was $143 billion at
second half of 2013 and is stabilizing. Global Services had December 31, 2013, an increase of 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted
good performance in the key growth initiatives of Smarter Planet, for currency) versus the prior year-end balance.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $56,947 $58,802 (3.2)% (0.2)%
Global Technology Services $38,551 $40,236 (4.2)% (1.4)%
Outsourcing 22,060 23,344 (5.5) (2.7)
Integrated Technology Services 9,380 9,550 (1.8) 1.0
Maintenance 7,111 7,343 (3.1) (0.7)
Global Business Services $18,396 $18,566 (0.9)% 2.6%
Outsourcing 4,097 4,209 (2.6) 1.5
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,298 14,358 (0.4) 2.9
Global Technology Services revenue of $38,551 million in 2013 while Europe was flat year to year. By offering, growth was driven by
decreased 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. the practices that address the Digital Front Office. GBS delivered
From a geographic perspective, revenue declines in North America double-digit growth in each of the strategic growth initiatives of busi-
and Europe were partially offset by growth in Japan, adjusted for ness analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud. The company has been
currency. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 5.5 percent (3 per- investing to build capabilities in these key areas and now has nearly
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue performance was 20,000 resources in GBS focused on the growing Digital Front Office
impacted by a decline in revenue from sales into existing base opportunity. In the area of big data, the GBS capabilities span from
accounts. This activity is more transactional in nature and can be Business Analytics and Optimization strategy, through Front Office
economically sensitive. Revenue was also impacted by the work done Analytics to Fraud and Regulatory Compliance and Risk Management.
to improve the profitability of the restructured low margin outsourcing Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 2.6 percent as reported,
contracts. GTS Outsourcing had double-digit signings growth in 2013 but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency. C&SI revenue decreased
and started to realize the benefit from several of the large transfor- 0.4 percent as reported, but increased 3 percent adjusted for currency.
mational contract signings in its fourth-quarter 2013 revenue. Both lines of business had constant currency revenue growth year
Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue decreased 1.8 percent to year in the growth markets. In 2013, the GBS backlog grew for the
as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 fifth consecutive year at constant currency led by the major markets.
compared to 2012. The company continues to shift the ITS business
toward higher value managed services such as business continuity, ($ in millions)
security and cloud. Within the cloud offerings, SoftLayer contributed Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
2 points of revenue growth to the ITS performance in 2013, and a
Margin
half-point to total GTS revenue for the year. SoftLayer provides For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
unmatched performance, flexibility and breadth for public and hybrid Global Services
cloud workloads. In January 2014, the company announced plans Global Technology Services
to invest over $1.2 billion to double its SoftLayer centers, and with External gross profit $14,691 $14,740 (0.3)%
40 cloud datacenters in 15 countries, the company will have cloud External gross profit margin 38.1% 36.6% 1.5 pts.
centers in every major geography and key financial center.
Pre-tax income $ 6,983 $ 6,961 0.3%
Global Business Services revenue of $18,396 million decreased
Pre-tax margin 17.6% 16.8% 0.8 pts.
0.9 percent as reported, but increased 3 percent at constant currency
Global Business Services
in 2013 with growth in both GBS Outsourcing and Consulting and
External gross profit $ 5,676 $ 5,564 2.0%
Systems Integration (C&SI), adjusted for currency. GBS revenue
External gross profit margin 30.9% 30.0% 0.9 pts.
increased 0.5 percent (4 percent at constant currency) in the second
half of the year. On a geographic basis, revenue growth at constant Pre-tax income $ 3,214 $ 2,983 7.7%
currency was led by North America, Japan and the growth markets, Pre-tax margin 16.8% 15.5% 1.3 pts.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit decreased 0.3 percent in 2013 and the gross profit Global Services Backlog
margin improved 1.5 points year to year with margin expansion in The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2013 was
each line of business, as well as in the growth markets and major $143 billion, an increase of 1.8 percent as reported and 5 percent
markets. Pre-tax income increased 0.3 percent year to year and the adjusted for currency compared to the December 31, 2012 balance,
pre-tax margin expanded 0.8 points to 17.6 percent. The 2013 with growth across both the transactional and outsourcing busi-
margin improvement was driven by reductions in performance- nesses. Revenue generated from the opening backlog is approximately
related compensation, benefits from the second-quarter 2013 70 percent of total services annual revenue in any year. In 2014, the
workforce rebalancing activity and efficiency improvements primarily projected total services revenue from the backlog is expected to be
through the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives, partially up 1 percent year to year at consistent foreign currency exchange
offset by higher year-to-year workforce rebalancing charges. rates. The divestiture of the company’s customer care business in the
The GBS gross profit margin expanded 0.9 points in 2013 with first quarter of 2014 will impact performance from the backlog. This
improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS pre-tax will reduce the total backlog and impact revenue growth from the
income increased 7.7 percent in 2013 with a pre-tax margin of 16.8 backlog by approximately 3 points; including the divestiture, revenue
percent, an improvement of 1.3 points year to year. GBS benefitted generated from the backlog is expected to be down 2 percent year
from reductions in performance-related compensation, the compa- to year. The balance of the revenue, the other approximately 30 per-
ny’s enterprise productivity initiatives and the second-quarter 2013 cent of total services revenue in any year, comes from yield from
workforce rebalancing activity, partially offset by higher year-to-year current year signings, and sales and volumes into the existing client
workforce rebalancing charges. The savings from those actions fuel base. It also includes SoftLayer and some other cloud services, which
the investments being made in the key growth initiatives. generate period revenue that isn’t reflected in the backlog.
The total Global Services business delivered profit growth and The estimated transactional backlog at December 31, 2013
margin expansion throughout 2013. Pre-tax income of $10,197 mil- increased 5.3 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) and the esti-
lion in 2013 increased 2.5 percent year to year and the pre-tax mated outsourcing backlog increased 1.5 percent (5 percent adjusted
margin expanded 1.0 points to 17.4 percent. for currency), respectively, from the December 31, 2012 levels.
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Backlog
Total backlog $142.8 $140.3 1.8% 4.8%
Outsourcing backlog 90.8 89.4 1.5 4.7
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s
Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Maintenance. commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement, and
Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Outsourc- the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
ing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting and Systems Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and
Integration. Total backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract extensions
under contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of
estimates are subject to change and are affected by several factors, the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included in signings
including terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
revalidations, adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjust- revenues equal renewals.
ments for currency. Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
the value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services contract. company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
There are no third-party standards or requirements governing recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or coin-
the calculation of signings. The calculation used by management cidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Total signings $63,203 $56,595 11.7% 14.8%
Outsourcing signings $35,027 $27,891 25.6% 28.7%
Transactional signings 28,176 28,703 (1.8) 1.4

===== PAGE 39 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,932 $25,448 1.9% 2.9%
Middleware $21,557 $20,983 2.7% 3.7%
Key Branded Middleware 17,322 16,528 4.8 5.7
WebSphere Family 8.2 9.1
Information Management 2.8 3.7
Social Workforce Solutions* 10.8 11.9
Tivoli 3.9 4.8
Rational 4.9 6.0
Other middleware 4,235 4,455 (4.9) (3.9)
Operating systems 2,447 2,525 (3.1) (1.9)
Other 1,929 1,940 (0.6) 0.2
* Formerly Lotus
Software revenue of $25,932 million increased 1.9 percent as Information Management revenue increased 2.8 percent (4 per-
reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 compared to cent adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012. Performance
2012. The Software business delivered revenue growth, at constant in 2013 included strong growth in the distributed database offerings,
currency, in all four quarters of the year. Revenue continued to mix including Netezza, and content management software.
toward key branded middleware with growth in all five brands. The Tivoli revenue increased 3.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for cur-
Software value proposition remains strong for enterprise clients. rency) in 2013 and gained share, driven by storage growth and the
Customers continue to increase deployment of the company’s security solutions portfolio. Tivoli storage revenue was up 7 percent (8
middleware products and the business is investing and gaining percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Tivoli security revenue increased
share in social, mobile, analytics, cloud and security. Some of this is 17 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency) and reflects contribution
delivered in a SaaS model, and the company has over 100 SaaS from the acquisition of Trusteer in the third quarter of 2013, which
offerings in its software portfolio. Across the Software brands, there extended Tivoli’s data security capabilities further into cloud and mobile
was strong performance in the growth initiatives that address the environments. The transformation driven by mobile and cloud comput-
key market trends—Smarter Planet, business analytics and cloud. ing is raising the importance of security for enterprise customers. The
The Software business completed eight acquisitions in 2013, adding company has been building and expanding its security capabilities and
to its capabilities in mobile, big data analytics and security. The Soft- now has 6,000 security experts worldwide, 3,000 patents in security
ware business grew segment pre-tax profit 2.7 percent to $11.1 billion and 25 security laboratories worldwide across software and services.
and expanded pre-tax margin 0.5 points. Social Workforce Solutions revenue increased 10.8 percent
In January 2014, the company announced a $1 billion investment in (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Performance was driven
Watson, and it established a new Watson Group within the Software by Kenexa, which provides cloud-based recruiting and talent
business. This new unit is dedicated to the development and com- management solutions.
mercialization of cloud-delivered cognitive innovations. Rational revenue increased 4.9 percent (6 percent adjusted for
Key branded middleware revenue increased 4.8 percent (6 percent currency) in 2013 year over year.
adjusted for currency), with strong performance in the areas of analytics, Operating systems revenue decreased 3.1 percent (2 percent
cloud, mobile, social and security. The faster growing and higher value adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012, driven by declines in
branded middleware accounted for 67 percent of total Software revenue Systems z and Power Systems.
in 2013, an increase of 2 points from 2012.
WebSphere revenue increased 8.2 percent (9 percent adjusted ($ in millions)
for currency) in 2013 and gained share. Revenue performance was Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
driven by double-digit growth in the Commerce offerings, and
Margin
growth in Business Integration and the on-premises Application For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Server business. Mobile contributed strong revenue growth in 2013. Software
MobileFirst, the company’s comprehensive portfolio of mobile soft- External gross profit $23,032 $22,569 2.0%
ware and services, was introduced in 2013 and extends value to External gross profit margin 88.8% 88.7% 0.1 pts.
clients to reach new markets and gain competitive advantage. The Pre-tax income $11,106 $10,810 2.7%
company continues to add capabilities to the WebSphere brand. In
Pre-tax margin 38.1% 37.6% 0.5 pts.
January 2014, the business acquired Aspera, Inc. which provides
best in class transfer speeds for movement of big data.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software gross profit increased 2.0 percent in 2013, with a gross enterprise productivity initiatives, to drive profit growth and margin
profit margin of 88.8 percent. Software pre-tax income increased expansion. The relative strength of the Software business, fueled by
2.7 percent and the pre-tax margin improved 0.5 points to 38.1 per- growth in the key growth initiatives, improved the company’s busi-
cent. The Software business had another successful year leveraging ness mix and contributed to its operating (non-GAAP) consolidated
revenue growth and expense savings, primarily from the company’s gross and net margin improvements.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $14,371 $17,667 (18.7)% (17.9)%
System z (13.4)% (12.6)%
Power Systems (31.4) (30.7)
System x (13.5) (12.7)
Storage (10.8) (9.7)
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions (17.6) (16.8)
Microelectronics OEM (11.9) (11.9)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions (17.0) (16.3)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012) (98.2) (98.2)
Systems and Technology (STG) revenue decreased 18.7 percent Power Systems revenue decreased 31.4 percent (31 percent
(18 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. Adjusting for adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The Power platform
the divested RSS business, revenue declined 17.0 percent (16 per- continues to ship significant capacity into the UNIX market, however
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Growth markets revenue this has been more than offset by significant price performance,
decreased 16.5 percent (16 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013, resulting in lower revenue. The company has been very successful
compared to the prior year, while major markets revenue decreased in the UNIX market, and is taking two actions to improve its business
21.5 percent (20 percent adjusted for currency). Japan declined 18 model in Power Systems. First, it is making the platform more rele-
percent as reported, but was essentially flat adjusted for currency. vant to clients. To achieve this:
Two issues within the business significantly impacted the segment’s • In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company introduced a new
revenue and profit performance in 2013. First, STG is dealing with Integrated Facility for Linux offering which enables clients to run
challenges in its hardware business models specific to Power Sys- Linux workloads in their existing servers. This mirrors the suc-
tems, Storage and x86. In addition, System z revenue was impacted cessful strategy the company executed on the System z platform;
by the product cycle, particularly in the second half, as the company • The company will expand its Linux relevance even further
entered the back end of the current mainframe cycle with difficult with POWER8 in 2014, which will provide additional big data
period-to-period comparisons driving revenue declines. and cloud capabilities; and
System z revenue decreased 13.4 percent (13 percent adjusted • Through the company’s OpenPOWER consortium it is making
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The decrease was primarily driven Power technology available to an open development alliance,
by lower revenue in North America, while revenue increased in the building an ecosystem around the Power technologies.
growth markets. MIPS (millions of instructions per second) ship-
These effects will take some time.
ments increased 6 percent in 2013 versus the prior year. The
Secondly, even with these additional capabilities, the company
increase in MIPS was driven by specialty engines, which increased
recognizes that the size of the Power platform will not return to prior
17 percent year over year and continue to be more than 50 percent
revenue levels. The company will take action by right-sizing the busi-
of the total volumes. The decline in System z revenue was expected
ness for the demand characteristics it expects.
based on the product’s movement through the product cycle in
System x revenue decreased 13.5 percent (13 percent adjusted for
2013. In the current mainframe cycle, the company has shipped 28
currency) in 2013 versus 2012. High-end System x revenue decreased
percent more MIPS compared to the same period in the prior cycle.
16 percent (16 percent adjusted for currency) and blades revenue
The revenue and gross profit in the current cycle are each about 99
declined 45 percent (45 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus
percent of the previous cycle, net of currency. Mainframe products
the prior year. These decreases were partially offset by increased
provide the highest levels of availability, reliability, efficiency and
revenue driven by PureSystems.
security, which position it as the ideal platform for high volume, mis-
PureSystems continued to gain momentum. Globally to date, the
sion critical workloads. The additional MIPS capacity in the current
company has shipped over 10,000 systems across its hardware brands.
product cycle is a reflection of the ongoing relevance of the main-
Storage revenue decreased 10.8 percent (10 percent adjusted for
frame to clients, and provides the company with financial returns
currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The company’s flash solutions contin-
consistent with past cycles.
ued to gain momentum in 2013 with positive revenue growth. The

===== PAGE 41 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Storwize products delivered double-digit growth, which were more The decrease in external gross profit in 2013 versus 2012 was due
than offset by declines in legacy OEM mid-range offerings, and to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin reflecting
declines in high-end offerings driven by significant pricing pressure. the business model challenges. Overall gross margin decreased 3.5
Retail Store Solutions (RSS) revenue decreased 98.2 percent points in 2013 versus the prior year. The decrease was driven by
(98 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. In the third lower margins in Power Systems (1.0 points), System x (0.9 points),
quarter of 2012, the company divested the RSS business to Toshiba Microelectronics (0.7 points) and Storage (0.4 points) as well as a
TEC. See the caption, “Divestitures,” on page 98 for additional infor- decline due to revenue mix (0.7 points), partially offset by margin
mation regarding the transaction. improvement in System z (0.1 points).
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 11.9 percent (12 percent Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased $1,734
adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. million to a loss of $507 million in 2013, when compared to the prior
year. Pre-tax margin decreased 10.1 points in 2013 versus 2012. The
($ in millions) decline in pre-tax income was driven by the hardware businesses
Yr.-to-Yr. which are dealing with business model challenges due to market
Percent/
shifts and System z, as it entered the backend of the mainframe
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change product cycle late in the year.
Systems and Technology
External gross profit $5,120 $6,903 (25.8)% Global Financing
See pages 72 through 75 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
External gross profit margin 35.6% 39.1% (3.5) pts.
segment results.
Pre-tax income $(507) $1,227 NM
Pre-tax margin (3.4)% 6.7% (10.1) pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Total revenue $99,751 $104,507 (4.6)% (2.5)%
Geographies $97,800 $102,268 (4.4)% (2.2)%
Americas 43,249 44,556 (2.9) (2.0)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 31,628 31,775 (0.5) (2.1)
Asia Pacific 22,923 25,937 (11.6) (2.8)
Major markets (4.2)% (2.2)%
Growth markets (4.9)% (2.4)%
BRIC countries (8.2)% (5.6)%
Total geographic revenue of $97,800 million decreased 4.4 per- and China, combined revenue declined 8.2 percent (6 percent
cent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue in the adjusted for currency). The company continues to see good oppor-
major markets decreased 4.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for cur- tunity in all regions over the long term and is continuing to invest in
rency). Revenue from the growth markets, which represented these key markets.
approximately 23 percent of the total geographic revenue for the Americas revenue decreased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for
year, decreased 4.9 percent on a year-to-year basis (2 percent currency) compared to the prior year. The major market countries were
adjusted for currency). Performance at constant currency in the down 3.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency), partially offset by
growth markets was mixed, with year-to-year growth in the first an increase in the Latin America growth markets of 4.4 percent
half offset by declines in the second half. The company had (9 percent adjusted for currency). Within the major market countries,
strength in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa region. the U.S. was down 3.4 percent and Canada was down 6.3 percent
However, declines in some of the larger growth markets, for example (3 percent adjusted for currency). Within the growth market countries,
China and Australia, impacted the overall performance in the Brazil increased 3.3 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency) and
growth markets. Within the BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India Mexico increased 7.8 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 0.5 per- Total expense and other (income) increased 2.1 percent in 2013
cent (2 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year. versus 2012. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other
The major market countries were down 0.5 percent (3 percent (income) increased 1.4 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers
adjusted for currency), while the growth market countries were down of the year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) were
0.6 percent (up 1 percent adjusted for currency). In the major market approximately:
countries, the UK decreased 1.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency),
Total Operating
Germany decreased 0.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), Consolidated (non-GAAP)
France decreased 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), and • Currency* (1) point (1) point
Italy decreased 2.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). Within • Acquisitions** 2 points 2 points
the EMEA growth markets, the Middle East and Africa region • Base expense 1 point 1 point
increased 5.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), but this * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
growth was offset primarily by a decrease in Russia of 22.7 percent ** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
(22 percent adjusted for currency).
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 11.6 percent (3 percent adjusted In the execution of its strategy, the company continues to invest
for currency) year to year. Japan revenue decreased 15.2 percent as in its growth initiatives, innovation and strategic acquisitions. The
reported, but increased 4 percent overall and grew in every quarter company also has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency
on a constant currency basis. This growth reflects the benefits of and productivity across the business.
shifting investment and redirection of the company’s go-to-market For additional information regarding total expense and other
focus to improve performance in Japan. The Asia Pacific growth (income), see the following analyses by category.
markets decreased 9.1 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency),
Selling, General and Administrative
with China down 12.2 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) and
Australia down 15.9 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency). ($ in millions)
During 2013, performance in China was impacted by the process Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
surrounding the implementation of a broad governmental economic For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
reform plan. Selling, general and
OEM revenue of $1,951 million in 2013 decreased 12.9 percent administrative expense
(12 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year, driven Selling, general and
by the Microelectronics OEM business. administrative—other $19,187 $19,589 (2.1)%
Advertising and promotional expense 1,294 1,339 (3.3)
Total Expense and Other (Income) Workforce rebalancing charges 1,064 803 32.4
($ in millions) Retirement-related costs 995 945 5.3
Yr.-to-Yr. Amortization of acquired
Percent/
intangible assets 370 328 12.9
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Stock-based compensation 435 498 (12.6)
Total consolidated expense Bad debt expense 156 50 210.0
and other (income) $28,981 $28,396 2.1%
Total consolidated selling, general
Non-operating adjustments and administrative expense $23,502 $23,553 (0.2)%
Amortization of acquired Non-operating adjustments
intangible assets (370) (328) 12.9
Amortization of acquired
Acquisition-related charges (40) (35) 14.9 intangible assets (370) (328) 12.9
Non-operating retirement-related Acquisition-related charges (25) (22) 13.3
(costs)/income (433) (274) 58.3
Non-operating retirement-related
Operating (non-GAAP) (costs)/income (376) (294) 28.1
expense and other (income) $28,137 $27,760 1.4%
Operating (non-GAAP)
Total consolidated selling, general and
expense-to-revenue ratio 29.1% 27.2% 1.9 pts. administrative expense $22,731 $22,910 (0.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 28.2% 26.6% 1.6 pts.

===== PAGE 43 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased Research, Development and Engineering
0.2 percent in 2013 versus 2012. The decrease was primarily driven
($ in millions)
by the effects of currency (1 point) and base spending (1 point), Yr.-to-Yr.
partially offset by acquisition-related spending (2 points). Operating Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
(non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 0.8 percent primarily driven
Total consolidated research,
by the effects of currency (1 point) and lower base spending
development and engineering $6,226 $6,302 (1.2)%
(1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending (1 point).
Non-operating adjustment
The decrease was driven by lower SG&A—other expense, as the
Non-operating retirement-related
company continues to shift its spending. The company is continuing
(costs)/income (57) 20 NM
to drive productivity across the business, primarily through its enter-
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
prise productivity initiatives, and is reinvesting most of those savings development and engineering $6,170 $6,322 (2.4)%
into the business to drive its growth areas. The increase in workforce
NM—Not meaningful
rebalancing charges was due to actions the company took in the
second quarter of 2013. Bad debt expense increased $106 million
The company continues to invest in research and development,
in 2013 versus 2012, primarily driven by higher specific account
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities
reserves. The accounts receivable provision coverage was 1.6 per-
and to extend its technology leadership. Total research, development
cent at December 31, 2013, an increase of 20 basis points from
and engineering (RD&E) expense decreased 1.2 percent in 2013
year-end 2012.
versus 2012, primarily driven by lower base spending (3 points), par-
tially offset by acquisitions (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E
Other (Income) and Expense
expense decreased 2.4 percent in 2013 compared to the prior year
($ in millions) primarily driven by lower base spending (4 points), partially offset by
Yr.-to-Yr. acquisitions (2 points). Overall, the investment in RD&E represented
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change 6.2 percent of revenue in 2013, compared to 6.0 percent in 2012.
Other (income) and expense
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Foreign currency transaction
losses/(gains) $(260) $(240) 8.4% ($ in millions)
(Gains)/losses on derivative Yr.-to-Yr.
instruments 166 72 132.5 Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Interest income (74) (109) (32.2)
Sales and other transfers
Net (gains)/losses from securities of intellectual property $352 $ 324 8.7%
and investment assets (29) (55) (48.0)
Licensing/royalty-based fees 150 251 (40.0)
Other (131) (511) (74.4)
Custom development income 320 500 (36.0)
Total consolidated other
Total $822 $1,074 (23.5)%
(income) and expense $(327) $(843) (61.2)%
Non-operating adjustment
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of intellectual
Acquisition-related charges (16) (13) 17.4
property (IP) may vary significantly from period to period depending
Operating (non-GAAP) upon timing of divestitures, industry consolidation, economic con-
other (income) and expense $(343) $(857) (60.0)%
ditions and the timing of new patents and know-how development.
There were no significant individual IP transactions in 2013 or 2012.
Other (income) and expense was income of $327 million and $843
Custom development income declined 36 percent compared to
million in 2013 and 2012, respectively. The decrease in income of
the prior year due to a reduction in payments from the company’s
$516 million in 2013 was primarily driven by lower income from dives-
technology alliance partners.
titures ($405 million) driven by the gain associated with the divested
RSS business ($446 million) in 2012 reflected in Other in the table
Interest Expense
above, and increased losses on derivative instruments ($95 million)
($ in millions)
due to foreign currency rate volatility year to year.
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Interest expense
Total $402 $459 (12.5)%

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The decrease in interest expense in 2013 versus 2012 was primarily In 2013, total retirement-related plan cost increased by $488 million
driven by lower average interest rates, partially offset by higher aver- compared to 2012, primarily driven by an increase in recognized
age debt levels. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in actuarial losses ($1,027 million) and lower expected return on plan
the Consolidated State ment of Earnings only if the related external assets ($169 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($510 million)
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. and lower pension litigation cost ($152 million).
See page 75 for additional information regarding Global Financing As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section
debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense (excluding capi- on page 26, the company characterizes certain retirement-related
talized interest) for 2013 was $989 million, a decrease of $15 million costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this
year to year. characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2013 were
$1,815 million, a decrease of $36 million compared to 2012, driven
Stock-Based Compensation by lower cost of defined contribution plans ($122 million), partially
Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $614 million offset by increased service cost ($52 million) and increased amor-
decreased $74 million compared to 2012. The decrease was primar- tization of prior service cost ($34 million). Non-operating costs of
ily related to performance share units ($48 million), the company’s $1,062 million increased $524 million in 2013, compared to the
assumption of stock-based awards previously issued by acquired prior year, driven primarily by the increase in recognized actuarial
entities ($16 million) and restricted stock units ($10 million). Stock- losses ($1,027 million) and lower expected return on plan assets
based compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, was ($169 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($510 million)
reflected in the following categories: Cost: $122 million, down $10 and lower pension litigation cost ($152 million).
million; SG&A expense: $435 million, down $63 million; and RD&E
expense: $57 million, down $2 million. Income Taxes
See note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 124 to 127 The effective tax rate for 2013 was 15.6 percent, a decrease of 8.6
for additional information on stock-based compensation. points versus the prior year, driven by the following factors:
• A benefit resulting from the completion of the U.S. 2008-2010
Retirement-Related Plans tax audit, including the associated reserve redeterminations
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement- (11.5 points);
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated • A benefit due to a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) income in 2013 (2.4 points);
relating to the job function of the plan participants. • Benefits from the retroactive impact of the 2012 American
Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points) and an increase in research
($ in millions) and development credits (0.6 points);
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent • A benefit from a tax agreement which required a reassess-
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change ment of certain valuation allowances on deferred tax assets
Retirement-related plans—cost (1.5 points); and
Service cost $ 545 $ 493 10.6% • Benefits from the resolution of certain non-U.S. tax audits
Amortization of prior (0.8 points) and newly enacted U.S. state tax legislation
service cost/(credits) (114) (148) (22.9) (0.6 points); partially offset by
Cost of defined contribution plans 1,384 1,506 (8.1) • Tax charges related to certain intercompany payments
Total operating costs $ 1,815 $ 1,851 (2.0)% made by foreign subsidiaries and the intercompany licensing
Interest cost 3,728 4,238 (12.0) of certain IP (9.1 points); and
• The year-over-year impact of the 2012 benefit related to a tax
Expected return on plan assets (6,187) (6,356) (2.7)
restructuring in Latin America (0.8 points).
Recognized actuarial losses 3,434 2,407 42.7
Plan amendments/curtailments/
The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 16.0 percent, a
settlements 0 1 (30.6)
decrease of 8.0 points versus 2012 principally driven by the same
Multi-employer plan/other costs 86 247 (65.4)
factors described above.
Total non-operating costs/(income) $ 1,062 $ 538 97.5%
Total retirement-related Earnings Per Share
plans—cost $ 2,876 $ 2,389 20.4%
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during
the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis
of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock out-
standing plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock options
and stock awards.

===== PAGE 45 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
During 2013, the company generated $17,485 million in cash from
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent operations, a decrease of $2,102 million compared to 2012. In addi-
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
tion, the company generated $15,021 million in free cash flow, a
Earnings per share of common stock
decrease of $3,164 million versus the prior year. See pages 65 to 67
Assuming dilution $14.94 $14.37 4.0%
for additional information on free cash flow. The company returned
Basic $15.06 $14.53 3.6% $17,917 million to shareholders in 2013, with $13,859 million in gross
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $16.28 $15.25 6.8% share repurchases and $4,058 million in dividends. In 2013 the com-
Weighted-average shares pany repurchased approximately 73 million shares and had
outstanding (in millions) approximately $14.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authoriza-
Assuming dilution 1,103.0 1,155.4 (4.5)% tion at year end. The company’s cash generation permits the
Basic 1,094.5 1,142.5 (4.2)% company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attrac-
tive long-term opportunities.
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2013 and 2012 were The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing
1,054.4 million and 1,117.4 million, respectively. The average number business are a significant part of the company’s financial position.
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 52.4 million The financial position amounts appearing on page 80 are the con-
shares lower in 2013 versus 2012. The decrease was primarily the solidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts
result of the common stock repurchase program. See note L, appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning
“Equity Activity,” on page 116 for additional information regarding on page 72, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an
common stock activities. Also see note P, “Earnings Per Share of understanding of the Global Financing business.
Common Stock,” on pages 124 and 125.
Working Capital
Financial Position
($ in millions)
Dynamics
At December 31: 2013 2012
At December 31, 2013, the company continues to have a high degree
Current assets $51,350 $49,433
of financial flexibility with a strong balance sheet to support the busi-
Current liabilities 40,154 43,625
ness over the long term. Cash and marketable securities at year end
Working capital $11,196 $ 5,807
were $11,066 million, consistent with the prior year-end balance.
Current ratio 1.28:1 1.13:1
During the year, the company continued to manage the investment
portfolio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives.
Working capital increased $5,388 million from the year-end 2012
Total debt of $39,718 million increased $6,449 million from prior
position. The key changes are described below:
year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at December 31,
Current assets increased $1,917 million ($2,815 million adjusted
2013, was $2,458 million, an increase of $658 million from the prior
for currency), due to:
year. Within total debt, $27,504 million is in support of the Global
• An increase of $1,258 million ($1,886 million adjusted for
Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. The com-
currency) in short-term receivables primarily due to higher
pany continues to have substantial flexibility in the market. During
volumes related to inventory financing; and
2013, the company completed bond issuances totaling $10,956
• An increase of $463 million ($630 million adjusted for
million, with terms ranging from 2 to 12 years, and priced from 0.22
currency) in prepaid expenses and other assets,
to 3.38 percent depending on maturity. The company has consis-
primarily driven by prepaid income taxes ($407 million).
tently generated strong cash flow from operations and continues
to have access to additional sources of liquidity through the capital
Current liabilities decreased $3,471 million ($2,562 million adjusted
markets and its $10 billion global credit facility, with 100 percent of
for currency), as a result of:
the facility available on a same day basis.
• A decrease in short-term debt of $2,319 million ($2,096 million
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasures
adjusted for currency) (see debt analysis on pages 45 and 46);
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
• A decrease of $853 million ($770 million adjusted for currency)
December 31. At December 31, 2013, the overall net underfunded
in compensation and benefits reflecting lower accruals for
position was $11,434 million, a decrease of $8,756 million from
performance-related compensation; and
December 31, 2012 driven by the increase in discount rates, primarily
• A decrease in accounts payable of $490 million ($409 million
in the U.S. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans
adjusted for currency) reflecting payment of higher 2012 year-
were well funded and the cash requirements related to these plans
end volumes; partially offset by
remain stable going forward at less than $700 million per year
• An increase in deferred income of $605 million ($861 million
through 2015. In 2013, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by Software.
assets was 7.1 percent and the plan was 109 percent funded. Overall,
global asset returns were 7.1 percent and the qualified defined benefit
plans worldwide were 102 percent funded. See note S, “Retirement-
Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to 141 for additional information.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financing
($ in millions)
activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows At December 31: 2013 2012
on page 81, is summarized in the table below. These amounts include
Noncurrent assets $74,873 $69,780
the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
Long-term debt $32,856 $24,088
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $30,284 $32,516
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012
The increase in noncurrent assets of $5,093 million ($6,521 million
Net cash provided by/(used in)
adjusted for currency) was driven by:
Operating activities $17,485 $ 19,586
• An increase of $4,607 million ($4,578 million adjusted for
Investing activities (7,326) (9,004)
currency) in prepaid pension assets primarily driven by plan
Financing activities (9,883) (11,976)
remeasurements; and
Effect of exchange rate changes • An increase in intangible assets and goodwill of $2,022 million
on cash and cash equivalents 28 (116)
($2,385 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by
Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ 304 $ (1,511)
current year acquisitions; partially offset by
• A decrease of $922 million in deferred taxes ($753 million
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $2,102
adjusted for currency) driven by retirement-related plans
million in 2013 driven by operational performance and the following
activity.
key factors:
• A net increase in the use of cash for taxes (deferred, payable, Long-term debt increased by $8,768 million ($8,779 million adjusted
reserves) of $2,200 million primarily driven by an increase in for currency) primarily driven by new debt issuances of $12,898 million,
cash income tax payments; partially offset by reclasses to short-term debt of $3,949 million.
• A net decrease from compensation and benefits of approxi- Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, decreased $2,232
mately $600 million primarily driven by reductions in million ($1,723 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
performance-related compensation; • A decrease in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations of
• An increase in the use of cash of $438 million related to the $4,176 million driven by plan remeasurements; partially offset by
fulfillment of services contracts; • An increase of $2,326 million in other liabilities primarily
• Higher cash requirements for inventory ($337 million); driven by deferred tax increases related to the pension plan
• Higher cash payments for workforce rebalancing of remeasurements.
$332 million; and
• Lower net income of $121 million; partially offset by Debt
• Lower cash used by accounts receivables of $823 million The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and
primarily driven by financing receivables; and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liability
• A decrease in cash funding related to retirement-related profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility to
plans of $723 million driven by a decrease in nonpension access global funding sources as needed.
postretirement contributions.
($ in millions)
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $1,679 million driven by: At December 31: 2013 2012
• An increase in cash of $1,232 million from net sales of Total company debt $39,718 $33,269
marketable securities and other investments; Total Global Financing segment debt $27,504 $24,501
• A net decrease of $539 million in cash used for capital Debt to support external clients 24,471 21,583
expenditures; and Debt to support internal clients 3,033 2,919
• A net decrease of $363 million in cash used for acquisitions/
divestitures; partially offset by Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
• A net decrease in cash provided by non-operating financing pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by
receivables of $455 million. other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, gener-
ate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $2,094 million as
asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global Services
compared to the prior year driven by the following factors:
assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset
• An increase in net cash from debt transactions (including
base. The debt analysis above is further detailed in the Global
short-term borrowings) of $4,708 million; partially offset by
Financing section on page 75.
• An increase of $2,330 million of net cash used for common
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-to-
stock transactions; and
capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and equity
• An increase in dividend payments of $285 million.
as management believes this is more representative of the com-
pany’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from period to
period as the company manages its global cash and debt positions.

===== PAGE 47 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing increase in equity as a result of retirement-related plan remeasure-
debt and equity) was 39.0 percent at December 31, 2013 compared ments in December.
to 36.1 percent at December 31, 2012. The increase was primarily
driven by an increase in non-Global Financing debt of $3,446 million Equity
partially offset by an increase in non-Global Financing equity of Total equity increased by $3,945 million from December 31, 2012 as
$3,615 million from the December 31, 2012 balances. a result of an increase in retained earnings of $12,401 million, an
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2013 increase in common stock of $1,484 million and lower accumulated
was 63.4 percent versus 63.7 percent at December 31, 2012. other comprehensive losses of $4,157 million, partially offset by an
The “core” debt-to-capitalization ratio and the consolidated increase in treasury stock of $14,110 million related to common stock
debt-to-capitalization ratio were impacted by the $3,184 million repurchases during the year.
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 26 for the
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $48,505 $ 394 $ 629 $49,527
Gross profit margin 48.6% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 49.7%
SG&A $23,502 $(394) $ (376) $22,731
RD&E 6,226 0 (57) 6,170
Other (income) and expense (327) (16) 0 (343)
Total expense and other (income) 28,981 (410) (433) 28,137
Pre-tax income 19,524 804 1,062 21,390
Pre-tax income margin 19.6% 0.8 pts. 1.1 pts. 21.4%
Provision for income taxes* $ 3,041 $ 57 $ 333 $ 3,431
Effective tax rate 15.6% (0.3) pts. 0.8 pts. 16.0%
Net income $16,483 $ 747 $ 729 $17,959
Net income margin 16.5% 0.7 pts. 0.7 pts. 18.0%
Diluted earnings per share $ 14.94 $0.68 $ 0.66 $ 16.28
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,298 $ 376 $ 264 $50,938
Gross profit margin 48.1% 0.4 pts. 0.3 pts. 48.7%
SG&A $23,553 $(349) $ (294 ) $22,910
RD&E 6,302 0 20 6,322
Other (income) and expense (843) (13) 0 (857)
Total expense and other (income) 28,396 (363) (274) 27,760
Pre-tax income 21,902 739 538 23,179
Pre-tax income margin 21.0% 0.7 pts. 0.5 pts. 22.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,298 $ 98 $ 156 $ 5,552
Effective tax rate 24.2% (0.4) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.0%
Net income $16,604 $ 641 $ 381 $17,627
Net income margin 15.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 16.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 14.37 $0.55 $ 0.33 $ 15.25
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results Within the company’s segments, revenue performance at con-
stant currency was led by growth in Software, Global Services and
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Global Financing which was more than offset by a decline in STG.
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Software revenue improved 2.8 percent as reported and 4 percent
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2013 2012 Change at constant currency. Performance was broad-based with constant
Revenue $27,699 $29,304 (5.5)%* currency growth in all brands and strength in several of the areas
where the company has targeted it investments—business analyt-
Gross profit margin 51.7% 51.8% (0.1) pts.
ics, cloud and security. Total Global Services revenue declined 2.3
Total expense and other (income) $ 7,353 $ 7,336 0.2%
percent as reported, but increased 1 percent at constant currency
Total expense and other
consistent with performance in the third-quarter. Performance was
(income)-to-revenue ratio 26.5% 25.0% 1.5 pts.
driven by GBS which increased 0.6 percent as reported and 4 per-
Income before income taxes $ 6,962 $ 7,831 (11.1)%
cent adjusted for currency, driven by offerings that address
Provision for income taxes 777 1,998 (61.1)%
digitization of the front office. Revenue performance in strategic
Net income $ 6,185 $ 5,833 6.0%
outsourcing within GTS continued to improve, adjusted for currency.
Net income margin 22.3% 19.9% 2.4 pts.
The Global Services backlog increased 1.8 percent (5 percent
Earnings per share of common stock adjusted for currency), also driven by GBS. STG revenue decreased
Assuming dilution $ 5.73 $ 5.13 11.7% 26.1 percent as reported (25 percent adjusted for currency) and
Weighted-average shares outstanding impacted the overall consolidated performance. The company is
Assuming dilution 1,080.0 1,136.4 (5.0)% dealing with challenges in its hardware business models specific to
Power Systems, Storage and x86. As expected, System z mainframe
* (3.5) percent adjusted for currency.
revenue was impacted by the product cycle and decreased 37.4
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) percent (37 percent adjusted for currency) compared to a very
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2013 and 2012. strong performance in the fourth quarter of 2012. These dynamics
in the hardware business significantly impacted consolidated
($ in millions except per share amounts) revenue growth and profit in the fourth quarter of 2013.
Yr.-to-Yr. On a geographic basis, revenue in the growth markets declined
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2013 2012 Change 9.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) with mixed results by
Net income as reported $6,185 $5,833 6.0% region, though disappointing overall. In the two largest regions, Asia
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax) Pacific growth markets were down 15.7 percent (12 percent adjusted
for currency), primarily driven by China, while growth markets in Latin
Acquisition-related charges 268 243 10.6
America were essentially flat as reported, but increased 5 percent
Non-operating retirement-related
costs/(income) 164 53 207.8 at constant currency.
The consolidated gross profit margin was essentially flat year to
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $6,617 $ 6,129 8.0%
year at 51.7 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross profit margin
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
earnings per share $ 6.13 $ 5.39 13.7% increased 0.3 points to 52.6 percent. Margins expanded in both Global
Services segments, and the relative strength in the Software business
* See page 52 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP)
drove an improving mix. These improvements were mitigated by a 5.5
earnings.
point margin decline in STG. System z margin improved year to year
Snapshot as expected at this point in the product cycle, but the other hardware
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company reported $27.7 billion in rev- brands declined reflecting the business model challenges.
enue, expanded its net income margin and delivered diluted earnings Total expense and other (income) increased 0.2 percent in the
per share growth of 11.7 percent as reported and 13.7 percent on an fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-
operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $6.5 billion in GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 1.0 percent versus
cash from operations and $8.4 billion in free cash flow in the fourth quar- the prior year. The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total
ter driving shareholder returns of $6.8 billion in gross common stock expense and other (income) were approximately:
repurchases and dividends. The free cash flow performance repre-
sented 56 percent of the full year—the highest percent in several years. Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
Revenue in the fourth quarter decreased 5.5 percent, 3.5 percent
• C urrency* (2) points (2) points
at constant currency. The currency impact to revenue was 2.0 points.
• A cquisitions** 2 points 2 points
Consistent with the full year, currency also impacted profit perfor-
• Base expense 0 points (1) point
mance in the fourth quarter as the depreciation of the Yen largely
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
flows to profit due to the local services content within the company’s
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is
business in Japan and the inability to hedge these cash flows. net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.

===== PAGE 49 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Pre-tax income declined 11.1 percent year to year and the pre-tax 3.0 points compared to the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP)
margin was 25.1 percent. Net income increased 6.0 percent and effective tax rate was 11.0 percent versus 24.4 percent in the fourth
the net income margin was 22.3 percent, an increase of 2.4 points quarter of 2012 driven by the same factors described above.
year to year. The effective tax rate for the fourth quarter was 11.2 Diluted earnings per share of $5.73 increased 11.7 percent versus
percent, compared to 25.5 percent in the prior year. The decrease the prior year. In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 33.2
in the tax rate included substantial benefits from tax audit settle- million shares of its common stock. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted
ments and a modest reduction in the ongoing tax rate. Specifically, earnings per share of $6.13 increased $0.74 or 13.7 percent versus
the fourth-quarter tax rate included the conclusion of the U.S. tax the fourth quarter of 2012 driven by the following factors:
audit for the three-year period from 2008-2010. The company • Revenue decrease at actual rates $ (0.29)
accrues taxes for uncertain tax matters in the normal tax rate. The • Margin expansion $ 0.73
conclusion of the audit in November 2013 resulted in a reduction • Common stock repurchases $ 0.30
of tax expense previously recorded in the normal tax rate. While the
audit closure had the most significant impact, there were additional The operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share growth in the fourth
discrete items impacting the rate in the fourth quarter. Operating quarter was achieved through a combination of: continued momen-
(non-GAAP) pre-tax income declined 8.4 percent year to year and tum in key growth areas, which drove a mix to higher-value Software
the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 26.8 percent, down and GBS; yield from productivity initiatives; a modest improvement
0.8 points year to year driven entirely by the hardware business. in the ongoing tax rate, along with substantial benefits from tax
Operating (non-GAAP) net income increased 8.0 percent and the audit settlements; and, the effective use of cash to repurchase
operating (non-GAAP) net income margin of 23.9 percent increased common shares.
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2013 versus the fourth quarter of 2012 reportable segment external revenue and gross
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arms-length transfer
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 9,917 $10,284 (3.6)% (0.6)%
Gross margin 38.8% 37.6% 1.2 pts.
Global Business Services 4,747 4,720 0.6% 4.3%
Gross margin 30.7% 29.9% 0.7 pts.
Software 8,140 7,915 2.8% 3.5%
Gross margin 90.5% 90.6% (0.1) pts.
Systems and Technology 4,261 5,763 (26.1)% (25.4)%
Gross margin 38.6% 44.1% (5.5) pts.
Global Financing 534 535 (0.1)% 2.6%
Gross margin 43.3% 43.8% (0.4) pts.
Other 100 87 15.2% 16.9%
Gross margin (234.8)% (73.2)% (161.6) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $27,699 $29,304 (5.5)% (3.5)%
Total consolidated gross profit $14,315 $15,167 (5.6)%
Total consolidated gross margin 51.7% 51.8% (0.1) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 103 99 4.1%
Acquisition-related charges 1 0 NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 154 60 155.7%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $14,574 $15,327 (4.9)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 52.6% 52.3% 0.3 pts.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services and was driven by the practices that address the Digital Front Office.
Global Business Services, generated $14,664 million of revenue in GBS delivered double-digit growth in each of the strategic growth
the fourth quarter, a decrease year to year of 2.3 percent as initiatives—business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud. In addi-
reported, but an increase of 1 percent adjusted for currency. This tion, within the back office solutions that address the Globally
was the second consecutive quarter of constant currency revenue Integrated Enterprise, implementation services that support the
growth in total Global Services. Pre-tax income of $2,929 million in traditional packaged applications increased again in the fourth quar-
the fourth quarter of 2013 was up 2.1 percent year to year and the ter at constant currency. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased
pre-tax margin improved 0.9 points, with margin expansion in both 6.5 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and C&SI revenue
segments. Global Services continued to have good performance in increased 2.7 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency), representing
the key growth areas of cloud, business analytics and Smarter a 1 point sequential improvement at constant currency from the third
Planet in the quarter, and the company is continuing to invest to quarter of 2013. The GBS gross profit margin improved 0.7 points
extend its capabilities. Total outsourcing revenue of $6,662 million in the fourth quarter versus the prior year. GBS pre-tax income of
decreased 4.5 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and total $940 million in the fourth quarter of 2013 increased 11.7 percent,
transactional revenue of $6,202 million increased 0.3 percent with a pre-tax margin of 19.1 percent, an improvement of 2.0 points
(4 percent adjusted for currency) year over year. year to year. The primary year-to-year profit drivers were reductions
Global Technology Services revenue of $9,917 million decreased in performance-related compensation, continued benefits from the
3.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter enterprise productivity initiatives and the second-quarter 2013 work-
of 2013 with constant currency performance in line with the third force rebalancing actions.
quarter of 2013. The major markets returned to constant currency
growth for the first time since the first half of 2012, led by Europe, Software
while the growth markets performance decelerated. GTS Outsourc- Software revenue of $8,140 million increased 2.8 percent (4 percent
ing revenue decreased 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter led by growth in key
in the fourth quarter of 2013; however, constant currency perfor- branded middleware. Key branded middleware revenue increased
mance improved 2 points from the third quarter. While GTS 5.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year and
Outsourcing is beginning to realize the benefit from several of the gained share.
large client transformational contracts signed earlier in 2013, it con- WebSphere revenue increased 14.3 percent (15 percent adjusted
tinues to see a decline in revenue from sales into existing base for currency) in the fourth quarter and gained share. Revenue per-
accounts where the activity is more transactional in nature and can formance included good growth in both the on-premise Application
be economically sensitive. ITS revenue decreased 3.1 percent (flat Server business and the newer cloud-based offerings. Mobile con-
adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter. The company continues tinued to have strong growth—the comprehensive MobileFirst
to shift the ITS business toward higher value managed services portfolio of software and services extends value to clients enabling
such as business continuity, security and cloud. Within the cloud them to reach new markets and gain competitive advantage. In addi-
offerings, SoftLayer contributed to the ITS revenue performance tion, the core WebSphere offerings of Business Integration and
and drove one point of constant currency revenue growth to total Commerce delivered strong growth. Information Management rev-
GTS in the fourth quarter. The GTS gross profit margin improved 1.2 enue increased 4.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in the
points in the fourth quarter, with margin expansion across all lines fourth quarter and gained share. Distributed database offerings
of business, led by ITS and Maintenance. Pre-tax income decreased were up double-digits at constant currency, and the business ana-
1.9 percent to $1,989 million while the pre-tax margin improved 0.4 lytics software offerings had its strongest growth in 2013 in the
points to 19.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to the fourth quarter, led by business intelligence and Netezza appliances.
prior year. Profit performance was impacted by the performance in Tivoli revenue increased 0.5 percent (1 percent adjusted for cur-
the growth markets. In addition, the company continues to make rency) in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year period, driven
investments in key growth areas such as cloud, mobility and secu- by double-digit growth in its security business. The transformation
rity. These initiatives are beginning to contribute to revenue growth, driven by mobile and cloud computing is raising the importance of
and will yield improved profit results as they achieve scale. Margin security for enterprise customers, and the company is continuing to
expansion was driven by reductions in performance-related com- build its capabilities in this area. Social Workforce Solutions revenue
pensation and benefits from the second-quarter 2013 workforce increased 2.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
rebalancing actions. quarter and continued to be driven by Kenexa, which provides
Global Business Services revenue of $4,747 million increased cloud-based recruiting and talent management. Rational revenue
0.6 percent as reported and 4 percent at constant currency in the increased 0.3 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) year to year
fourth quarter of 2013 and gained share again in the period. GBS in the fourth quarter.
had constant currency revenue growth in all geographic regions led The Software business delivered pre-tax income of $4,239
by North America and the growth markets. Japan continued its solid million in the fourth quarter of 2013, an increase of 5.5 percent year
performance, and Europe had constant currency revenue growth to year, with a pre-tax margin of 47.0 percent, an improvement of
for the second consecutive quarter. On an offering basis, growth 1.0 points.

===== PAGE 51 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology Global Financing
Systems and Technology revenue of $4,261 million decreased 26.1 Global Financing revenue of $534 million was essentially flat as
percent (25 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter reported and increased 3 percent adjusted for currency, with
versus the same period in 2012. increased financing revenue offset by a decrease in used equipment
System z revenue decreased 37.4 percent (37 percent adjusted sales revenue. The Global Financing fourth-quarter pre-tax income
for currency) in the fourth quarter of 2013 compared to a very strong increased 13.8 percent to $589 million and the pre-tax margin
fourth quarter of 2012, when revenue increased 56 percent year to increased 2.7 points to 49.6 percent. The increase in pre-tax income
year. During the fourth quarter, the company entered the back end was driven by the increase in internal gross profit ($118 million), par-
of the current mainframe cycle and, as expected, delivered a higher tially offset by increases in financing receivables provisions ($33
gross margin percentage on a lower base of revenue. Fourth quarter million) and SG&A expenses ($14 million).
MIPS shipments decreased 26 percent following the largest MIPS
shipment in mainframe history in the fourth quarter of 2012. In the Geographic Revenue
current mainframe cycle, the company has shipped 28 percent more Total geographic revenue of $27,246 million decreased 4.8 percent
MIPS compared to the same period in the prior cycle. The revenue (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter of 2013 compared
and gross profit in the current cycle are each approximately 99 per- to the prior year. In total, the major markets decreased 3.3 percent
cent of the previous cycle, net of currency. The additional capacity (2 percent at constant currency) and the growth markets decreased
reflects the ongoing relevance of the mainframe to clients, and pro- 9.5 percent as reported and 6 percent at constant currency.
vides the company with financial returns consistent with past cycles. Americas revenue decreased 2.8 percent (2 percent adjusted
Power Systems revenue decreased 31.4 percent (31 percent for currency) compared to the fourth quarter of 2012. Strong growth
adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter. The company continues in software was more than offset by the impact from the mainframe
to ship significant capacity into the UNIX market, but this has been product cycle, predominantly in the U.S. The U.S. was down 3.0
more than offset by significant price performance resulting in lower percent and Canada was down 4.5 percent as reported, but
revenue. The company is taking actions to improve its business increased 1 percent adjusted for currency. Canada improved their
model in Power Systems, including introducing in the fourth quarter year-to-year revenue growth rate at constant currency by 3 points
a new Integrated Facility for Linux offering which enables clients to in both the third and fourth quarters of 2013. Revenue in the Latin
run Linux workloads in their existing servers. This mirrors the suc- America growth markets was essentially flat as reported, but
cessful strategy executed on System z. increased 5 percent at constant currency, led by Brazil which
System x revenue decreased 15.9 percent (15 percent adjusted increased 2.0 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) year to year.
for currency) in the fourth quarter of 2013 versus the fourth quarter Europe/Middle East/Africa revenue increased 0.9 percent as
of 2012. PureSystems continues to gain momentum. Across the reported, but decreased 2 percent adjusted for currency year to
hardware product lines, PureSystems revenue was up more than year, consistent with the third-quarter performance. Western Europe
30 percent in the fourth quarter compared sequentially to the third revenue declined year to year at constant currency in line with the
quarter of 2013. Globally, the company shipped over 2,500 systems market, although software performed well. Germany grew 3.9 per-
in fourth quarter, and over 10,000 total systems to date. cent (decreased 1 percent at constant currency) and the UK
Storage revenue decreased 13.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for increased 3.5 percent (3 percent at constant currency). Italy
currency) in the fourth quarter. The company’s flash solutions con- decreased 6.1 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency).
tinued to gain momentum and contributed a few points of growth in Overall, Asia Pacific fourth-quarter revenue decreased 15.8
the quarter. The Storwize product delivered double-digit growth, percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) year over year. Japan
which was offset by declines in the legacy OEM midrange offerings. revenue decreased 16.0 percent as reported, but increased 4 per-
Highend offerings declined driven by significant pricing pressure. cent on a constant currency basis. Adjusted for currency, this was
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 33.0 percent the fifth consecutive quarter of revenue growth in Japan. The com-
(33 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter. pany has shifted investment and redirected its go-to-market-focus
Systems and Technology’s gross profit margin decreased 5.5 to significantly improve performance in Japan. The Asia Pacific
points in the fourth quarter of 2013 versus the prior year. The growth markets decreased 15.7 percent (12 percent adjusted for
decrease was driven by lower margins in Power Systems (1.3 points), currency) and China was down 22.1 percent (23 percent adjusted
System x (1.2 points), Storage (0.6 points), Microelectronics (0.5 points) for currency).
and a decline due to revenue mix (2.2 points). Systems and Technol-
ogy’s pre-tax income decreased $768 million or 78.8 percent in the
fourth quarter, and pre-tax margin decreased 11.7 points versus the
prior year period. Approximately half of the fourth-quarter pre-tax
income decline was driven by System z due to the product cycle
dynamics, though the platform remains secularly strong with a solid
business model. The other System & Technology hardware busi-
nesses are dealing with business model challenges due to market
shifts. The company will make these products more relevant while
right-sizing these businesses to meet the new value proposition.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Within the growth markets, the company continued to gain Total expense and other (income) increased 0.2 percent in the fourth
share and deliver growth in Latin America and in the Middle East quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 26.5 percent compared
and Africa region. Performance in these regions has been consis- to 25.0 percent in the fourth quarter of 2012. Total operating (non-
tently strong, and in particular Latin America had a difficult GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 1.0 percent in the
compare with revenue growth in the fourth quarter of 2012 up 18 fourth quarter. The decrease in total operating expense and other
percent at constant currency. In Eastern Europe, the declines (income) was primarily driven by currency (2 points), lower base
moderated, while revenue in the Asia Pacific countries declined at expense (1 point), partially offset by increased expense from the
a double-digit rate, primarily driven by China. The largest declines company’s acquisitions over the past 12 months (2 points). Within
in China were in the hardware business. The company continues base expense, the company is continuing to shift its spending—
to be impacted by the process surrounding the implementation of driving productivity across the business, primarily through the
a broad-based governmental economic plan. While there is more enterprise productivity initiatives. A majority of the savings are re-
clarity on the overall plan, the company continues to believe that invested into the business to drive growth in the key growth areas.
it will take some time for its business in China to improve. While Within selling, general and administrative expense, accounts receiv-
the company is disappointed with its performance in certain able provisions were up approximately $60 million year to year in
regions of the growth markets, the company continues to see the fourth quarter with reserve coverage up less than 20 basis
good opportunity in all regions over the long term—and the com- points, although flat compared to September 2013.
pany continues to invest in these key markets.
Cash Flow
Total Expense and Other (Income) The company generated $6,528 million in cash flows provided by
operating activities, an increase of $182 million compared to the
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. fourth quarter of 2012, driven primarily by a decrease in cash used
Percent/ by financing receivables ($1,218 million) and a decrease in cash
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2013 2012 Change funding of retirement-related plans ($495 million), partially offset by
Total consolidated expense the December payment of the 401(k) employer matching contribu-
and other (income) $7,353 $7,336 0.2% tion ($541 million), increased cash used for income tax payments
Non-operating adjustments ($471 million) and declines in operational performance. Net cash
Amortization of acquired used in investing activities of $2,902 million decreased $1,190 million
intangible assets (93) (86) 7.9 primarily due to decreased spending for acquisitions ($961 million).
Acquisition-related charges (16) (12) 33.5 Net cash used in financing activities of $3,013 million decreased
Non-operating retirement-related $779 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher
(costs)/income (104) (23) 356.8 net cash proceeds from total debt ($3,730 million) partially offset
Operating (non-GAAP) by increased cash used for gross common stock repurchases
expense and other (income) $7,140 $7,215 (1.0)% ($2,791 million).
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue ratio 26.5% 25.0% 1.5 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 25.8% 24.6% 1.2 pts.

===== PAGE 53 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 26 for the
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $14,315 $ 105 $ 154 $14,574
Gross profit margin 51.7% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 52.6%
SG&A $ 5,989 $(101) $ (90) $ 5,798
RD&E 1,566 0 (14) 1,552
Other (income) and expense (113) (8) 0 (121)
Total expense and other (income) 7,353 (109) (104) 7,140
Pre-tax income 6,962 213 258 7,434
Pre-tax income margin 25.1% 0.8 pts. 0.9 pts. 26.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 777 $ (55) $ 94 $ 817
Effective tax rate 11.2% (1.1) pts. 0.9 pts. 11.0%
Net income $ 6,185 $ 268 $ 164 $ 6,617
Net income margin 22.3% 1.0 pts. 0.6 pts. 23.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 5.73 $0.25 $0.15 $ 6.13
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $15,167 $ 100 $ 60 $15,327
Gross profit margin 51.8% 0.3 pts. 0.2 pts. 52.3%
SG&A $ 5,921 $ (91) $ (29) $ 5,801
RD&E 1,580 0 6 1,586
Other (income) and expense (47) (7) 0 (54)
Total expense and other (income) 7,336 (98) (23) 7,215
Pre-tax income 7,831 198 83 8,112
Pre-tax income margin 26.7% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 27.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,998 $ (45) $ 30 $ 1,983
Effective tax rate 25.5% (1.2) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.4%
Net income $ 5,833 $ 243 $ 53 $ 6,129
Net income margin 19.9% 0.8 pts. 0.2 pts. 20.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 5.13 $0.21 $0.05 $ 5.39
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective
tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW billion in free cash flow driving shareholder returns of $15.8 billion in
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the gross common stock repurchases and dividends. The free cash
company’s financial performance in 2012 as compared to 2011. flow performance in 2012 was $12.3 billion greater than the company
For a detailed discussion of prior-year performance, see the 2012 generated in 2002. The financial results demonstrated the strength
Annual Report. and flexibility of the company’s business model, which is designed
to deliver profit and cash on a sustained basis.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts) The company continued to deliver value to its clients and capital-
Yr.-to-Yr. ize on key trends in 2012. The company had strong performance in
Percent/
Margin business analytics, cloud and Smarter Planet—key growth initiatives
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
that leverage the software portfolio and contribute to margin expan-
Revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)%*
sion. Within the growth markets, the company continued to expand
Gross profit margin 48.1% 46.9% 1.2 pts. its capabilities and build out IT infrastructures in emerging markets.
Total expense and other (income) $ 28,396 $ 29,135 (2.5)% In 2012, the growth markets revenue growth rate at constant cur-
Total expense and other rency outpaced the major markets by 8 points. The company
(income)-to-revenue ratio 27.2% 27.3% (0.1 )pts. continued to invest for innovation and technological leadership.
Income before income taxes $ 21,902 $ 21,003 4.3% These investments supported the introduction of the new System
Provision for income taxes 5,298 5,148 2.9% z mainframe, storage and POWER7+ products in hardware, as well
Net income $ 16,604 $ 15,855 4.7% as a series of major launches across software that included more
Net income margin 15.9% 14.8% 1.1 pts. than 400 new or upgraded product announcements. The introduc-
Earnings per share of common stock tion of PureSystems, a new category of expert integrated systems,
brought together hardware and software and provided built-in
Assuming dilution $ 14.37 $ 13.06 10.0%
expertise to deliver a more efficient and effective solution to the
Weighted-average shares outstanding
company’s clients. In addition, the company was awarded more U.S.
Assuming dilution 1,155.4 1,213.8 (4.8)%
patents in 2012 than any other company for the 20th consecutive
Assets** $119,213 $116,433 2.4%
year, with many of the patents in key areas such as business analytics,
Liabilities** $100,229 $ 96,197 4.2%
Big Data, cybersecurity, cloud, mobile, social networking and soft-
Equity** $ 18,984 $ 20,236 (6.2)% ware-defined environments. The company also continued to add to
* 0.0 percent adjusted for currency. its capabilities to support the growth initiatives by acquiring 11 com-
** At December 31. panies in 2012—investing approximately $4 billion. At the same time,
the company divested its RSS business as it focused the Smarter
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
Commerce portfolio on higher value, intellectual property-based
earnings for 2012 and 2011.
opportunities. Throughout the year, the company continued the
transformation of the business—shifting to higher value areas and
($ in millions except per share amounts)
improving its structure—resulting in a higher quality revenue stream
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent and margin expansion.
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Segment performance was led by Software which increased
Net income as reported $16,604 $15,855 4.7% revenue 2.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key
Non-operating adjustments branded middleware which increased 2.9 percent (5 percent
(net of tax)
adjusted for currency). Global Services revenue decreased 2.3 per-
Acquisition-related charges 641 495 29.5 cent as reported, but was up 0.4 percent on a constant currency
Non-operating retirement-related basis. Global Services revenue performance was led by the growth
costs/(income) 381 (32) NM
markets which were up 4.8 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $17,627 $16,318 8.0% and represented more than 20 percent of total Global Services rev-
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) enue. Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent;
earnings per share $ 15.25 $ 13.44 13.5%
adjusting for the divested RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent
NM—Not meaningful (4 percent adjusted for currency). The company’s new mainframe
* See page 63 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) was well received in the market, with System z revenue increasing
earnings.
5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) versus the prior year.
Global Financing revenue decreased 4.2 percent as reported, 1 per-
Snapshot
cent on a constant currency basis, compared to the prior year.
In 2012, the company reported revenue of $104.5 billion, expanded
Across all of the segments, the company continued to have strong
gross, pre-tax and net income margins, and delivered diluted earn-
performance in its key growth initiatives. These are not stand-alone
ings per share growth of 10.0 percent as reported and 13.5 percent
offerings; they are integrated into the overall client offerings and are
on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. This was the 10th consecutive
included in the financial results of the segments. In the growth mar-
year of double-digit earnings per share growth for the company. The
kets, revenue increased 4.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency)
company generated $19.6 billion in cash from operations, and $18.2
year to year and represented 24 percent of total geographic revenue,

===== PAGE 55 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
an increase of 8 points since 2006. The company has been suc- (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew 7.3 percent and the operating
cessful in capturing the opportunity in these faster growing markets. (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 22.2 percent, an increase of 2.0
The company’s business analytics initiative continued to expand. points versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) net income
The company made significant strides and expanded its leadership increased 8.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) net income
in a number of strategic areas including Risk Management, Price margin of 16.9 percent increased 1.6 points versus the prior year.
and Promotion Optimization and Sales Performance Management. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.0 percent
The value proposition in business analytics uniquely leverages the versus 24.5 percent in 2011.
integration between the software portfolio and the GBS consulting Diluted earnings per share improved 10.0 percent year to year
expertise. In 2012, business analytics revenue increased 13 percent reflecting the growth in net income and the benefits of the common
compared to the prior year, led by the GBS consulting practice. stock repurchase program. In 2012, the company repurchased
Within cloud computing, the company’s SmartCloud portfolio approximately 61 million shares of its common stock. Diluted earn-
addresses the full scope of enterprise client requirements. In 2012, ings per share of $14.37 increased $1.31 from the prior year. Operating
the company continued to see strong demand for the foundational (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $15.25 increased $1.81
offerings in hardware and software that help clients build and run versus 2011 driven by the following factors:
their private clouds, as well as for cloud-based solutions, like the • Revenue decrease at actual rates $(0.30)
company’s Software as a Service (SaaS) offerings. With strong • Margin expansion $ 1.38
global growth, cloud revenue for 2012 increased 80 percent com- • Common stock repurchases $ 0.73
pared to the prior year. The Smarter Planet growth initiative
expanded significantly in the past year—measured in terms of offer- At December 31, 2012, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity
ings, markets, clients and revenue performance. Clients are positions were strong and well positioned to support the company’s
leveraging the company’s growing capabilities in areas like: Smarter objectives. Cash and marketable securities at year end was $11,128
Commerce, Social Business and Smarter Cities, and in next gen- million. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows are
eration systems, like Watson, which are helping clients with their highlighted below.
complex challenges. For the year, Smarter Planet solutions gener- Total assets increased $2,780 million ($3,242 million adjusted for
ated revenue growth of over 25 percent versus the prior year. currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by:
Overall, within the offerings in business analytics, cloud and • Increases in total receivables ($3,053 million), goodwill
Smarter Planet, approximately half of the revenue was software. ($3,034 million), marketable securities ($717 million) and
Therefore, as these offerings become a larger percentage of total intangible assets ($395 million); partially offset by
revenue, they are driving the higher quality revenue stream and • Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($1,899 million), cash
improved mix and margins. and cash equivalents ($1,511 million) and prepaid expenses
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.2 points versus and other current assets ($1,224 million).
2011 to 48.1 percent. This was the ninth consecutive year of improve-
Total liabilities increased $4,032 million ($4,511 million adjusted for
ment in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) gross
currency) from December 31, 2011 driven by:
margin of 48.7 percent increased 1.5 points compared to the prior
year. The increase in gross margin in 2012 was driven by margin • Increased retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit
obligations ($2,044 million), total debt ($1,949 million), taxes
improvements in Software and both Global Services segments, and
($1,635 million) and total deferred income ($399 million);
an improved revenue mix driven by Software.
partially offset by
Total expense and other (income) decreased 2.5 percent in 2012
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other • Decreases in other liabilities ($1,389 million) and accounts
payable ($565 million).
(income) decreased 3.9 percent compared to the prior year. The
year-to-year drivers were approximately:
Total equity of $18,984 million decreased $1,252 million from
Total Operating December 31, 2011 as a result of:
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
• Currency* (5) points (5) points • Increased treasury stock ($12,168 million) driven by share
• Acquisitions** 3 points 2 points repurchases and increased losses in accumulated other
• Base expense (0) points (2) points comprehensive income/(loss) of ($3,874 million) driven
by pension remeasurements; partially offset by
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
• Higher retained earnings ($12,783 million) and common stock
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period, operating (non-GAAP) is
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. ($1,980 million).
Pre-tax income grew 4.3 percent and the pre-tax margin was 21.0 The company generated $19,586 million in cash flow provided by
percent, an increase of 1.3 points versus 2011. Net income increased operating activities, a decrease of $260 million when compared to
4.7 percent and the net income margin was 15.9 percent, an increase 2011, primarily driven by a decrease in cash due to receivables ($1,290
of 1.1 points versus 2011. The effective tax rate for 2012 was 24.2 million) and an increased use of cash for accounts payable ($675
percent compared with 24.5 percent in the prior year. Operating million), partially offset by a decrease in net taxes paid ($999 million)

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and the increase in net income ($749 million). Net cash used in invest- in financing activities of $11,976 million was $1,719 million lower com-
ing activities of $9,004 million was $4,608 million higher than 2011, pared to 2011, primarily due to lower cash used for common stock
primarily due to an increase in cash used of $2,719 million associated repurchases ($3,051 million), partially offset by lower cash provided
with net purchases and sales of marketable securities and other by common stock transactions ($914 million) and increased dividend
investments, increased cash used for acquisitions ($1,911 million) payments ($300 million).
and increased net capital investments ($248 million), partially offset For additional information regarding 2002 free cash flow, see the
by increased cash from divestitures ($585 million). Net cash used company’s Form 8-K filed with the SEC on January 22, 2013.
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2012 versus 2011 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an
arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 40,236 $ 40,879 (1.6)% 1.3%
Gross margin 36.6% 35.0% 1.6 pts.
Global Business Services 18,566 19,284 (3.7)% (1.6)%
Gross margin 30.0% 28.8% 1.2 pts.
Software 25,448 24,944 2.0% 4.3%
Gross margin 88.7% 88.5% 0.2 pts.
Systems and Technology 17,667 18,985 (6.9)% (5.9)%
Gross margin 39.1% 39.8% (0.7) pts.
Global Financing 2,013 2,102 (4.2)% (1.2)%
Gross margin 46.5% 49.8% (3.3 ) pts.
Other 577 722 (20.1)% (18.7)%
Gross margin (71.6)% (54.5)% (17.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)% 0.0%
Total consolidated gross profit $ 50,298 $ 50,138 0.3%
Total consolidated gross margin 48.1% 46.9% 1.2 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 375 340 10.3%
Acquisition-related charges 1 1 13.1
Retirement-related costs/(income) 264 2 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 50,938 $ 50,481 0.9%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 48.7% 47.2% 1.5 pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Global Services
In 2012, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services (2 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. The services seg-
and Global Business Services, delivered revenue of $58,802 million, ments also had strength in all the key growth initiatives, which are
grew pre-tax profit 7 percent and expanded pre-tax margin 1.5 points becoming a larger part of the services business as the company
on an as-reported basis. Revenue performance was led by strength continues to shift toward higher value content. Total outsourcing
in the growth markets which were up 4.8 percent (9 percent adjusted revenue of $27,552 million decreased 2.6 percent (flat adjusted
for currency) and represented over 20 percent of total Global Services for currency) and total transactional revenue of $23,907 million
revenue. Revenue from the major markets declined 4.0 percent decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) year to year.

===== PAGE 57 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $58,802 $60,163 (2.3)% 0.4%
Global Technology Services $40,236 $40,879 (1.6)% 1.3%
Outsourcing 23,344 23,911 (2.4) 0.5
Integrated Technology Services 9,550 9,453 1.0 3.7
Maintenance 7,343 7,515 (2.3) 0.6
Global Business Services $18,566 $19,284 (3.7)% (1.6)%
Outsourcing 4,209 4,390 (4.1) (1.7)
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,358 14,895 (3.6) (1.6)
Global Technology Services revenue of $40,236 million in 2012 ($ in millions)
decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
adjusted for currency year to year. Revenue growth from the back- Margin
log was partially offset by a decline in revenue from new signings For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
and a decrease in sales in existing accounts. Revenue performance Global Services
was led by the growth markets which were up 5.0 percent (9 per- Global Technology Services
cent adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased External gross profit $14,740 $14,320 2.9%
2.4 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for cur- External gross profit margin 36.6% 35.0% 1.6 pts.
rency in 2012. Outsourcing revenue from the growth markets Pre-tax income $ 6,961 $ 6,284 10.8%
increased 2.4 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), as the out- Pre-tax margin 16.8% 14.9% 1.9 pts.
sourcing offerings help clients build out their IT infrastructures. ITS
Global Business Services
revenue increased 1.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) in
External gross profit $ 5,564 $ 5,545 0.3%
2012 compared to 2011, and continued to be led by strength in the
External gross profit margin 30.0% 28.8% 1.2 pts.
growth markets which increased 10.3 percent (13 percent adjusted
Pre-tax income $ 2,983 $ 3,006 (0.8)%
for currency).
Pre-tax margin 15.5% 15.0% 0.5 pts.
Global Business Services revenue of $18,566 million decreased
3.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012. On a geo-
GTS gross profit increased 2.9 percent in 2012 and the gross profit
graphic basis, solid performance in the growth markets, with
margin improved 1.6 points year to year with margin expansion in
revenue up 4.3 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency), was offset
each line of business, led by Outsourcing. Pre-tax income of $6,961
by a 5.1 percent decline (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the major
million in 2012 increased 10.8 percent year to year and the pre-tax
markets. The growth initiatives—business analytics, Smarter Planet
margin expanded 1.9 points to 16.8 percent. Normalized for work-
and cloud had solid double-digit revenue growth, and represented
force rebalancing charges of $151 million and $5 million in the third
over one-third of total GBS revenue in 2012. As GBS shifts more
quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, GTS pre-tax income was up
of its business to higher value content, these larger, more complex
13.1 percent and pre-tax margin expanded 2.2 points versus the
engagements are having a positive effect on the GBS backlog.
prior year. The year-over-year gross and pre-tax margin expansion
The GBS backlog grew for the fourth consecutive year at constant
was driven by several factors: the work done to improve the profit-
currency—although the backlog was mixing to longer duration
ability of a number of low-margin contracts in the outsourcing
engagements. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased 4.1 per-
portfolio, increased contribution from the higher margin growth
cent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 year to year, and C&SI
markets, and increased efficiency and productivity from the focus
revenue decreased 3.6 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency).
on automation and process primarily through the company’s enter-
Both GBS lines of business had solid revenue performance year to
prise productivity initiatives.
year in the growth markets with Application Outsourcing and C&SI
The GBS gross profit margin expanded 1.2 points, led primarily
up 1.5 percent and 5.3 percent, respectively, as reported, and up 6
by improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS
percent and 8 percent, respectively, at constant currency.
pre-tax income of $2,983 million declined 0.8 percent in 2012 with
a pre-tax margin of 15.5 percent, an improvement of 0.5 points year
to year. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of $113 million
and $5 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, GBS
pre-tax income was up 2.8 percent and the pre-tax margin expanded
1.1 points versus the prior year. The gross and pre-tax margins ben-
efitted from improved service delivery and yield from the company’s
enterprise productivity initiatives.

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The total Global Services business delivered strong profit and to the prior year. The estimated Global Services backlog at December
margin expansion throughout 2012. Pre-tax income of $9,944 million 31, 2012 was $140 billion, a decrease of 0.3 percent as reported,
in 2012 increased 7.0 percent year to year. Normalized for the higher but an increase of 1 percent adjusted for currency compared to the
level of workforce rebalancing charges in 2012, pre-tax income was December 31, 2011 balance.
up 9.8 percent and the pre-tax margin expanded 1.9 points compared
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,448 $24,944 2.0% 4.3%
Middleware $20,983 $20,650 1.6% 3.9%
Key Branded Middleware 16,528 16,055 2.9 5.2
WebSphere Family 7.8 9.9
Information Management 1.5 3.8
Social Workforce Solutions* (2.1) 0.3
Tivoli 4.1 6.2
Rational (1.6) 0.6
Other middleware 4,455 4,596 (3.1) (0.6)
Operating systems 2,525 2,480 1.8 4.3
Other 1,940 1,813 7.0 9.2
* Formerly Lotus
Software revenue of $25,448 million increased 2.0 percent (4 per- Information Management revenue increased 1.5 percent (4 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Software cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Performance
revenue growth continued to be led by the key branded middleware was led by growth in the business analytics offerings. The acquisi-
products with constant currency growth in all the brands, and par- tions of Varicent and Vivisimo expanded the Business Analytics and
ticular strength and share gains in WebSphere and Tivoli. Software Optimization software capabilities. Varicent’s analytics software
continued its momentum throughout 2012 in the growth initiatives helps clients optimize sales performance management. Vivisimo
with strong performance in business analytics, Smarter Commerce expands the breadth of the company’s big data capabilities and
and cloud. The Software business delivered $10.8 billion in segment creates the most complete end-to-end big data solution for clients.
pre-tax profit, an increase of $840 million from 2011. The results Tivoli revenue increased 4.1 percent (6 percent adjusted for cur-
reflected the company’s sustained investment in strategic branded rency) in 2012, led by its storage and security offerings, and gained
software. In addition to organic investments, acquisitions have pro- share. Tivoli storage revenue was up 12 percent (14 percent adjusted
vided additional capabilities, while leveraging the existing portfolio for currency) in 2012, with double-digit constant currency growth in
of offerings. The Software business completed nine acquisitions in each quarter, reflecting the value of storage software. Tivoli security
2012, further increasing the company’s capabilities in analytics, revenue increased 8 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency), with
cloud and Smarter Planet. strong contribution from Q1 Labs which provides next generation
Key branded middleware revenue increased 2.9 percent (5 percent security intelligence.
adjusted for currency) and again gained market share in 2012, as Social Workforce Solutions revenue decreased 2.1 percent as
the Software business continued to be the leader in the middleware reported, but was flat year to year at constant currency in 2012. The
market. Revenue continued to mix to the faster growing and higher social business offerings performed well, including contribution from
value branded middleware products which accounted for 65 percent the acquisition of Kenexa, a leading provider of recruiting and talent
of total software revenue in 2012, an increase of 1 point from 2011. management solutions.
WebSphere revenue increased 7.8 percent (10 percent adjusted Rational revenue decreased 1.6 percent as reported, but increased
for currency) in 2012, with strong performance throughout the year, 1 percent at constant currency in 2012 year over year, and held share.
and gained share. Revenue performance included strong growth in Operating systems revenue increased 1.8 percent (4 percent
the core offerings of commerce and application servers. Commerce adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011, driven by Platform
revenue increased 14 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) and Computing which provides cluster and grid management software
application server products increased 6 percent (8 percent adjusted for distributed computing environments.
for currency). The company further strengthened its WebSphere
portfolio during the year with the acquisitions of Worklight, DemandTec,
Emptoris and Tealeaf.

===== PAGE 59 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other software revenue increased 7.0 percent (9 percent adjusted Software gross profit increased 2.3 percent to $22,569 million in 2012,
for currency) driven by growth in software-related services. with a gross profit margin of 88.7 percent, up 0.2 points year to year.
Software pre-tax income of $10,810 million increased 8.4 percent and
($ in millions) the pre-tax margin improved 2.3 points to 37.6 percent. Normalized
Yr.-to-Yr. for workforce rebalancing charges of $94 million and $6 million in the
Percent/
Margin third quarter of 2012 and 2011, respectively, software pre-tax income
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
was up 9.3 percent and the pre-tax margin expanded 2.6 points
Software
versus the prior year. The Software business had another successful
External gross profit $22,569 $22,065 2.3% year leveraging revenue growth and expense productivity which drove
External gross profit margin 88.7% 88.5% 0.2 pts. significant margin expansion and profit growth.
Pre-tax income $10,810 $ 9,970 8.4%
Pre-tax margin 37.6% 35.3% 2.3 pts.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $17,667 $18,985 (6.9)% (5.9)%
System z 5.4% 6.3%
Power Systems (8.5) (7.4)
System x (3.7) (2.7)
Storage (5.8) (4.1)
Total Systems excluding Retail Store Solutions (3.7) (2.5)
Microelectronics OEM (14.4) (14.4)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions (5.1) (4.0)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012) (52.6) (51.7)
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 6.9 percent (6 percent Power Systems revenue decreased 8.5 percent (7 percent
adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Adjusting for the divested adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Low-end servers
RSS business, revenue declined 5.1 percent (4 percent adjusted for increased 6 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) offset by
currency) in 2012. Growth markets revenue increased 0.3 percent declines in high-end and mid-range products. Early in October, the
(1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, compared to the prior year company announced new POWER7+ based servers. The high-end
while major markets revenue decreased 8.3 percent (7 percent and midrange models available in the fourth quarter performed well
adjusted for currency). During 2012, the company’s continued invest- in the period. In 2012, the company had nearly 1,200 competitive
ments for innovation supported the introduction of the new System displacements resulting in over $1 billion of business; almost equally
z mainframe, the PureSystems offerings and new Storage and from Hewlett Packard and Oracle/Sun.
POWER7+ products. In its introductory year, the company sold more System x revenue decreased 3.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for
than 2,300 PureSystems in over 70 countries. currency) in 2012 versus 2011. High-end System x revenue increased
System z revenue increased 5.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for 5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus the prior
currency) in 2012 versus 2011. The increase was driven by the new year, while high-volume and blade servers declined year to year.
mainframe which began shipping late in the third quarter. Fourth- Storage revenue decreased 5.8 percent (4 percent adjusted for
quarter revenue increased 55.6 percent (56 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Total disk revenue decreased 3 per-
currency), as revenue increased in the major markets over 50 per- cent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. Tape
cent and over 65 percent in the growth markets. MIPS shipments revenue decreased 16 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) in
increased 19 percent in 2012 versus the prior year. The increase in 2012 versus the prior year. The value in storage solutions continued
MIPS was driven by the new mainframe shipments, including spe- to shift to software, as demonstrated by the ongoing success the
cialty engines, which increased 44 percent year over year driven by company had in its Tivoli storage software offerings.
Linux workloads. This was a good indicator of new workloads Retail Store Solutions revenue decreased 52.6 percent (52 per-
moving to this platform. The performance reflected the technology cent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. In the third quarter,
leadership and value of the vertically integrated stack that the com- the company divested the Retail Store Solutions business to Toshiba
pany’s flagship server delivers to its clients. Tec. See the caption, “Divestitures,” on page 98 for additional infor-
mation regarding the transaction.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 14.4 percent Overall gross margin decreased 0.7 points in 2012 versus the
(14 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 versus 2011. prior year. The decrease was driven by lower margins in System x
(0.6 points), Microelectronics (0.6 points), Storage (0.5 points) and
($ in millions) Power Systems (0.2 points), partially offset by an improvement due
Yr.-to-Yr. to revenue mix (1.2 points).
Percent/
Margin Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased $406
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
million (24.9 percent) to $1,227 million in 2012, with a pre-tax margin
Systems and Technology
of 6.7 percent. Normalized for workforce rebalancing charges of
External gross profit $6,903 $7,555 (8.6)% $46 million and $3 million in the third quarter of 2012 and 2011,
External gross profit margin 39.1% 39.8% (0.7) pts. respectively, pre-tax income decreased 22.2 percent and the pre-
Pre-tax income $1,227 $1,633 (24.9)% tax margin decreased by 1.3 points versus the prior year.
Pre-tax margin 6.7% 8.2% (1.5) pts.
Global Financing
The decrease in external gross profit in 2012 versus 2011 was due See pages 72 through 75 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin. segment results.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change Currency
Total revenue $104,507 $106,916 (2.3)% 0.0%
Geographies $102,268 $104,170 (1.8)% 0.5%
Americas 44,556 44,944 (0.9) 0.0
Europe/Middle East/Africa 31,775 33,952 (6.4) (1.0)
Asia Pacific 25,937 25,273 2.6 3.3
Major markets (3.5)% (1.3)%
Growth markets 4.2% 6.9%
BRIC countries 7.4% 12.2%
Total geographic revenue decreased 1.8 percent (flat adjusted for the company accelerated the opening of new branch offices result-
currency) in 2012; excluding the divested RSS business, revenue ing in a doubling of the number of face-to-face branches when
decreased 1.4 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent at con- compared to 2011. At year end, the company had almost 450 face-
stant currency compared to the prior year. Revenue performance at to-face and virtual branch offices in the growth markets.
constant currency was driven by strong results in the growth mar- Americas revenue decreased 0.9 percent (flat adjusted for
kets, offsetting a modest decline year to year in the major markets. currency) in 2012. Within the major market countries, the U.S.
Across all geographies, growth markets revenue increased 4.2 decreased 1.1 percent and Canada decreased 1.5 percent as
percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and these countries rep- reported (flat adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin Amer-
resented 24 percent of total geographic revenue, an increase of 8 ica growth markets increased 1.4 percent (8 percent adjusted
points since 2006 when the company introduced its 2010 road map. for currency) with constant currency growth in Brazil of 6 percent,
Adjusted for currency, revenue growth in these fast growing markets down 4.6 percent as reported.
outpaced the major markets in 2012 by approximately 8 points. The Europe/Middle East/Africa revenue decreased 6.4 percent
BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India and China combined revenue (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012 compared to 2011. Within
increased 7.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 2012, with the major market countries, the UK was essentially flat (up 1 percent
double-digit growth in Russia, India and China, adjusted for currency. adjusted for currency), Germany was down 7.6 percent (flat
Overall in 2012, the company had double-digit constant currency adjusted for currency), France was down 12.6 percent (6 percent
revenue growth in nearly 35 growth market countries. The company adjusted for currency) and Italy was down 8.4 percent (1 percent
continued to expand into new countries and territories, building out adjusted for currency). The EMEA growth markets increased 0.8
IT infrastructures in support of economic growth and taking a lead- percent (5 percent at constant currency) led by growth in Russia
ership position in key industries. To drive market expansion, in 2012, of 11.7 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 61 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Asia Pacific revenue increased 2.6 percent (3 percent adjusted For additional information regarding total expense and other (income),
for currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets see the following analyses by category.
increased 6.0 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), with growth
led by China (17.9 percent as reported, 16 percent at constant cur- Selling, General and Administrative
rency) and India (decreased 0.9 percent as reported, increased 13
($ in millions)
percent at constant currency). Japan revenue decreased 1.9 percent Yr.-to-Yr.
(2 percent adjusted for currency) but improved sequentially through- Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
out the year at constant currency and returned to growth in the
Selling, general and
fourth quarter of 2012. administrative expense
OEM revenue of $2,239 million in 2012 decreased 18.5 percent
Selling, general and
(18 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2011, driven by the administrative—other $19,589 $20,287 (3.4)%
Microelectronics OEM business. Advertising and promotional expense 1,339 1,373 (2.5)
Workforce rebalancing charges 803 440 82.5
Total Expense and Other (Income)
Retirement-related costs 945 603 56.7
($ in millions) Amortization of acquired
Yr.-to-Yr. intangible assets 328 289 13.3
Percent/
Margin Stock-based compensation 498 514 (3.0)
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Bad debt expense 50 88 (42.5)
Total consolidated expense
and other (income) $28,396 $29,135 (2.5)% Total consolidated selling, general
and administrative expense $23,553 $23,594 (0.2)%
Non-operating adjustments
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (328) (289) 13.3
intangible assets (328) (289) 13.3
Acquisition-related charges (35) (45) (21.2)
Acquisition-related charges (22) (20) 10.2
Non-operating retirement-related
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income (274) 74 NM
(costs)/income (294) (13) NM
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other (income) $27,760 $28,875 (3.9)% Operating (non-GAAP)
selling, general and
Total consolidated administrative expense $22,910 $23,272 (1.6)%
expense-to-revenue ratio 27.2% 27.3% (0.1) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) NM—Not meaningful
expense-to-revenue ratio 26.6% 27.0% (0.4) pts.
Total SG&A expense decreased 0.2 percent in 2012 versus 2011.
NM—Not meaningful The decrease was primarily driven by the effects of currency (3
points), partially offset by acquisition-related spending (2 points),
Total expense and other (income) decreased 2.5 percent in 2012
while base spending was essentially flat.
versus 2011. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income)
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 1.6 percent
decreased 3.9 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers of the
primarily driven by the effects of currency (3 points) and lower base
year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) were
spending (1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending (2
approximately:
points). The increase in workforce rebalancing charges was due to
Total Operating actions primarily focused on the company’s non-U.S. operations in
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
• Currency* (5) points (5) points the third quarter of 2012. The increase in retirement-related costs
• Acquisitions** 3 points 2 points was primarily driven by the charge related to a court decision
• Base expense (0) points (2) points regarding one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a result of the
ruling, the company recorded an additional retirement-related obli-
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
gation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012. This charge was
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period, operating (non-GAAP) is
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. not reflected in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense. See note M,
“Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 119 to 121 for addi-
tional information. Bad debt expense decreased $37 million in 2012
versus 2011, as the company increased its provisions in 2011 reflect-
ing the European credit environment. The accounts receivable
provision coverage was 1.4 percent at December 31, 2012, a decrease
of 10 basis points from year-end 2011.

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense The company continued to invest in research and development,
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. and to extend its technology leadership. Total RD&E expense
Percent increased 0.7 percent in 2012 versus 2011, primarily driven by acqui-
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
sitions (3 points), partially offset by the effects of currency (2 points)
Other (income) and expense
and lower base spending (1 point). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E
Foreign currency transaction
expense decreased 0.4 percent in 2012 compared to the prior year
losses/(gains) $(240) $ 513 NM%
primarily driven by the effects of currency (2 points) and lower base
(Gains)/losses on
spending (2 points), partially offset by acquisitions (3 points). RD&E
derivative instruments 72 (113) NM
investments represented 6.0 percent of revenue in 2012, compared
Interest income (109) (136) (20.2)
to 5.9 percent in 2011.
Net (gains)/losses from securities
and investment assets (55) (227) (75.5)
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Other (511) (58) NM
Total consolidated other ($ in millions)
(income) and expense $(843) $ (20) NM% Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Non-operating adjustment For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Acquisition-related charges (13) (25) (46.0) Sales and other transfers of
intellectual property $ 324 $ 309 4.7%
Operating (non-GAAP) other
(income) and expense $(857) $ (45) NM% Licensing/royalty-based fees 251 211 19.0
Custom development income 500 588 (14.9)
NM—Not meaningful
Total $1,074 $1,108 (3.0)%
Other (income) and expense was income of $843 million and $20
million in 2012 and 2011, respectively. The increase in income of $823 The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may vary
million in 2012 was primarily driven by higher gains from foreign cur- significantly from period to period depending upon timing of dives-
rency transactions ($753 million) due to rate volatility year to year, titures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the timing
and the gain associated with the divested RSS business ($446 mil- of new patents and know-how development. There were no signifi-
lion) reflected in Other in the table above. These increases in income cant individual IP transactions in 2012 or 2011.
were partially offset by increased losses on derivative instruments
($184 million) and lower gains from securities and investment asset Interest Expense
sales ($171 million). In 2011, the company had investment gains of ($ in millions)
over $200 million, primarily from the sale of Lenovo shares. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change
Research, Development and Engineering
Interest expense
($ in millions) Total $459 $411 11.8%
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2012 2011 Change The increase in interest expense in 2012 versus 2011 was primarily
Total consolidated research, driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average
development and engineering $6,302 $6,258 0.7% interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in
Non-operating adjustment the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related external
Non-operating retirement-related borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
(costs)/income 20 88 (76.9) See page 75 for additional information regarding Global Financing
Operating (non-GAAP) research, debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense (excluding capi-
development and engineering $6,322 $6,345 (0.4)%
talized interest) for 2012 was $1,004 million, an increase of $40
million year to year.

===== PAGE 63 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Income Taxes Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured
The effective tax rate for 2012 was 24.2 percent compared with 24.5 the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
percent in 2011. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2012 was December 31. At December 31, 2012, the overall net underfunded
24.0 percent compared with 24.5 percent in 2011. The 0.3 point position was $20,190 million, an increase of $3,800 million from
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven December 31, 2011, as the increase in the benefit obligation due to
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (2.6 points) the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan
and a one-time benefit in the first quarter associated with a tax assets. At year-end 2012, the company’s qualified defined benefit
restructuring in Latin America (0.8 points), primarily offset by a plans were well funded and the cash requirements related to these
decrease in the utilization of foreign tax credits in 2012 (2.9 points) plans remained stable going forward at approximately $1 billion per
and the unfavorable tax impact of the gain on the RSS divestiture year through 2015. In 2012, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension
(0.3 points).The remaining items were individually insignificant. Plan assets was 11.3 percent and the plan was 98 percent funded.
Overall, global asset returns were 11.1 percent and the company’s
Financial Position qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 94 percent funded.
Cash and marketable securities at year end were $11,128 million, The company’s qualified defined benefit plans did hold European
a decrease of $794 million from the prior year-end position. During sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retire-
the year the company continued to manage the investment port- ment-Related Benefits,” on page 135 for additional information.
folio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives. At During 2012, the company generated $19,586 million in cash
December 31, 2012, there were no holdings of European sovereign from operations, a decrease of $260 million compared to 2011. In
debt securities in the investment portfolio. addition, the company generated $18,185 million in free cash flow
Total debt of $33,269 million increased $1,949 million from the in 2012, an increase of $1,581 million over the prior year. See pages
prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at December 65 to 67 for additional information on free cash flow. The company
31, 2012 was $1,800 million, a decrease of $500 million from the returned $15,768 million to shareholders in 2012, with $11,995 mil-
prior year. Within total debt, $24,501 million was in support of the lion in gross share repurchases and $3,773 million in dividends. In
Global Financing business which was leveraged at a 7.0 to 1 ratio. 2012, the company repurchased approximately 61 million shares
The company continued to have substantial flexibility in the market. and had $8.7 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization
During 2012, the company completed bond issuances totaling at year end. The company’s strong cash generation permitted
$7,875 million, with terms ranging from three to 30 years and priced the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most
from 0.55 to 4.00 percent depending on the maturity. The com- attractive long-term opportunities.
pany has consistently generated strong cash flow from operations
and continued to have access to additional sources of liquidity
through the capital markets and its $10 billion global credit facility,
with 100 percent of the facility available on a same-day basis.

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 26 for the
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,298 $ 376 $ 264 $50,938
Gross profit margin 48.1% 0.4 pts. 0.3 pts. 48.7%
SG&A $23,553 $(349) $(294) $22,910
RD&E 6,302 0 20 6,322
Other (income) and expense (843) (13) 0 (857)
Total expense and other (income) 28,396 (363) (274) 27,760
Pre-tax income 21,902 739 538 23,179
Pre-tax income margin 21.0% 0.7 pts. 0.5 pts. 22.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,298 $ 98 $ 156 $ 5,552
Effective tax rate 24.2% (0.4) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.0%
Net income $16,604 $ 641 $ 381 $17,627
Net income margin 15.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 16.9%
Diluted earnings per share $ 14.37 $0.55 $0.33 $ 15.25
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2011: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,138 $ 341 $ 2 $50,481
Gross profit margin 46.9% 0.3 pts. 0.0 pts. 47.2%
SG&A $23,594 $(309) $ (13) $23,272
RD&E 6,258 0 88 6,345
Other (income) and expense (20) (25) 0 (45)
Total expense and other (income) 29,135 (334) 74 28,875
Pre-tax income 21,003 675 (72) 21,605
Pre-tax income margin 19.6% 0.6 pts. (0.1) pts. 20.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,148 $ 179 $ (40) $ 5,287
Effective tax rate 24.5% 0.1 pts. (0.1) pts. 24.5%
Net income $15,855 $ 495 $ (32) $16,318
Net income margin 14.8% 0.5 pts. (0.0) pts. 15.3%
Diluted earnings per share $ 13.06 $0.41 $(0.03) $ 13.44
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company measures the success of its business model over the In May 2010, the company met with investors to describe how the
long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s strate- company manages its business, allocates it capital and serves its share-
gies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective of holders in a detailed discussion of its strategy. The company dis-
optimizing long-term performance. A long-term perspective ensures cussed how it continuously changes its business mix and resource
that the company is well-positioned to take advantage of major allocation toward higher value, higher growth market opportunities.
shifts occurring in technology, business and the global economy. The company also discussed its transformation to a globally

===== PAGE 65 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
integrated enterprise and how this has allowed the company to cap- the company will continue to invest to extend its capabilities. There
ture new growth and productivity. The company highlighted that by is good momentum in Global Business Services which delivered
aligning its business model with its clients’ needs, the company can double-digit profit growth in the second half of 2013. In Global Tech-
achieve its financial goals which will allow the company to invest in nology Services, the company expects the profit base in this
future sources of growth and provide strong returns to its sharehold- segment to improve in 2014. Contribution from significant contracts
ers. This delivers long-term value and performance to all key that the business signed in 2013 should improve as the transitional
stakeholders. The execution of the company’s strategy results in the investments mature and productivity improves. Overall, the busi-
2015 road map with the expectation of at least $20 of operating ness expects Global Services to improve profit in 2014 consistent
(non-GAAP) earnings per share in 2015. with its model for that business, 8-10 percent. In 2013, pre-tax
Looking forward, the company expects to continue its transfor- income in the Systems and Technology business was down $1.7
mation in 2014, shifting its investments to the growth areas and billion year to year. The performance was driven by the business
mixing to higher value. The company will continue to acquire key model issues in the Power Systems, System x and Storage business
capabilities, divest of certain businesses, rebalance its workforce units and System z mainframe product cycle. The company remains
and invest in innovation as it continues to return value to its share- confident in the secular strength of the mainframe and the product
holders. In January 2014, the company disclosed that it is expecting cycle. However, the business will take actions to address the busi-
GAAP earnings of at least $17.00 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings ness model challenges including making the products more
of at least $18.00 per diluted share for the full year 2014. The operat- relevant to clients and right-sizing these businesses to meet the
ing (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation exclude new value proposition. In January 2014, the company announced
acquisition-related charges of $0.76 per share and non-operating a definitive agreement with Lenovo Group Limited in which Lenovo
retirement-related costs of $0.24 per share. This expectation results will acquire the company’s x86 server portfolio. The company
in an increase year to year of 13.8 percent in GAAP earnings per expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain on the sale of approxi-
share and an increase of 10.5 percent year to year in operating (non- mately $1 billion. See the caption “Divestitures” on page 98 for
GAAP) earnings per share which keeps the company on track to its additional information. While the company is focused on getting
2015 objective. The company’s expectation for 2014 includes: a gain the Systems and Technology business back to profit growth, in its
from the sale of its customer care business to SYNNEX of approxi- earnings per share expectation for 2014, the company has assumed
mately $150-$175 million, flat year to year pre-tax income in the flat pre-tax income year to year for this business, excluding the
Systems and Technology business, a continued headwind from cur- divestiture gain.
rency, approximately flat workforce rebalancing charges year to year, Within the growth markets, performance in 2013 was mixed;
benefits from both the 2013 and 2014 workforce actions, continued however, the company was disappointed with the overall results.
benefits from productivity initiatives and a 23 percent assumption for The new governmental economic reforms in China impacted per-
the tax rate. The company also stated that in the first quarter of 2014 formance. As the company expands its footprint in China, the
it expects to close the initial phase of the sale of its customer care company continues to see good long-term opportunity and it con-
business, and that it also expects to take the majority of its workforce tinues to invest to capture that opportunity. Overall, in the growth
rebalancing charges in the same period. As a result, the company markets, the company believes it is on a trajectory to growth and
expects first-quarter 2014 GAAP and operating (non-GAAP) earnings expects mid-single-digit revenue growth at constant currency by
per share to be approximately 14 percent of the full year expectation, the end of 2014.
reflecting about half of the divestiture gain, the workforce rebalancing Currency movements impacted the company’s year-to-year
charges and continued impacts from currency. The year-to-year revenue and earnings per share growth in 2013. Revenue growth
dynamics of the workforce rebalancing charges will impact the com- for the full year was impacted by 2.1 points from currency. Currency
pany’s quarterly earning profile in the first half. The company expects also impacted the company’s profit performance. While there were
first-quarter 2014 GAAP and operating (non-GAAP) earnings per a number of currency movements year to year, the company’s
share to be down year to year as a result of the expected workforce results were significantly impacted by the depreciation of the Yen.
rebalancing charges, and it expects second-quarter 2014 GAAP and Due to the fact that the company’s business in Japan is more heavily
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to increase year to year skewed to local services, the company has less ability to hedge
due to the workforce rebalancing charges recorded in the prior year. cross-border cash flows in Japan as compared to most other coun-
For the first half of 2014, the company expects low double-digit tries. As a result, the currency impact related to the Yen largely falls
growth in its GAAP and operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to profit. In January 2014, the company indicated that at current spot
compared to the prior year. rates, it expects this impact to continue through 2014.
From a segment perspective, the Software business again deliv- The company’s free cash flow performance in 2013 compared
ered improved revenue, pre-tax income and margin expansion in to the prior year was impacted by operational performance, changes
2013. The company continues to invest in the Software business in sales cycle working capital and cash tax payments. The company
and is confident in its profit trajectory going into 2014, expecting expects free cash flow in 2014 to increase by approximately $1 billion
the business to grow consistently with its performance the past few year to year, including continued impacts of cash tax payments, and
years. The Global Services business delivered pre-tax income and grow faster than net income. Cash tax payments are expected to be
margin expansion in 2013. The Global Services business continues a year-to-year headwind in 2014 of about $2 billion, with the majority
to see strength in cloud, Smarter Planet and business analytics and of that impact in the first quarter.

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company expects 2014 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with
to be approximately $2.1 billion, a decrease of approximately $800 respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
million compared to 2013. This estimate reflects current pension The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt cov-
plan assumptions at December 31, 2013. Within total retirement- enants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The failure
related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan cost is expected to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event of
to be approximately $1.8 billion, flat versus 2013. Non-operating default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. If
retirement-related plan cost is expected to be approximately $300 certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest on
million, a decrease of approximately $800 million compared to 2013, the debt to which such event of default applied would become
driven by less recognized actuarial losses. Cash disbursements for immediately due and payable.
all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $2.9 The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its
billion in 2014, an increase of approximately $200 million compared debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders
to 2013. See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments
to 141 for additional information. thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The company’s
The company’s effective tax rate for 2013 benefitted from the contractual agreements governing derivative instruments contain
recognition of discrete period tax events, including audit settle- standard market clauses which can trigger the termination of the
ments. The company expects, in the normal course of business, agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below investment
that its effective tax rate and operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will grade. At December 31, 2013, the fair value of those instruments that
be approximately 23 percent in 2014. The rate will change year to were in a liability position was $501 million, before any applicable
year based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations in fair value period
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring to period based on the level of the company’s outstanding instru-
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the ments and market conditions. The company has no other contractual
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. result in a material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Moody’s
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from Standard Investors Fitch
& Poor’s Service Ratings
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $17.5 billion
Senior long-term debt AA- Aa3 A+
and $20.8 billion per year over the past five years. The company
Commercial paper A-1+ Prime-1 F1
provides for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining
an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, a
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
committed global credit facility and other committed and uncommit-
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow
ted lines of credit worldwide. The following table provides a summary
presentation on page 81 and highlights causes and events underly-
of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31,
ing sources and uses of cash in that format on page 45. For the
2009 through 2013.
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the com-
($ in billions)
pany’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evaluate strategic
2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
investments and assess the company’s ability and need to incur and
Net cash from
operating activities $17.5 $19.6 $19.8 $19.5 $20.8 service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term under GAAP and it
should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow amount is available
Cash and short-term
marketable securities $11.1 $11.1 $11.9 $11.7 $14.0 for discretionary expenditures. The company defines free cash flow as
Committed global net cash from operating activities less the change in Global Financing
credit facility $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 receivables and net capital expenditures, including the investment in
software. As discussed on page 33, a key objective of the Global Financ-
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securities ing business is to generate strong returns on equity. Increasing
at December 31, 2013 appear in the following table and remain receivables is the basis for growth in a financing business. Accordingly,
unchanged from December 31, 2012. The company’s indenture management considers Global Financing receivables as a profit-gen-
governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each erating investment, not as working capital that should be minimized for
contain significant covenants which obligate the company to efficiency. After considering Global Financing receivables as an invest-
promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount of ment, the remaining net operational cash flow less net capital
secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback transactions to 10 expenditures is viewed by the company as free cash flow.
percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets, and From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in
restrict the company’s ability to merge or consolidate unless certain 2013, free cash flow was $15.0 billion, a decrease of $3.2 billion
conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a covenant on compared to 2012. The decrease was driven by the company’s
the company’s consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot operational performance, higher cash tax payments and changes

===== PAGE 67 =====
66 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in sales cycle working capital. These decreases were partially offset shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases. The
by lower capital expenditures and the prepayment of certain post- company’s performance during this period demonstrates that
retirement benefit plan contributions in 2012. there is fungibility across the elements of share repurchases, divi-
In 2013, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on dends and acquisitions. The amount of prospective returns to
returning value to shareholders including $4.1 billion in dividends and shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases will
$12.8 billion in net stock transactions, including the common stock vary based upon several factors including each year’s operating
repurchase program. In addition, $3.1 billion was utilized to acquire results, capital expenditure requirements, research and develop-
10 companies. For the full year, the company generated $15.0 billion ment investments and acquisitions, as well as the factors
in free cash flow and utilized $19.9 billion on acquisitions, net share discussed below.
repurchases and dividends. The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
Over the past five years, the company generated over $81 billion the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2013, the Board
in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested nearly of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
$16 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $69 billion to dividend from $0.85 to $0.95 per share.
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described on page 65 and above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 17.5 $ 19.6 $ 19.8 $ 19.5 $20.8
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables (1.3) (2.9) (0.8) (0.7) 1.9
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Global Financing receivables 18.8 22.5 20.7 20.3 18.9
Capital expenditures, net (3.8) (4.3) (4.1) (4.0) (3.7)
Free cash flow 15.0 18.2 16.6 16.3 15.1
Acquisitions (3.1) (3.7) (1.8) (5.9) (1.2)
Divestitures 0.3 0.6 0.0 0.1 0.4
Share repurchase (13.9) (12.0) (15.0) (15.4) (7.4)
Dividends (4.1) (3.8) (3.5) (3.2) (2.9)
Non-Global Financing debt 3.2 0.7 1.7 2.3 (4.7)
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and Global Financing debt) 2.4 (0.8) 2.3 3.5 1.7
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities $ (0.1) $ (0.8) $ 0.3 $ (2.3) $ 1.1
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow dynam- The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in
ics discussed above include significant changes in operating results, 2006, and, among other things, increases the funding requirements
material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after December 31,
adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding requirements 2007. No mandatory contribution is required for the U.S. defined
during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the timing benefit plan in 2014 as of December 31, 2013.
of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such an adverse impact The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
will depend on a number of variables, which are more completely its current domestic operations and obligations, including investing
described in note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. The
119 to 121. With respect to pension funding, in 2013, the company company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, and,
contributed $507 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit plans versus in those circumstances where the company has additional cash
$617 million in 2012. As highlighted in the Contractual Obligations requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity options
table on page 67, the company expects to make legally mandated available. These options may include the ability to borrow additional
pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of approximately funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its committed global
$3.3 billion in the next five years. The 2014 contributions are currently credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and utilizing inter-
expected to be approximately $600 million. Cash disbursements company loans with certain foreign subsidiaries.
related to all retirement-related plans is expected to be approximately The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
$2.9 billion in 2014, an increase of approximately $0.2 billion com- income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely rein-
pared to 2013. Financial market performance could increase the vest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and
legally mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. coun- accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made
tries that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in the it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the
capital markets or pension plan funding regulations. deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
earnings is not practicable. While the company currently does the company could elect to repatriate these funds which could
not have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign subsidiaries, result in a reassessment of the company’s policy and increased
if these funds are needed for operations and obligations in the U.S., tax expense.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual Payments Due In
Payment Stream 2014 2015-16 2017-18 After 2018
Long-term debt obligations $36,978 $3,839 $ 8,656 $ 8,035 $16,448
Interest on long-term debt obligations 10,614 1,084 1,943 1,564 6,023
Capital (finance) lease obligations 58 16 25 12 5
Operating lease obligations 5,991 1,492 2,302 1,419 778
Purchase obligations 1,394 593 633 106 62
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding (mandated)* 3,300 600 1,300 1,400
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,757 84 178 192 1,303
Long-term termination benefits 1,519 238 227 178 876
Tax reserves** 2,904 101
Other 1,052 44 93 80 836
Total $65,567 $8,091 $15,357 $12,986 $26,331
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2018 could not be reasonably estimated.
** T hese amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $101 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the next
12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress
of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months.
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above excluding Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the amounts From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Certain arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67
noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the table above as their future (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis
cash outflows are uncertain. This includes deferred taxes, derivatives, about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con tractual
deferred income, disability benefits and other sundry items. Obligations.”
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase At December 31, 2013, the company had no off-balance sheet
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the com- current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial
pany would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, capi-
(3) the company must make specified minimum payments even if tal expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for the
it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services company’s contractual obligations, and note M, “Contingencies and
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services is non- Commitments,” on page 121, for detailed information about the com-
cancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the table pany’s guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification
above. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur arrangements. The company does not have retained interests in
a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-
as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified balance sheet interests or instruments.
in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they rep-
resent the portion of each contract that is a firm commitment. Critical Accounting Estimates
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into con- The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates
tracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a portion of and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly
its requirements of a specific product, commodity or service from affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates
a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in and assumptions discussed in this section are those that the com-
order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not pany considers to be the most critical to its financial statements.
specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature
the company does not consider them to be purchase obligations. of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the
effective interest rate at December 31, 2013, plus the interest rate
spread associated with that debt, if any.

===== PAGE 69 =====
68 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a rea- To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such
sonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is that management changes its expected long-term return on plan
material to the company’s financial condition. Senior management assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in the
has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption will have
estimates with the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Direc- an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of $256 million on
tors. The company’s significant accounting policies are described in the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/cost
note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 84 through 93. (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 2013 and
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that informa- assuming no contributions are made in 2014).
tion is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required,
material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sen- by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results that
sitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users differ from the estimates may result in more or less future company
of the Annual Report to understand a general direction cause and funding into the pension plans than is planned by management.
effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent manage- Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s pension plans
ment’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should in other countries worldwide will vary depending upon the status of
be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, each respective plan.
and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Revenue Recognition
Pension Assumptions Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related to
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measurement the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the company
of the company’s benefit obligation to employees and net periodic to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrange-
pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, ments with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant
including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting,
return on plan assets. including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple-element
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the (gain)/ arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting.
loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic Other significant judgments include determining whether IBM or
pension (income)/cost calculation (see page 133 for information a reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and whether
regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the projected benefit separate contracts are considered part of one arrangement.
obligation (PBO). The company increased the discount rate assump- Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability
tion for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based defined to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. The
benefit plan, by 90 basis points to 4.50 percent on December 31, company considers various factors, including a review of specific
2013. This change will decrease pre-tax cost and expense recog- transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical expe-
nized in 2014 by an estimated $264 million. If the discount rate rience and market and economic conditions when calculating these
assumption for the PPP decreased by 90 basis points on December provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each quarter
31, 2013, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2014 would have to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates were
increased by an estimated $195 million. Changes in the discount rate changed by 10 percent in 2013, net income would have been
assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact the impacted by $97 million (excluding Global Financing receivables
company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. Each discussed on pages 73 and 74).
25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate will cause a
corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s PBO Costs to Complete Service Contracts
of an estimated $1.3 billion based upon December 31, 2013 data. The company enters into numerous service contracts through its
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue,
used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost (see page cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profit-
133 for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan ability of each contract, especially contracts for which the company
assets assumption). Expected returns on plan assets are calculated uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of accounting. If
based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract will be unprof-
changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five- itable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is
year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic recorded immediately in cost. The company performs ongoing profit-
pension (income)/cost. The differences between the actual return ability analyses of its services contracts in order to determine whether
on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets the latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the
are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets company to estimate the future costs to complete each contract are
line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component future labor costs, future product costs and expected productivity
of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the service lives efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as a component of
or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, pro- other accrued expenses and liabilities were approximately $41 million
vided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon the and $54 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by
accounting standards.

===== PAGE 70 =====
Management Discussion 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Income Taxes Valuation of Goodwill
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually, in the fourth
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determin- quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
ing the consolidated provision for income taxes. the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transac- The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its reporting
tions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events and circum-
uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based stances that affect the fair value of reporting units, including
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. macroeconomic, industry and market conditions, the company
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s belief assesses individual factors such as:
that its tax return positions are supportable, the company believes • A significant adverse change in legal factors
that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review by tax or the business climate;
authorities. The company believes that its accruals for tax liabilities • An adverse action or assessment by a regulator;
are adequate for all open audit years based on its assessment of • Unanticipated competition;
many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. • A loss of key personnel; and
This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions, and may • A more likely than not expectation that a reporting
involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold
extent that new information becomes available which causes the or otherwise disposed of.
company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine
tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill
expense in the period in which such determination is made. impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if the company
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the value is less than its carrying amount.
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available In the fourth quarter, the company performed its annual goodwill
evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, esti- impairment analysis. The qualitative assessment illustrated evidence
mates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax of a potential impairment triggering event as a result of the financial
planning strategies. In the event that the company changes its deter- performance of the Systems and Technology reporting unit. The
mination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be quantitative analysis resulted in no impairment as the reporting
realized, the company will adjust its valuation allowance with a cor- unit’s estimated fair value exceeded the carrying amount by over
responding impact to income tax expense in the period in which 100 percent.
such determination is made.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period Loss Contingencies
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each signifi-
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the cant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. If the potential
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. amount can be reasonably estimated, the company accrues a liability
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the deter-
decreases by 1 percent of income before income taxes, consolidated mination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure
net income would have decreased/improved by $195 million in 2013. is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these mat-
ters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the
Valuation of Assets time. As additional information becomes available, the company reas-
The application of business combination and impairment accounting sesses the potential liability related to its pending claims and litigation,
requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The acqui- and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the
sition method of accounting for business combinations requires the potential liabilities could have a material impact on the company’s results
company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities of operations and financial position.
assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree to properly
allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are depre- Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
ciated and amortized from goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
assets. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and indef- port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A descrip-
inite-lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash flows to tion of the methods used by management to estimate the amount
those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates are Accounting Policies,” on page 93. Factors that could result in actual
based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are receivable losses that are materially different from the estim ated
inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant
use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect unantici- change in the economic health of a particular client that represents
pated events and circumstances that may occur. a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.

===== PAGE 71 =====
70 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect
estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global Financing’s adjustments based upon a simple constant currency mathematical
segment pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income translation of local currency results using the comparable prior period’s
before income taxes would be higher or lower by an estimated $39 currency conversion rate. However, this constant currency method-
million (using 2013 data), depending upon whether the actual collect- ology that the company utilizes to disclose this information does not
ibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates. incorporate any operational actions that management may take in
reaction to fluctuating currency rates. Currency movements, particu-
Residual Value larly the depreciation of the Yen, impacted the company’s year-to-year
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment revenue and earnings per share growth in 2013. Based on the currency
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates rate movements in 2013, total revenue decreased 4.6 percent as
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as operating reported and 2.5 at constant currency versus 2012. On a pre-tax
or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of leased income basis, these translation impacts offset by the net impact of
equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no
for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-looking product pricing or sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $400 million
information such as marketing plans and technological innovations. in 2013. The same mathematical exercise resulted in a decrease of
Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed and “other than approximately $100 million in 2012. The company views these amounts
temporary” declines in estimated future residual values are recog- as a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported financial results.
nized upon identification. Anticipated increases in future residual Considering the operational responses mentioned above, movements
values are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of hedging instruments,
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from it is difficult to predict future currency impacts on any particular period,
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment but the company believes it could be substantially less than the theo-
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations retical maximum given the competitive pressure in the marketplace.
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment. For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dollars
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, translation adjust-
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s segment ments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, the company
pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income before manages currency risk in these entities by linking prices and contracts
income taxes for 2013 would have been lower by an estimated to U.S. dollars. The company continues to monitor the economic condi-
$94 million. If the actual residual value recovery is higher than man- tions in Venezuela. On December 30, 2010, the official rate for essential
agement’s estimates, the increase in income will be realized at the goods was eliminated, with no change to the SITME rate. The SITME
end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. rate remained constant throughout 2012 and 2011. In February 2013, the
SITME rate was eliminated, and the official rate was set at 6.3 bolivares
Currency Rate Fluctuations fuerte (BsF) to the U.S. dollar. This devaluation did not have a material
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. impact given the size of the company’s operations in Venezuela (less
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. than 1 percent of total 2013 and 2012 revenue, respectively).
At December 31, 2013, currency changes resulted in assets and In addition, in March 2013, the Venezuelan government created
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer a new foreign exchange mechanism called the “Complimentary
dollars than at year-end 2012. The company uses financial hedging System of Foreign Currency Aquirement.” This system operates
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing trans- similar to an auction system and allows entities in specific sectors
actions and other foreign currency-based transactions. Further to bid for U.S. dollars to be used for specific import transactions. In
discussion of currency and hedging appears in note D, “Financial December 2013, the Venezuelan regulation that created this mecha-
Instruments,” on pages 102 through 106. nism was amended to expand its use, and to require publication of
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses the average exchange rates implied by transactions settled in these
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During auctions. The company did not participate in this exchange mecha-
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and nism in 2013, and will consider its participation going forward.
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pricing In January 2014, the Argentinian government devalued its cur-
offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of the rency from 6 pesos to the U.S. dollar to 8 pesos to the U.S. dollar.
advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position com- This devaluation will not have a material impact given the size of
petitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, the company’s operations in Argentina (less than 1 percent of total
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to 2013 revenue).
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action.
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency- Market Risk
based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The In the normal course of business, the financial position of the
company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash man- company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the
agement purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the volatility market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements
of currency impacts on the company’s financial results. on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-U.S. liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts
operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.

===== PAGE 72 =====
Management Discussion 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $300 million as
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse compared to an increase of $181 million at December 31, 2012.
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the com- Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s
pany does not anticipate any material losses from these risks. financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the com-
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, contains pany’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
an element of market risk from changes in interest and currency
rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through the use of a Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as described At December 31, 2013, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against for-
in note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 through 106. eign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a sen- in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments
sitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures of $1,340 million as compared with an increase of $1,203 million at
may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other finan- December 31, 2012. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar
cial instruments. against foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant,
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity would result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash equivalents, instruments of $1,340 million compared with a decrease of $1,203
marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial million at December 31, 2012. The change in impact from 2012 to
financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long- 2013 was comprised of: assets ($59 million), debt ($2 million) and
term and short-term debt and derivative financial instruments. The derivatives ($76 million).
company’s derivative financial instruments generally include interest
rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts. Financing Risks
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the risk See the “Description of Business” on page 33 for a discussion of
of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in interest the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-sensitive instru- and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
ments. The market values for interest and foreign currency exchange
risk are computed based on the present value of future cash flows as Cybersecurity
affected by the changes in rates that are attributable to the market The company’s approach on cybersecurity leverages its ability
risk being measured. The discount rates used for the present value to adapt to a changing environment, as well as the depth and
computations were selected based on market interest and foreign breadth of its global capabilities, both in terms of its offerings to
currency exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2013 and 2012. clients and its internal approaches to cybersecurity issues. The
The differences in this comparison are the hypothetical gains or company has software solutions that deliver identity and access
losses associated with each type of risk. management, data security, application security, network security
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces- and endpoint security. IBM’s software solutions include a security
sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company intelligence dashboard that can collect information on customer
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to practi- IT security events and provide detailed information to customers
cal limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor about potential threats and security posture. The company’s
are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are con- services businesses offer professional solutions for security from
strained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from assessment to deployment. In addition, the company offers man-
the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing aged and outsourced security solutions from multiple security
or hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items operations centers around the world. Finally, security is embed-
include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and ded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineering
direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and processes and by critical functions (encryption, access control,
the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a conse- etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
quence, reported changes in the values of some of the financial From an enterprise perspective, IBM has implemented a multi-
instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not faceted approach involving people, tools, and processes to identify
matched with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that and address cybersecurity risks. The company has established
those instruments are designed to finance or hedge. policies and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2013 and infrastructure and data are managed, which help protect IBM and
2012, are as follows: client data. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online
education, Web articles and other awareness initiatives to enable
Interest Rate Risk its workforce to be knowledgeable about cybersecurity threats and
At December 31, 2013, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest their responsibilities to identify and mitigate these risks. IBM per-
rates with all other variables held constant would result in a decrease forms ongoing assessments regarding its technical controls and its
in the fair market value of the company’s financial instruments of methods for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The
$322 million as compared with a decrease of $192 million at Decem- company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to defend
ber 31, 2012. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest rates with against cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, data
all other variables held constant would result in an increase in the centers and applications.

===== PAGE 73 =====
72 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013-12 2012-11
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 431,212 434,246 433,362 (0.7)% 0.2%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 9,018 8,009 7,523 12.6 6.5
Complementary 23,555 24,740 25,500 (4.8) (3.0)
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in more than Total revenue in 2013 increased $232 million versus 2012 as a result of:
175 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the higher value • An increase in internal revenue of 10.8 percent driven by an
segments of enterprise computing. The company continually assesses increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 20.0 percent
its resource needs with the objective of balancing its workforce glob- to $1,871 million), partially offset by a decrease in financing
ally to improve the company’s global reach and competitiveness. revenue (down 17.9 percent to $411 million); and
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent • An increase in external revenue of 0.4 percent (3 percent
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited- adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing
term employment arrangements to meet specific business needs revenue (up 1.4 percent to $1,493 million), partially offset
in a flexible and cost-effective manner. by a decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down
2.3 percent to $528 million).
GLOBAL FINANCING
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a
lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. The
stand-alone entity.
increase in external financing revenue was due to a higher average
In 2013, the Global Financing business remained focused on its
asset balance, partially offset by lower asset yields and a decrease
core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s clients
in remarketing lease revenue. Global Financing gross profit increased
and business partners. For the year, Global Financing delivered
8.0 percent compared to 2012 due to an increase in used equipment
external revenue of $2,022 million and total revenue of $4,304 mil-
sales gross profit, partially offset by a decrease in financing gross
lion, and expanded gross and pre-tax margins. Total pre-tax income
profit. The gross profit margin increased 1.5 points due to an
of $2,171 million increased 6.8 percent compared to 2012 and return
increase in the used equipment sales margin, partially offset by a
on equity was 40.6 percent.
shift in mix toward lower margin used equipment sales.
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact
Total revenue in 2012 decreased $122 million versus 2011 as a
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results
result of:
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact
• A decline in external revenue of 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted
Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both
for currency) driven by a decrease in financing revenue
financing revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations,
(down 8.7 percent to $1,471 million), partially offset by
which determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like
an increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 10.6
business, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales and
percent to $540 million); and
services volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates. Par-
• A decline in internal revenue of 1.6 percent driven by a
ticipation rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their
decrease in financing revenue (down 11.3 percent to $500
transactions through Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front
million), partially offset by an increase in used equipment
cash or financing through a third party.
sales revenue (up 2.0 percent to $1,559 million).
Results of Operations
The decreases in external and internal financing revenue were due
($ in millions) to lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue.
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 Global Financing gross profit in 2012 decreased 2.0 percent
External revenue $2,022 $2,013 $2,102 compared to 2011 due to a decrease in financing gross profit, par-
Internal revenue 2,282 2,060 2,092 tially offset by an increase in used equipment sales gross profit. The
Total revenue 4,304 4,073 4,195 gross profit margin increased 0.6 points due to a higher financing
margin, partially offset by a shift in mix toward lower margin used
Cost 1,417 1,400 1,467
equipment sales and a lower used equipment sales margin.
Gross profit $2,888 $2,673 $2,728
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 6.8 percent in 2013
Gross profit margin 67.1% 65.6% 65.0%
versus 2012, following an increase of 1.1 percent in 2012 versus 2011.
Pre-tax income $2,171 $2,034 $2,011
The increase in 2013 was driven by the increase in gross profit ($215
After-tax income* $1,456 $1,362 $1,338
million), partially offset by increases in financing receivables provi-
Return on equity* 40.6% 41.0% 40.7% sions ($60 million) and SG&A expenses ($20 million). The increase
* See page 75 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation. in 2012 was driven by decreases in SG&A expenses ($61 million) and

===== PAGE 74 =====
Management Discussion 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
financing receivables provisions ($16 million), partially offset by the primarily for software and services and are unsecured. These loans
decrease in gross profit ($55 million). The increase in financing are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and,
receivable provisions in 2013 was due to higher specific reserve when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the
requirements, primarily in China. At December 31, 2013, the overall loan agreements which include covenants to protect against credit
allowance for credit losses coverage rate was 1.2 percent, flat com- deterioration during the life of the obligation. Client financing also
pared to the prior year. includes internal activity as described on pages 33 and 34.
The decrease in return on equity from 2012 to 2013 was driven Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory
by a higher average equity balance, and the increase in return on and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of
equity from 2011 to 2012 was driven by higher after-tax income. IBM and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory financing and
accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
Financial Condition These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and are
also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate
Balance Sheet
the associated risk.
($ in millions)
In addition to the actions previously described, in certain circum-
At December 31: 2013 2012
stances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer credit
Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,446 $ 1,380
risk to third parties.
Net investment in sales-type
At December 31, 2013, substantially all financing assets are IT
and direct financing leases 9,739 10,008
related assets, and approximately 59 percent of the total external
Equipment under operating leases
portfolio was with investment-grade clients with no direct exposure
External clients (a) 947 1,273
to consumers.
Internal clients (b)(c) 0 25
Client loans 14,297 13,121 Originations
Total client financing assets 24,982 24,428 The following are total financing originations:
Commercial financing receivables 8,541 7,755
($ in millions)
Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c) 4,216 4,328
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
Other receivables 352 459
Client financing $15,792 $16,277 $14,390
Other assets 601 533
Commercial financing 41,027 36,944 35,282
Total assets $40,138 $38,882
Total $56,819 $53,222 $49,673
Intercompany payables (b) $ 5,766 $ 6,802
Debt (d) 27,504 24,501 In 2013, new financing originations exceeded cash collections for
Other liabilities 3,043 4,084 both client and commercial financing. This resulted in a net increase
Total liabilities 36,314 35,388 in total financing assets from December 31, 2012. The increase in
Total equity 3,825 3,494 originations in 2013 versus 2012 was due to improving volumes in
Total liabilities and equity $40,138 $38,882 commercial financing. The increase in originations in 2012 versus
2011 was due to improving volumes in both client and commercial
(a) I ncludes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products
financing. Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed
purchased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s
consolidated results. under a loan facility and is not considered originations.
(b) E ntire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore Cash generated by Global Financing in 2013 was deployed to pay
does not appear on page 80.
intercompany payables and dividends to IBM as well as business
(c) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the
value in the table using Global Financing debt. partners and OEM suppliers.
(d) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt.
A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
or related to intercompany mark-up embedded in the Global Financing assets.
See table on page 75. The following table presents external financing receivables excluding
residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
Sources and Uses of Funds
($ in millions)
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client and
At December 31: 2013 2012
commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end users
Gross financing receivables $32,319 $30,621
consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but also
Specific allowance for credit losses 279 240
include OEM equipment, software and services to meet IBM clients’
total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are primarily Unallocated allowance for credit losses 113 115
sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for systems prod- Total allowance for credit losses 392 355
ucts, as well as loans for systems, software and services with terms Net financing receivables $31,928 $30,266
generally from one to seven years. Global Financing’s client loans are Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.2% 1.2%

===== PAGE 75 =====
74 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables The increase in the gross profit margin was driven by a shift in mix
Allowance for Credit Losses toward higher margin internal equipment sales and a margin increase
in internal equipment sales.
($ in millions) The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed
Allowance Additions/ December 31, residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases
January 1, 2013 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2013
at December 31, 2012 and 2013. In addition, the table presents the
$355 $(44 ) $85 $(5 ) $392
residual value as a percentage of the related original amount
* Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value
the period.
assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, 2013 is expected
** Primarily represents translation adjustments.
to be returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was 1.2 residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guar-
percent at December 31, 2013 and 2012. Specific reserves increased antees of the future value of the equipment to be returned at end of
16 percent from $240 million at December 31, 2012, to $279 million lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are also
at December 31, 2013. Unallocated reserves decreased 2 percent obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees
from $115 million at December 31, 2012, to $113 million at December are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by
31, 2013, primarily due to lower general reserve requirements. accounting standards in the determination of lease classifications
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was an increase of $85 for the covered equipment and provide protection against risk of
million for 2013, compared to an increase of $26 million for 2012. loss arising from declines in equipment values for these assets.
The year-to-year increase in bad debt expense was due to higher The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease pay-
specific reserve requirements, primarily in China, in the current year. ments that are utilized in determining the classification of a lease as
a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating lease. The
Residual Value aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of sales-type
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and man- leases were $479 million and $776 million for the financing transac-
agement of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately tions originated during the years ended December 31, 2013 and
project future equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing 2012, respectively. In 2013, the residual value guarantee program
has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under resulted in the company recognizing approximately $462 million of
lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing con- revenue that would otherwise have been recognized in future peri-
tinually monitors projections of future equipment values and ods as operating lease revenue. If the company had chosen to not
compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio. participate in a residual value guarantee program in 2013 and prior
See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 93 for the years, the 2013 impact would be substantially mitigated by the effect
company’s accounting policy for residual values. of prior year asset values being recognized as operating lease rev-
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by sell- enue in the current year. The aggregate asset values associated with
ing assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment to new the guarantees of direct financing leases were $218 million and $199
clients, or extending lease arrangements with current clients. Sales million for the financing transactions originated during the years
of equipment, which are primarily sourced from equipment returned ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The associated
at the end of a lease, represented 55.8 percent and 51.6 percent of aggregate guaranteed future values at the scheduled end of lease
Global Financing’s revenue in 2013 and 2012, respectively. The were $29 million and $53 million for the financing transactions origi-
increase was due to a shift from operating leases to used equipment nated during the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012,
sales for internal transactions. The gross profit margins on these sales respectively. The cost of guarantees was $3 million and $5 million
were 58.3 percent and 53.6 percent in 2013 and 2012, respectively. for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2013 Balance
2017 and
At December 31: 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 794 $ 736 $142 $204 $243 $149
Operating leases 259 200 93 50 42 15
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 1,053 $ 936 $235 $254 $285 $164
Related original amount financed $18,744 $17,642
Percentage 5.6% 5.3%

===== PAGE 76 =====
Management Discussion 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt
Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense
At December 31: 2013 2012 relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.2x 7.0x internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of
Operations” on pages 72 and 73 and in note T, “Segment Informa-
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a tion,” on pages 141 to 146.
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on page
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans 78, the external debt-related interest expense supporting Global
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from
the company to substantially match the term and currency underly- cost of financing to interest expense.
ing the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. The following table provides additional information on total com-
Both assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing balance pany debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes internal loans
sheet on page 73. and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global Services’
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com- long-term contracts and other internal activity. The company
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by believes these assets should be appropriately leveraged in line with
other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures Global the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2013 December 31, 2012
Global Financing Segment $27,504 $24,501
Debt to support external clients $24,471 $21,583
Debt to support internal clients 3,033 2,919
Non-Global Financing Segments 12,214 8,767
Debt supporting operations 15,247 11,686
Intercompany activity (3,033) (2,919)
Total company debt $39,718 $33,269
Liquidity and Capital Resources of business for future growth. Global Financing’s offerings are com-
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is sup- petitive and available to clients as a result of the company’s
ported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access to borrowing cost and access to the capital markets. Overall, Global
capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was deployed Financing’s originations will be dependent upon the demand for IT
to pay dividends to the company in order to maintain an appropriate products and services as well as client participation rates.
debt-to-equity ratio. IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted
Return on Equity period where IBM could not access the capital markets would likely
lead to a slowdown in originations.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2013 2012 Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
Numerator tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The
company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, combined
Global Financing after-tax income (a)* $1,456 $1,362
with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate gross
Denominator
margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.
Average Global Financing equity (b)** $3,585 $3,322
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b) 40.6% 41.0%
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provision
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply rigorous
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a
credit policies in both the origination of new business and the evalu-
consolidated basis.
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters. ation of the existing portfolio.
As discussed on page 74, Global Financing has historically been
Looking Forward able to manage residual value risk both through insight into the com-
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and funding pany’s product cycles, as well as through its remarketing business.
capacity which enables the company to be well positioned in the Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the
current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new financing key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with prod-
volumes are IBM and OEM products and services financed to the uct and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent management
company’s clients and business partners, and substantially all of the business going forward, even during periods of uncertainty
financing assets are IT related assets which provide a stable base with respect to the global economy.

===== PAGE 77 =====
76 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial informa- Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
tion presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management. adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
United States of America, applying certain estimates and judgments reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
as required. purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, accepted in the United States of America.
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the control of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accor-
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we dance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the com-
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication pany are being made only in accordance with authorizations of
channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective func- management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reason-
tioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company to able assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest ethical unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distrib- Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
uted to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
internal programs to assure that they are understood and followed. of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial procedures may deteriorate.
reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria estab-
Oversight Board (United States). lished in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (1992) issued by
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Com-
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon- mission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management concluded
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered that the company’s internal control over financial reporting was
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to effective as of December 31, 2013.
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically
and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm,
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM manage-
ment, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and
financial reporting matters. Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 25, 2014
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer,
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
February 25, 2014

===== PAGE 78 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of
Directors of International Business
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State- A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
ments appearing on pages 78 through 146 present fairly, in all designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
material respects, the financial position of International Business of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2013 for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
and 2012 and the results of their operations and their cash flows for accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2013 in reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately
United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company main- and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
tained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions
reporting as of December 31, 2013, based on criteria established in are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial state-
Internal Control—Integrated Framework (1992) issued by the Com- ments in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
mittee of Sponsoring Organi zations of the Treadway Commission and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made
(COSO). The Company’s management is responsible for these only in accordance with authorizations of management and direc-
financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over tors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance
financial reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition,
internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompany- use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a
ing Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial material effect on the financial statements.
Reporting appearing on page 76. Our responsibility is to express Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s inter- reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
nal control over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain procedures may deteriorate.
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are
free of material misstatement and whether effective internal control
over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our
audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the New York, New York
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used and February 25, 2014
significant estimates made by management, and evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control
over financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of inter-
nal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operat-
ing effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our
audits also included performing such other procedures as we con-
sidered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.

===== PAGE 79 =====
78 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2013 2012 2011
Revenue
Services $57,655 $ 59,453 $ 60,721
Sales 40,049 43,014 44,063
Financing 2,047 2,040 2,132
Total revenue 99,751 104,507 106,916
Cost
Services 37,564 39,166 40,740
Sales 12,572 13,956 14,973
Financing 1,110 1,087 1,065
Total cost 51,246 54,209 56,778
Gross profit 48,505 50,298 50,138
Expense and other income
Selling, general and administrative 23,502 23,553 23,594
Research, development and engineering O 6,226 6,302 6,258
Intellectual property and custom development income (822) (1,074) (1,108)
Other (income) and expense (327) (843) (20)
Interest expense D&J 402 459 411
Total expense and other (income) 28,981 28,396 29,135
Income before income taxes 19,524 21,902 21,003
Provision for income taxes N 3,041 5,298 5,148
Net income $16,483 $ 16,604 $ 15,855
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution P $ 14.94 $ 14.37 $ 13.06
Basic P $ 15.06 $ 14.53 $ 13.25
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 1,103,042,156 1,155,449,317 1,213,767,985
Basic 1,094,486,604 1,142,508,521 1,196,951,006
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2013 2012 2011
Net income $16,483 $16,604 $15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (1,335) (44) (693)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (4) 8 (14)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (8) (42) (231)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 20 4
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (8) (14) (241)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 43 32 (266)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (166) (253) 511
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges (123) (220) 245
Retirement-related benefit plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) 16 — (28)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 5,369 (7,489) (5,463)
Curtailments and settlements (3) (2) 11
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (114) (148) (157)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,499 2,457 1,847
Total retirement-related benefit plans 8,767 (5,182) (3,790)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L 7,301 (5,460) (4,479)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income L (3,144) 1,587 1,339
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L 4,157 (3,874) (3,142)
Total comprehensive income $20,641 $12,731 $12,713
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 81 =====
80 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2013 2012
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 10,716 $ 10,412
Marketable securities D 350 717
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $291 in 2013 and $255 in 2012) 10,465 10,667
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $308 in 2013 and $288 in 2012) F 19,787 18,038
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $36 in 2013 and $17 in 2012) 1,584 1,873
Inventories E 2,310 2,287
Deferred taxes N 1,651 1,415
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 4,488 4,024
Total current assets 51,350 49,433
Property, plant and equipment G 40,475 40,501
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 26,654 26,505
Property, plant and equipment—net G 13,821 13,996
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $80 in 2013 and $66 in 2012) F 12,755 12,812
Prepaid pension assets S 5,551 945
Deferred taxes N 3,051 3,973
Goodwill I 31,184 29,247
Intangible assets—net I 3,871 3,787
Investments and sundry assets H 4,639 5,021
Total assets $ 126,223 $ 119,213
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 4,633 $ 4,948
Short-term debt D&J 6,862 9,181
Accounts payable 7,461 7,952
Compensation and benefits 3,893 4,745
Deferred income 12,557 11,952
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,748 4,847
Total current liabilities 40,154 43,625
Long-term debt D&J 32,856 24,088
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations S 16,242 20,418
Deferred income 4,108 4,491
Other liabilities K 9,934 7,607
Total liabilities 103,294 100,229
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 51,594 50,110
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2013—2,207,522,548; 2012—2,197,561,159)
Retained earnings 130,042 117,641
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2013—1,153,131,611; 2012—1,080,193,483) (137,242) (123,131)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (21,602) (25,759)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 22,792 18,860
Noncontrolling interests A 137 124
Total equity 22,929 18,984
Total liabilities and equity $ 126,223 $ 119,213
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 16,483 $ 16,604 $ 15,855
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 3,327 3,392 3,589
Amortization of intangibles 1,351 1,284 1,226
Stock-based compensation 614 688 697
Deferred taxes (1,610) 797 1,212
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (236) (729) (342)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) (1,407) (2,230) (1,279)
Retirement related 294 (1,008) (1,371)
Inventories (57) 280 (163)
Other assets/other liabilities (747) 733 (28)
Accounts payable (529) (224) 451
Net cash provided by operating activities 17,485 19,586 19,846
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (3,623) (4,082) (4,108)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 372 410 608
Investment in software (517) (635) (559)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (4,608) (4,109) (1,594)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 4,873 3,142 3,345
Non-operating finance receivables—net (1,063) (608) (291)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (3,056) (3,722) (1,811)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 297 599 14
Net cash used in investing activities (7,326) (9,004) (4,396)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 16,353 12,242 9,996
Payments to settle debt (10,013) (9,549) (8,947)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 621 (441) 1,321
Common stock repurchases (13,859) (11,995) (15,046)
Common stock transactions—other 1,074 1,540 2,453
Cash dividends paid (4,058) (3,773) (3,473)
Net cash used in financing activities (9,883) (11,976) (13,696)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 28 (116) (493)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents 304 (1,511) 1,262
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 10,412 11,922 10,661
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 10,716 $ 10,412 $ 11,922
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 4,024 $ 3,169 $ 4,168
Interest paid on debt $ 982 $ 1,009 $ 956
Capital lease obligations $ 14 $ 10 $ 39
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 83 =====
82 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2011
Equity, January 1, 2011 $45,418 $ 92,532 $ (96,161) $(18,743) $ 23,046 $126 $ 23,172
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 15,855 15,855 15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,142) (3,142) (3,142)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,713 $ 12,713
Cash dividends paid—common stock (3,473) (3,473) (3,473)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (20,669,785 shares) 2,394 2,394 2,394
Purchases (1,717,246 shares) and
sales (4,920,198 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (56) 231 175 175
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (88,683,716 shares) (15,034) (15,034) (15,034)
Changes in other equity 317 317 317
Changes in noncontrolling interests (29) (29)
Equity, December 31, 2011 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2012
Equity, January 1, 2012 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 16,604 16,604 16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,874) (3,874) (3,874)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,731 $ 12,731
Cash dividends paid—common stock (3,773) (3,773) (3,773)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (15,091,320 shares) 1,532 1,532 1,532
Purchases (2,406,007 shares) and
sales (2,746,169 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (48) (160) (208) (208)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (61,246,371 shares) (12,008) (12,008) (12,008)
Changes in other equity 448 448 448
Changes in noncontrolling interests 27 27
Equity, December 31, 2012 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2013
Equity, January 1, 2013 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 16,483 16,483 16,483
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 4,157 4,157 4,157
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 20,641 $ 20,641
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,058) (4,058) (4,058)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (9,961,389 shares) 1,216 1,216 1,216
Purchases (1,666,069 shares) and
sales (1,849,883 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (25) (117) (142) (142)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (73,121,942 shares) (13,993) (13,993) (13,993)
Changes in other equity 268 268 268
Changes in noncontrolling interests 13 13
Equity, December 31, 2013 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $ 22,792 $137 $ 22,929
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 85 =====
84 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. Revenue
SIGnIFICAnT ACCOunTInG POlICIES The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable
Basis of Presentation and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement,
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot- delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and
notes of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until
the company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting products have been shipped or services have been provided to the
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP). client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied.
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
This is annotated where applicable. The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers,
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $7 million, $11 million resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when the
and $6 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2013, reseller has: economic substance apart from the company, credit
2012 and 2011, respectively, are included in the Consolidated State- risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to the company
ment of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end user, the com-
pany has no further obligations related to bringing about resale or
Principles of Consolidation delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, stock
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally majority owned. rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves”
in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Net included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K). Revenue
income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably and reliably
reported as described above in the Consolidated Statement of Earn- determined. The company bases its estimates on historical results
ings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included in taking into consideration the type of client, the type of transaction
the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in and the specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under
business entities in which the company does not have control, but cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense only
has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and if the company receives from the client an identifiable benefit suf-
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and ficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value can be
the company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in reasonably and reliably estimated. If the company does not receive
other (income) and expense. The accounting policy for other invest- an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale
ments in equity securities is on page 92 within “Marketable whose fair value can be reasonably estimated, such payments are
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are recorded as a reduction of revenue.
primarily accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation. is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is
Use of Estimates a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered to
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most nota-
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that bly whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or has
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the company
and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported in adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, was
the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclo- involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, has lati-
sures. These estimates are based on management’s best tude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that the The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes
company may undertake in the future and on various other assump- assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
tions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In addition
As a result, actual results may be different from these estimates. See to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific
“Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 67 to 70 for a discussion revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements
of the company’s critical accounting estimates. and for each major category of revenue.

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements Services
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist The company’s primary services offerings include information tech-
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on the nology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing, application
needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any combina- management services, consulting and systems integration, technol-
tion of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For example, ogy infrastructure and system maintenance, Web hosting and
a client may purchase a server that includes operating system soft- the design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s
ware. In addition, the arrangement may include post-contract specifications (design and build). These services are provided on a
support for the software and a contract for post-warranty mainte- time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price
nance service for the hardware. These types of arrangements can per measure of output contract and the contract terms range from
also include financing provided by the company. These arrange- less than one year to over 10 years.
ments consist of multiple deliverables, with the hardware and Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
software delivered in one reporting period and the software support contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided using
and hardware maintenance services delivered across multiple either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line basis over
reporting periods. In another example, a client may outsource the the term of the contract. Under the output method, the amount of
running of its datacenter operations to the company on a long-term, revenue recognized is based on the services delivered in the period.
multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers and/or soft- Revenue from application management services, technology
ware products from the company to upgrade or expand its facility. infrastructure and system maintenance and Web hosting contracts
The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous basis across is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
multiple reporting periods and the hardware and software products Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that a deliverable hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject to specific account- related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
ing guidance that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
such specific guidance. Examples of such arrangements may Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
include leased hardware which is subject to specific leasing guid- nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under
ance or software which is subject to specific software revenue the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs
recognition guidance on whether and/or how to separate multiple- incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs
deliverable arrangements into separate units of accounting to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original
(separability) and how to allocate the arrangement consideration estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward comple-
among those separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other tion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs,
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple-deliver- and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which
able arrangement is separated into more than one unit of accounting the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known by
if the following criteria are met: the company.
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its
basis; and services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
in the control of the company. remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC
method services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recog- recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income
nized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the earlier of $7,153 million and $7,281 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012,
of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered element respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and there is a Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the
relative selling price for all units of accounting in an arrangement, services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of
the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate units of $2,053 million and $1,998 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012,
accounting based on each unit’s relative selling price. The following respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in
revenue policies are then applied to each unit of accounting, the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
as applicable. Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, Smarter Planet the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue recognition policies Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months.
for multiple deliverable arrangements and for each major category
of revenue depending on the type of offering which can be com-
prised of services, hardware and/or software.

===== PAGE 87 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hardware item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used to allocate the
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of arrangement consideration. Under the residual method, the amount
system servers, storage solutions and the sale of semiconductors. of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the total
The company also offers installation services for its more complex arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair value of
hardware products. the undelivered elements.
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recog- The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have
nized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final accep- software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
tance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties and multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software deliv-
remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunctory are erable and the non-software deliverables based on the relative
accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using the
from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of sell-
basis over the term of the rental or lease. ing price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the company
cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the
Software deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliverable,
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is rec- BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
ognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue recognition
criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) Financing
license software is recognized on a straight-line basis over the Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing
period that the client is entitled to use the license. Revenue from leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the effec-
post-contract support, which may include unspecified upgrades on tive interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on a
a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
over the period such items are delivered. In multiple-deliverable
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental to Best Estimate of Selling Price
the products or services as a whole (software multiple-deliverable In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish VSOE
arrangements), software and software-related elements are accounted for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When VSOE
for in accordance with software revenue recognition guidance. cannot be established, the company attempts to establish the sell-
Software-related elements include software products and services ing price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined based
for which a software deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tan- on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold separately.
gible products containing software components and non-software When the company is unable to establish selling price using
components that function together to deliver the tangible product’s VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange-
essential functionality are not within the scope of software revenue ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price
recognition guidance and are accounted for based on other appli- at which the company would transact a sale if the product or service
cable revenue recognition guidance. were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the company
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, and therefore
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met: has established VSOE for its products and services offerings, the
• The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent company uses BESP to determine the relative selling price for a
on the undelivered element(s); product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement on an infre-
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair quent basis. An example of when BESP would be used is when the
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does not
on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling the
by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the new product on a stand-alone basis.
multiple-deliverable arrangement; and The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including
of the earnings process for that element(s). geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning,
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that
for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being includes review and approval by the company’s management. In
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its
earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered products and services, in addition to BESP.
element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element and
there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an arrange- Services Costs
ment, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the separate Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs
units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE of fair value. related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred.
There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE of fair value For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external
of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the delivered hardware and software accounted for under the POC method are

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date, The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the con- chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs,
tract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial including software coding, installation, testing and certain data
phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subsequently conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related line basis over periods ranging up to two years and are recorded
to the installation of systems and processes and are amortized on in selling, general and administrative expense.
a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, not to
exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated Product Warranties
with outsourcing contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a The company offers warranties for its hardware products that gener-
straight-line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an ally range up to three years, with the majority being either one or
asset is contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to the
of the useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related
clients in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in out- deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard
sourcing arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit and estimates of future spending, and applies this estimate to the
not to exceed the term of the contract. The company performs peri- revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs
odic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the current
transition and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is reviewed
estimated minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining obligation
to the unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted based on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the
cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an obligation period. Adjustments are made when actual warranty claim
impairment loss is recognized. experience differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price support
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,402 million or maintenance contracts, including extended warranty contracts,
and $2,424 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. are recognized as incurred.
Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs was Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts
estimated at December 31, 2013 to be $812 million in 2014, $612 is initially recorded as deferred income and subsequently recog-
million in 2015, $400 million in 2016, $247 million in 2017 and $332 nized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes in
million thereafter. deferred income for extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of liability for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued
acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $89 million expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated
and $51 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Amor- Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables:
tization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value
of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and was Standard Warranty Liability
estimated at December 31, 2013 to be $27 million in 2014, $27 million ($ in millions)
in 2015, $8 million in 2016, $5 million in 2017 and $22 million there- 2013 2012
after. In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, Balance at January 1 $ 394 $ 407
the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse the Current period accruals 346 394
company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamor- Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience 22 (15)
tized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized in
Charges incurred (387) (392)
the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred by
Balance at December 31 $ 376 $ 394
the company to transition the services.
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of ($ in millions)
licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research, 2013 2012
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to Balance at January 1 $ 606 $ 636
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been Revenue deferred for new extended
warranty contracts 305 268
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized
amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging Amortization of deferred revenue (324) (301)
up to three years and are recorded in software cost within cost Other* (8) 4
of sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that Balance at December 31 $ 579 $ 606
unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue. Current portion $ 284 $ 289
Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged to soft- Noncurrent portion 295 317
ware cost within cost of sales as incurred. Balance at December 31 $ 579 $ 606
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.

===== PAGE 89 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Shipping and Handling Other (Income) and Expense
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. from Global Financing external business transactions), gains and
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from
Expense and Other Income securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain real
Selling, General and Administrative estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses,
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to gains and losses from the sale of businesses and amounts related
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products to accretion of asset retirement obligations.
and services are classified as selling expense and include such
items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and travel. Business Combinations and
General and administrative expense includes such items as com- Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
pensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance The company accounts for business combinations using the acqui-
and office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense sition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, the
includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit losses, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree
workforce rebalancing accruals for contractually obligated payments are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill represents
to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, acquisi- the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets,
tion costs related to business combinations, amortization of certain including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The
intangible assets and environmental remediation costs. primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies
between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired
Advertising and Promotional Expense assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as an identifiable
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as intangible asset. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are applicable reporting units based on expected revenues. Identifiable
recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives.
in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred. Amortization of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and amor-
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, agency tization of all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A expense.
and promotional expense, was $1,294 million, $1,339 million and Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, legal, accounting,
$1,373 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively, and is recorded valuation and other costs, are expensed in the periods in which the
in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. costs are incurred. The results of operations of acquired businesses
are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the
Research, Development and Engineering acquisition date.
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed
as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished Impairment
product after technological feasibility has been established are Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible
capitalized as an intangible asset. See “Software Costs” on page 87. assets, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in
circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recover-
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income able. The impairment test is based on undiscounted cash flows and,
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual if impaired, the asset is written down to fair value based on either
property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-
and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties lived intangible assets are tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for
are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based sales impairment and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an
and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees involve transfers impairment may exist. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level
in which the company earns the income over time, or the amount which is the operating segment, or a business, which is one level
of income is not fixed or determinable until the licensee sells below that operating segment (the “component” level) if discrete
future related products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by manage-
revenue). Sales and other transfers typically include transfers of ment at the segment level. Components are aggregated as a single
IP whereby the company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics.
received is fixed or determinable at the transfer date. The company
also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and Depreciation and Amortization
income from these arrangements is recorded when earned. In addi- Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated
tion, the company earns income from certain custom development over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The
projects for strategic technology partners and specific clients. The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows:
company records the income from these projects when the fee is buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land
realized and earned, is not refundable and is not dependent upon improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, 2
the success of the project. to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after technologi- The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postretire-
cal feasibility has been established are amortized over periods ment benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value of
ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up to 2 plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is
years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods between recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated State-
1 and 7 years. ment of Financial Position.
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit
Environmental cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will losses previously recognized as a component of OCI and amortiza-
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, tion of the net transition asset remaining in accumulated other
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost represents the
liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental actuarial present value of participant benefits earned in the current
liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for year. Interest cost represents the time value of money cost associ-
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. ated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as changes in
the employee base, plan amendments and changes in actuarial
Asset Retirement Obligations assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation and
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated the corresponding change in OCI. The result of these events is
with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are initially amortized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) over
recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs are the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending
capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are
by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets. Net
subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets. periodic cost/(income) is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the
Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to- Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’
period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of respective functions.
time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the (Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized
amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets. as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a component
Defined Benefit Pension and of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are subse-
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans quently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/(income)
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of appli-
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Finan- cable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of
cial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a
between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/
December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension (credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior
plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO), service granted in plan amendments.
which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already (income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the
rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the non- company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the
pension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the plans and use participant-specific information such as compensation,
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which rep- age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, including
resents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan assets, rate of
attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and mortality rates.
plan assets represents the current market value of cumulative com-
pany and participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust
fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by
the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets
exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans,
with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets,
are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension post-
retirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.

===== PAGE 91 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Contribution Plans The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the com-
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is recorded pany’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
when the employee renders service to the company. The charge is believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review
recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the
Earnings based on the employees’ respective functions. largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of
being realized upon settlement. The current portion of tax liabilities
Stock-Based Compensation is included in taxes and the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock- included in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
based awards granted to employees. The company measures Position. To the extent that new information becomes available which
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the causes the company to change its judgment regarding the ade-
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a quacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee impact income tax expense in the period in which such determina-
requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of tion is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities
stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The company for potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense.
also grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including
Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local func-
entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, tional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars at
typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded
is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-aver-
stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. All age rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
stock-based compensation cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-
RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and
employees’ respective functions. branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approxi-
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result mate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated in a
amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory tax rate currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange
in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Differences rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income)
between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting and expense. Income and expense items are translated at the
purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the tax deduction These translation gains and losses are included in net income for
exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consolidated Statement the period in which exchange rates change.
of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction and
no additional paid-in capital exists from previous awards). Derivative Financial Instruments
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Finan-
Income Taxes cial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid expenses and
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income other current assets, investments and sundry assets, other accrued
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. Classification of each
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized derivative as current or noncurrent is based upon whether
for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are recog- the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months.
nized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured To qualify for hedge accounting, the company requires that the
by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allowances are instruments be effective in reducing the risk exposure that they are
recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will designated to hedge. For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge
more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation designation criteria also require that it be probable that the under-
allowance, management considers all available evidence for each lying transaction will occur. Instruments that meet established
jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future tax- accounting criteria are formally designated as hedges. These criteria
able income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. demonstrate that the derivative is expected to be highly effective
When the company changes its determination as to the amount of at offsetting changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying
deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is exposure both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an
adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the ongoing basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness
period in which such determination is made. and measuring hedge ineffectiveness is formally documented at
hedge inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness and
measures hedge ineffectiveness at least quarterly throughout the
designated hedge period.

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company earnings. However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a rec- will not occur by the end of the originally specified time period or
ognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm within an additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign in AOCI must be reclassified into earnings immediately. The company
currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of a reports cash flows arising from derivative financial instruments des-
forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid ignated as fair value or cash flow hedges consistent with the
related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge classification of cash flows from the underlying hedged items that
attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge these derivatives are hedging. Accordingly, the cash flows associated
of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign opera- with derivatives designated as fair value or cash flow hedges are
tion. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts classified in cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated
that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as
accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply net investment hedges and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges
hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging are reported in cash flows from investing activities. For currency
relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, which swaps designated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt
are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic offset (included in the company’s debt risk management program as
to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s). addressed in note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 through
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 106), cash flows directly associated with the settlement of the prin-
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of the cipal element of these swaps are reported in payments to settle debt
underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each period. in cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement
For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments are of Cash Flows.
recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of financing
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency Financial Instruments
risk associated with recorded financial assets or liabilities, derivative In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the company
fair value adjustments are recognized in other (income) and expense uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based on market
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. See note D,
of a derivative that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 100 to 102 for further information.
net of applicable taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of All methods of assessing fair value result in a general approximation
Comprehensive Income. When net income is affected by the vari- of value, and such value may never actually be realized.
ability of the underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount
of the gain or loss from the derivative that is deferred in AOCI is Fair Value Measurement
released to net income and reported in interest expense, Cost, SG&A Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be
expense or other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State- received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
ment of Earnings based on the nature of the underlying cash flow transaction between market participants at the measurement date.
hedged. Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is mea- Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain
sured on a spot-to-spot basis. The effective portion of changes in assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
the fair value of net investment hedging derivatives and other non- • Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets
derivative financial instruments designated as net investment hedges for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed
are recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. at the measurement date;
Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging • Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within
derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either
in interest expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge directly or indirectly; and
ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are • Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
included in net income each period until the instrument matures.
When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such
liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as data is available without undue cost and effort.
required under other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
are not designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies such
derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value of items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair
the underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge period value is based upon internally developed models that use current
(collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income for each market-based or independently sourced market parameters such
period and are reported in other (income) and expense. When a cash as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally
flow hedging relationship is discontinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI generated models are classified according to the lowest level input
must generally remain in AOCI until the item that was hedged affects or value driver that is significant to the valuation.

===== PAGE 93 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The determination of fair value considers various factors includ- Marketable Securities
ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be
with the duration of the instrument. realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com- included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable
pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes,
for several parameters that market participants would consider in in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale securities
determining fair value: are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are calculated
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a based on the specific identification method.
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in market
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument. value has occurred, the company considers the duration that, and
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below its cost; the
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer or underly-
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied ing collateral of a security; and the company’s intent and ability to
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but retain the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair value from amortized
in the credit default swap market. cost for available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company
intends to sell or would more likely than not be required to sell before
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a dis-
the expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are charged to
counted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs such
other (income) and expense in the period in which the loss occurs.
as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and forward
For debt securities that the company has no intent to sell and believes
exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs relate to
that it more likely than not will not be required to sell prior to recovery,
liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which are avail-
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in
able for the full term of the derivative.
other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecur-
in OCI. The credit loss component recognized in other (income) and
ring basis. These assets include equity method investments that are
expense is identified as the amount of the principal cash flows not
recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the extent that
expected to be received over the remaining term of the debt security
they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain
as projected using the company’s cash flow projections.
assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be
subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets Inventories
include available-for-sale equity investments that are deemed to Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the
be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than- lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale of
temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating activities
using a model described above. in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible finan-
cial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value, on Allowance for Credit Losses
an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not permitted Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a
to be accounted for at fair value under other accounting standards. product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
This election is irrevocable. The company does not apply the fair estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables
value option to any eligible assets or liabilities. is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Cash Equivalents Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated based
the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents. on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and any specific,
known troubled accounts.

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing Receivables Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets allowance.
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The com-
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when
pany determines its allowances for credit losses on financing
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the
receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and
original billing date.
loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio into
two classes: major markets and growth markets. Impaired loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all financ-
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its abil- ing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment
ity to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment and on a quarterly basis. The company considers any loan with an indi-
by considering the current fair market value of any other collateral. vidually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the
The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. The allowance level of impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status
for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales and customer as appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services
loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit analysis to
lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies evaluate the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions
that the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include
are applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows: covenants to protect against credit deterioration during the life of
the obligation.
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
consists of an analysis based upon current information available
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the
about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at
lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses the
as the current economic environment, collateral net of repossession
realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated increases
cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral depen-
in specific future residual values are not recognized before realiza-
dent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the collateral
tion through remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific
when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the company
future residual values that are considered to be other than temporary
determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates
are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as
an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For
an adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and
those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records
direct-financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net
a specific reserve.
investment and is recognized as a loss charged to financing income
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated in the period in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjust-
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different ment to unearned income to reduce future-period financing income.
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved.
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, Common Stock
term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different from as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea-
the estimated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury
significant change in the economic health of a particular client that stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a
represents a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio. weighted-average basis.
Other Credit-Related Policies Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method.
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or stock and participating securities according to dividends and dividend
nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other accounts equivalents and their respective participation rights in undistributed
for which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by dividing net
amounts due according to original terms of the lease or loan agree- income by the weighted-average number of common shares out-
ment. Income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash standing for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed
collections are first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common
Any cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding
recognized as interest income. Receivables may be removed from during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential
non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client common shares include outstanding stock options, stock awards and
circumstances. convertible notes.

===== PAGE 95 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE B. Standards Implemented
ACCOunTInG ChAnGES In July 2013, the FASB issued guidance allowing the use of the Fed
Funds Effective Swap Rate (or Overnight Index Swap Rate) as a bench-
New Standards to be Implemented mark interest rate for hedge accounting purposes in addition to interest
In July 2013, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) rates on direct Treasury obligations of the United States government
issued guidance regarding the presentation of an unrecognized tax and the LIBOR. In addition, the guidance removes the restriction on
benefit when a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, using different benchmark rates for similar hedges. The guidance
or a tax credit carryforward exists. Under certain circumstances, became effective on a prospective basis for qualifying new or re-
unrecognized tax benefits should be presented in the financial state- designated hedging relationships entered into on or after July 17, 2013.
ments as a reduction to a deferred tax asset for a net operating loss The company has not utilized the Fed Funds Effective Swap Rate on
carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward. The any financial instrument transactions through December 31, 2013.
guidance was a change in financial statement presentation only and In February 2013, the FASB issued additional guidance regarding
has no material impact in the consolidated financial results. The reclassifications out of AOCI. The guidance requires entities to report
guidance was effective January 1, 2014, and the company will adopt the effect of significant reclassifications out of AOCI on the respective
it on a prospective basis. line items in net income unless the amounts are not reclassified in
In March 2013, the FASB issued guidance on when foreign cur- their entirety to net income. For amounts that are not required to be
rency translation adjustments should be released to net income. reclassified in their entirety to net income in the same reporting period,
When a parent entity ceases to have a controlling financial interest entities are required to cross-reference other disclosures that provide
in a subsidiary or group of assets that is a business within a foreign additional detail about those amounts. For the company, the new
entity, the parent is required to release any related cumulative trans- guidance was effective on a prospective basis for all interim and
lation adjustment into net income. Accordingly, the cumulative annual periods beginning January 1, 2013 with early adoption permit-
translation adjustment should be released into net income only if the ted. The company adopted the guidance in its December 31, 2012
sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially complete financial statements. There was no impact in the consolidated finan-
liquidation of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary or group of cial results as the guidance related only to additional disclosures.
assets had resided. The guidance was effective January 1, 2014 on In July 2012, the FASB issued amended guidance that simplifies
a prospective basis. It is not expected to have a material impact in how entities test indefinite-lived intangible assets other than goodwill
the consolidated financial results. for impairment. After an assessment of certain qualitative factors, if
In February 2013, the FASB issued guidance for the recognition, it is determined to be more likely than not that an indefinite-lived
measurement and disclosure of obligations resulting from joint and intangible asset is impaired, entities must perform the quantitative
several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the obli- impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test is optional. The
gation within the scope of the guidance is fixed at the reporting date. amended guidance was effective for annual and interim impairment
Examples include debt arrangements, other contractual obligations tests performed for fiscal years beginning after September 15, 2012,
and settled litigation matters. The guidance requires an entity to mea- with early adoption permitted. The company adopted this guidance
sure such obligations as the sum of the amount that the reporting for its 2012 impairment testing of indefinite-lived intangible assets
entity agreed to pay on the basis of its arrangement among its co- performed in the fourth quarter. There was no impact in the con-
obligors plus additional amounts the reporting entity expects to pay solidated financial results.
on behalf of its co-obligors. The guidance was effective January 1, In May 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance and disclosure
2014 and is not expected to have a material impact in the consoli- requirements for fair value measurements. These changes were
dated financial results. effective January 1, 2012 on a prospective basis. These amendments
did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
In September 2011, the FASB issued additional disclosure
requirements for entities which participate in multi-employer pension
plans. The purpose of the new disclosures was to provide financial
statement users with information about an employer’s level of par-
ticipation in these plans and the financial health of significant plans.
The new disclosures were effective beginning with the full year 2011
financial statements. The company does not participate in any mate-
rial multi-employer plans. There was no impact in the consolidated
financial results as the changes relate only to additional disclosures.

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In September 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance that In December 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the guid-
simplified how entities test goodwill for impairment. After an assess- ance on goodwill impairment testing. The amendments modified
ment of certain qualitative factors, if it is determined to be more likely step 1 of the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero
than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying or negative carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is
amount, entities must perform the quantitative analysis of the good- required to perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more
will impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test(s) is optional. The likely than not that a goodwill impairment exists. In making that
guidance was effective January 1, 2012 with early adoption permitted. determination, an entity should consider whether there are any
The company adopted this guidance for the 2011 goodwill impair- adverse qualitative factors indicating that impairment may exist. The
ment test. There was no impact in the consolidated financial results. amendments were effective January 1, 2011 and did not have an
In June 2011, the FASB issued amended disclosure requirements impact in the consolidated financial results.
for the presentation of OCI and AOCI. OCI is comprised of costs,
expenses, gains and losses that are included in comprehensive NOTE C.
income but excluded from net income, and AOCI comprises the ACquISITIOnS/DIvESTITuRES
aggregated balances of OCI in equity. The amended guidance elimi-
nated the option to present period changes in OCI as part of the Acquisitions
Statement of Changes in Equity. Under the amended guidance, all Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected
period changes in OCI are to be presented either in a single continu- in the tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
ous statement of comprehensive income, or in two separate, but are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of
consecutive financial statements. Only summary totals are to be acquired cash and cash equivalents.
included in the AOCI section of the Statement of Changes in Equity.
These changes were effective January 1, 2012 with early adoption 2013
permitted. The company adopted the two statement approach In 2013, the company completed 10 acquisitions at an aggregate
effective with its full-year 2011 financial statements. There was no cost of $3,219 million.
impact in the consolidated financial results as the amendments
Softlayer Technologies, Inc. (Softlayer)—On July 3, 2013, the
related only to changes in financial statement presentation.
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of the privately
In April 2011, the FASB issued new and clarifying guidance and
held company, SoftLayer, a cloud computing infrastructure provider
to help creditors in determining whether a creditor has granted a
based in Dallas, Texas for cash consideration of $1,977 million. Soft-
concession, and whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficul-
Layer joins the company’s new cloud services division, which
ties for purposes of determining whether a restructuring constitutes
combines SoftLayer with IBM SmartCloud into a global platform.
a troubled debt restructuring. The new guidance became effective
The new division provides a broad range of choices to the company’s
July 1, 2011 applied retrospectively to January 1, 2011. Prospective
clients, ISVs and channel and technology partners. Goodwill of
application was required for any new impairments identified as a
$1,285 million has been assigned to the Global Technology Services
result of this guidance. These changes did not have a material
($1,246 million) and Software ($39 million) segments. It is expected
impact in the consolidated financial results.
that none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The
In December 2010, the FASB issued amended guidance to
overall weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
clarify the acquisition date that should be used for reporting pro-
acquired is 7.0 years.
forma financial information for business combinations. If comparative
financial statements are presented, the pro-forma revenue and earn-
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment completed acquisitions
ings of the combined entity for the comparable prior reporting
of eight privately held companies: in the first quarter, StoredIQ Inc.
period should be reported as though the acquisition date for all
(StoredIQ) and Star Analytics, Inc. (Star Analytics); in the second
business combinations that occurred during the current year had
quarter, UrbanCode Inc. (UrbanCode); and in the third quarter, Trust-
been completed as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual
eer, Ltd. (Trusteer) and Daeja Image Systems, Ltd. (Daeja); and in the
reporting period. The amendments in this guidance were effective
fourth quarter, Xtify, Inc. (Xtify), The Now Factory and Fiberlink Com-
on a prospective basis for business combinations for which the
munications (Fiberlink). Systems and Technology (STG) completed
acquisition date was on or after January 1, 2011. There was no
one acquisition: in the third quarter, CSL International (CSL), a
impact in the consolidated financial results as the amendments
privately held company. All acquisitions were for 100 percent of
related only to additional disclosures.
the acquired companies.

===== PAGE 97 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2013.
2013 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) SoftLayer Acquisitions
Current assets $ 80 $ 97
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 300 41
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,285 961
Completed technology 5—7 290 181
Client relationships 6—7 245 97
In-process R&D N/A 2 —
Patents/trademarks 2—7 75 32
Total assets acquired 2,277 1,408
Current liabilities (56) (61)
Noncurrent liabilities (244) (105)
Total liabilities assumed (300) (166)
Total purchase price $1,977 $1,242
N/A—Not applicable
In addition to SoftLayer, each acquisition further complemented and On January 17, 2014, the company completed the acquisition of
enhanced the company’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Aspera, Inc. (Aspera), a privately held company based in Emeryville,
The acquisition of StoredIQ advances the company’s efforts to help CA. Aspera’s technology helps companies securely speed the
clients derive value from big data. The combination of the company’s movement of massive data files around the world. At the date of
and Star Analytics’ software will advance the company’s business issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase accounting
analytics initiatives. UrbanCode automates the delivery of software, was not complete for this acquisition.
helping businesses quickly release and update mobile, social, big On February 24, 2014, the company announced that it had signed
data and cloud applications. CSL deepens the consolidation cloud a definitive agreement to acquire Boston, MA-based Cloudant, Inc.,
capabilities by offering simplified management of the virtualization (Cloudant) a privately held database-as-a-service (DBaaS) provider
environment. Trusteer extends the company’s data security capabili- that enables developers to easily and quickly create next generation
ties further into the cloud, mobile and endpoint security space. Daeja mobile and web apps. Cloudant will extend the company’s big data
delivers software that helps employees across all industries, espe- and analytics, cloud, and mobile offerings by further helping clients
cially data intensive ones such as banking, insurance and healthcare, take advantage of these key growth initiatives. The acquisition is
get faster access to critical business information, and complements expected to close in the first quarter of 2014.
the company’s big data capabilities. Xtify is a leading provider of
cloud-based mobile messaging tools that help organizations 2012
improve mobile sales, drive in-store traffic and engage customers In 2012, the company completed 11 acquisitions at an aggregate
with personalized offers. The Now Factory is a provider of analytics cost of $3,964 million.
software that helps communications service providers (CSPs)
Kenexa Corporation (Kenexa)—On December 3, 2012, the com-
deliver better customer experiences and drive new revenue oppor-
pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Kenexa, a publicly
tunities. Fiberlink is a mobile management and security company,
held company, for cash consideration of $1,351 million. Kenexa, a
that supports the company’s expanding vision for enterprise mobility
leading provider of recruiting and talent management solutions,
management, which encompasses secure transactions between
brings a unique combination of cloud-based technology and con-
businesses, partners, and customers.
sulting services that integrates both people and processes,
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of
providing solutions to engage a smarter, more effective workforce
the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years.
across their most critical businesses functions. Goodwill of $1,014
These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line
million was assigned to the Software ($771 million) and Global Tech-
basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $961 million has been
nology Services (GTS) ($243 million) segments. As of the acquisition
assigned to the Software ($948 million) and Systems and Technology
date, it was expected that approximately 10 percent of the goodwill
($13 million) segments. It is expected that approximately 2 percent of
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average
the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.5 years.

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed eight held company. STG completed two acquisitions: in the first quarter,
other acquisitions: in the first quarter, Green Hat Software Limited Platform Computing Corporation (Platform Computing), a privately
(Green Hat), Emptoris Inc. (Emptoris) and Worklight, Inc. held company; and in the third quarter, Texas Memory Systems
(Worklight), all privately held companies, and DemandTec, Inc. (TMS), a privately held company. All acquisitions were for 100 per-
(DemandTec), a publicly held company; in the second quarter, cent of the acquired companies.
Varicent Software Inc. (Varicent), Vivisimo Inc. (Vivisimo) and The table below reflects the purchase price related to these
Tealeaf Technology Inc. (Tealeaf), all privately held companies; and acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
in the third quarter, Butterfly Software, Ltd. (Butterfly), a privately December 31, 2012.
2012 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Kenexa Acquisitions
Current assets $ 133 $ 278
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 98 217
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,014 1,880
Completed technology 3—7 169 403
Client relationships 4—7 179 194
In-process R&D N/A — 11
Patents/trademarks 1—7 39 37
Total assets acquired 1,632 3,020
Current liabilities (93) (143)
Noncurrent liabilities (188) (264)
Total liabilities assumed (281) (407)
Total purchase price $1,351 $2,613
N/A—Not applicable
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the compa- key business information necessary to drive new initiatives. Tealeaf
ny’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Green Hat helps provides a full suite of customer experience management software,
customers improve the quality of software applications by enabling which analyzes interactions on websites and mobile devices. Butterfly
developers to use cloud computing technologies to conduct testing offers storage planning software and storage migration tools, helping
of a software application prior to its delivery. Emptoris expands the companies save storage space, operational time, IT budget and
company’s cloud-based analytics offerings that provide supply chain power consumption. Platform Computing’s focused technical and
intelligence leading to better inventory management and cost efficien- distributed computing management software helps clients create,
cies. Worklight delivers mobile application management capabilities integrate and manage shared computing environments that are used
to clients across a wide range of industries. The acquisition enhanced in compute-and-data intensive applications such as simulations,
the company’s comprehensive mobile portfolio, which is designed to computer modeling and analytics. TMS designs and sells high-
help global corporations leverage the proliferation of all mobile performance solid state storage solutions.
devices—from laptops and smartphones to tablets. DemandTec For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of
delivers cloud-based analytics software to help organizations improve the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years.
their price, promotion and product mix within the broad context of These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line
enterprise commerce. Varicent’s software automates and analyzes basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,880 million was assigned
data across sales, finance, human resources and IT departments to to the Software ($1,412 million), Global Business Services (GBS)
uncover trends and optimize sales performance and operations. Vivi- ($5 million), GTS ($21 million) and STG ($443 million) segments.
simo software automates the discovery of big data, regardless of its As of the acquisition dates, it was expected that approximately
format or where it resides, providing decision makers with a view of 15 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes.

===== PAGE 99 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2011 2011 Acquisitions
In 2011, the company completed five acquisitions of privately held
($ in millions)
companies at an aggregate cost of $1,849 million. Amortization Total
These acquisitions were completed as follows: in the second Life (in Years) Acquisitions
quarter, TRIRIGA, Inc. (TRIRIGA); and in the fourth quarter, i2, Algo- Current assets $ 251
rithmics, Inc. (Algorithmics), Q1 Labs and Curam Software Ltd. Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 88
(Curam Software). TRIRIGA was integrated into the Software and Intangible assets
GBS segments upon acquisition. All acquisitions were integrated Goodwill N/A 1,291
into the Software segment upon acquisition. All acquisitions Completed technology 7 320
reflected 100 percent ownership of the acquired companies.
Client relationships 7 222
TRIRIGA is a provider of facility and real estate management soft-
Patents/trademarks 1—7 17
ware solutions, which help clients make strategic decisions regarding
Total assets acquired 2,190
space usage, evaluate alternative real estate initiatives, generate
Current liabilities (191)
higher returns from capital projects and assess environmental impact
Noncurrent liabilities (150)
investments. The acquisition added advanced real estate intelligence
to the company’s smarter buildings initiative. i2 expanded the com- Total liabilities assumed (341)
pany’s Big Data analytics software for Smarter Cities by helping both Total purchase price $1,849
public and private entities in government, law enforcement, retail,
N/A—Not applicable
insurance and other industries access and analyze information they
need to address crime, fraud and security threats. Algorithmics pro- Divestitures
vides software and services for improved business insights at
2014
financial and insurance institutions to assess risk and address regula-
On January 23, 2014, IBM and Lenovo Group Limited (Lenovo)
tory challenges. Q1 Labs is a provider of security intelligence software
announced a definitive agreement in which Lenovo will acquire the
and accelerates efforts to help clients more intelligently secure their
company’s x86 server portfolio for $2.3 billion, consisting of approxi-
enterprises by applying analytics to correlate information from key
mately $2 billion in cash, with the balance in Lenovo stock. The stock
security domains and creating security dashboards for their organi-
will represent less than 5 percent equity ownership in Lenovo. The
zations. Curam Software is a provider of software and services which
company will sell to Lenovo its System x, BladeCenter and Flex
help governments improve the efficiency, effectiveness and acces-
System blade servers and switches, x86-based Flex integrated sys-
sibility of social programs for Smarter Cities.
tems, NeXtScale and iDataPlex servers and associated software,
The overall weighted-average life of the indentified intangible
blade networking and maintenance operations.
assets acquired was 6.9 years. These identified intangible assets
IBM and Lenovo plan to enter into a strategic relationship which
will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives.
will include a global OEM and reseller agreement for sales of IBM’s
Goodwill of $1,291 million was assigned to the Software ($1,277 mil-
industry-leading entry and midrange Storwize disk storage systems,
lion) and GBS ($14 million) segments. As of the acquisition dates, it
tape storage systems, General Parallel File System software, Smart-
was expected that approximately 25 percent of the goodwill would
Cloud Entry offering, and elements of IBM’s system software,
be deductible for tax purposes.
including Systems Director and Platform Computing solutions. Fol-
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
lowing the closing of the transaction, Lenovo will assume related
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
customer service and maintenance operations. IBM will continue to
December 31, 2011.
provide maintenance delivery on Lenovo’s behalf for an extended
period of time.
The transaction will be completed as soon as is practical, subject
to the satisfaction of regulatory requirements, customary closing
conditions and any other required approvals. The transaction is
expected to be completed in phases, with the initial closing in the
second half of 2014. Subsequent local closings will occur subject to
similar conditions, agreements and the information and consultation
process in applicable countries.
The company expects to recognize a pre-tax gain on the sale.
This gain will be recognized consistent with the closing schedule for
the transaction. The exact amount of the gain and the breakdown
by closing date is not yet determinable. The variables that can
impact the final gain include the valuation of the final balance sheet
transferred, the valuation of other related agreements and transac-
tion-related expenses. See “Looking Forward” on page 64 for
additional information.

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s worldwide x86 business is reported in the Systems 2012
and Technology segment, and the associated maintenance opera- On April 17, 2012, the company announced that it had signed a
tions are part of the Global Technology Services segment. In 2013, definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for the sale of its Retail Store
this combined business delivered approximately $4.6 billion of Solutions business to Toshiba TEC. As part of the transaction,
revenue, and was essentially breakeven on a pre-tax income basis. Toshiba TEC and the company also signed a multi-year business
partner agreement to integrate retail store solutions for Smarter
2013 Commerce. The transaction price was $850 million, and the com-
On September 10, 2013, IBM and SYNNEX announced a definitive pany received approximately $800 million in cash, net of closing date
agreement in which SYNNEX will acquire the company’s worldwide working capital adjustments.
customer care business process outsourcing services business for Through December 31, 2012, the company completed the first
$505 million, consisting of approximately $430 million in cash, net three phases of the sale. For the completed phases, the company
of balance sheet adjustments, and $75 million in SYNNEX stock, received net proceeds of $546 million, recorded a note receivable
which represents less than 5 percent equity ownership in SYNNEX. of $251 million and recognized a net pre-tax gain of $446 million.
As part of the transaction, SYNNEX will enter into a multi-year agree- The gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, cer-
ment with the company, and Concentrix, SYNNEX’s outsourcing tain transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain
business, will become an IBM strategic business partner for global was recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
customer care business process outsourcing services. Statement of Earnings and the net proceeds are reflected within
The transaction will be completed in phases—the initial closing divestitures of businesses, net of cash transferred within cash flows
was completed on January 31, 2014, with subsequent closings from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
expected to be completed in the second quarter of 2014, subject to Flows. In addition, in the third quarter, the company acquired a 19.9
customary closing conditions, local agreements and the information percent ownership interest for $161 million in Toshiba Global Com-
and consultation process in applicable countries. The company merce Solutions Holding Corporation, the new holding company
expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain on the sale of between that Toshiba TEC established for the business. The company will
$150 - $175 million. This gain will be recognized consistent with the retain this ownership for a period of three years at which time
closing schedule for the transaction. The company’s worldwide Toshiba TEC will purchase the company’s equity interest for the
customer care business process outsourcing services and industry initial acquisition value. This investment was recorded in investments
process services are included in the Global Technology Services and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Posi-
segment. In 2013, the divested business delivered $1.3 billion of rev- tion and the payment was reflected within purchases of marketable
enue, approximately 1 percent of the company’s total revenue, securities and other investments within cash flows from investing
approximately $0.1 billion of pre-tax income, and had approximately activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
$50 million in tangible assets. The company closed additional phases of the divestiture in 2013.
In the first quarter of 2013, the company completed the divesti- Overall, the company has recognized a pre-tax gain on the sale of
ture of its Showcase Reporting product set to Help/Systems. $463 million through December 31, 2013.
Showcase Reporting, which was acquired by the company through
the SPSS acquisition in 2009, is an enterprise-class business intel- 2011
ligence platform that enables customers to build and manage During the fourth quarter of 2011, the company completed the dives-
analytical reporting environments. titure of the iCluster business to Rocket Software. iCluster, which
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company completed two dives- was acquired in the Data Mirror acquisition in 2007, was part of the
titures, the Applicazioni Contabili Gestionali (ACG) business and the Software business. This transaction was not material to the consoli-
Cognos Application Development Tools (ADT) business. dated financial results.
The ACG business was purchased by TeamSystem. The ACG During the second quarter of 2011, the company completed two
product is an Italian Enterprise Resource Planning solution for small- divestitures related to subsidiaries of IBM Japan. The impact of these
and medium-sized companies. The Cognos ADT business was transactions was not material to the consolidated financial results.
purchased by UNICOM Systems, Inc. The Cognos ADT product
suite represents a legacy family of products that provide application
development environments that would enable programmers to
develop COBOL applications at a higher productivity level.
Financial terms of each transaction were not disclosed and did not
have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.

===== PAGE 101 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D.
FInAnCIAl InSTRumEnTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at
December 31, 2013 and 2012.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $4,754 $— $4,754
Commercial paper — 1,507 — 1,507
Money market funds 1,728 — — 1,728
Other securities — 8 — 8
Total 1,728 6,269 — 7,997(6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 350 — 350(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 7 — 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 18 — — 18
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 308 — 308
Foreign exchange contracts — 375 — 375
Equity contracts — 36 — 36
Total — 719 — 719 (7)
Total assets $1,747 $7,345 $— $9,092 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Interest rate contracts $ — $ 13 $— $ 13
Foreign exchange contracts — 484 — 484
Equity contracts — 4 — 4
Total liabilities $ — $ 501 $— $ 501 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) C ommercial paper reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position at December 31, 2013 were $318 million and $401 million, respectively.
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2013 were $375 million and $126 million, respectively.
(6) A vailable-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $251 million each.

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2012: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $3,694 $— $3,694
Commercial paper — 2,098 — 2,098
Money market funds 1,923 — — 1,923
Other securities — 30 — 30
Total 1,923 5,823 — 7,746(6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 717 — 717(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 2 8 — 10
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 34 — — 34
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 604 — 604
Foreign exchange contracts — 305 — 305
Equity contracts — 9 — 9
Total — 918 — 918 (7)
Total assets $1,959 $7,466 $— $9,424 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 496 $— $ 496
Equity contracts — 7 — 7
Total liabilities $ — $ 503 $— $ 503 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) C ommercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position at December 31, 2012 were $333 million and $585 million, respectively.
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2012 were $426 million and $78 million, respectively.
(6) A vailable-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $262 million each.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended long-Term Debt
December 31, 2013 and 2012. Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted
Short-Term Receivables and Payables market price is not available, an expected present value technique
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value.
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt The carrying amount of long-term debt is $32,856 million and
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial liabili- $24,088 million and the estimated fair value is $34,555 million and
ties with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured $27,119 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. If mea-
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments sured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. (including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the
fair value hierarchy.
loans and long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur- Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are
credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is not
2013 and 2012, the difference between the carrying amount and materially different from carrying value, in the Consolidated Statement
estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was of Financial Position. The tables on the following page summarize
immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, the company’s noncurrent debt and marketable equity securities
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the which are also considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair
fair value hierarchy. value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 103 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2013: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 7 $1 $— $ 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $20 $2 $ 4 $18
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2012: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 8 $2 $— $10
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $31 $4 $ 1 $34
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, Derivative Financial Instruments
2013, the company believes that unrealized losses on debt and The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is a
available-for-sale equity securities are temporary and do not repre- significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the normal
sent an other-than-temporary impairment. course of business, the company is exposed to the impact of inter-
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during the est rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a lesser
period were as follows: extent equity and commodity price changes and client credit risk.
The company limits these risks by following established risk man-
($ in millions) agement policies and procedures, including the use of derivatives,
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the currencies in
Proceeds $41 $112 $405 which assets are denominated. For interest rate exposures, deriva-
Gross realized gains (before taxes) 13 45 232 tives are used to better align rate movements between the interest
Gross realized losses (before taxes) 5 1 0 rates associated with the company’s lease and other financial assets
and the interest rates associated with its financing debt. Derivatives
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale debt are also used to manage the related cost of debt. For foreign cur-
and equity securities that have been included in other comprehen- rency exposures, derivatives are used to better manage the cash
sive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses reclassified flow volatility arising from foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) to net income As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is
were as follows: exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will fail
to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the counterparty
($ in millions) credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering into contracts
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012
with carefully selected major financial institutions based upon their
Net unrealized gains/(losses)
overall credit profile. The company’s established policies and proce-
arising during the period $ 0 $ 17
dures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions include
Net unrealized (gains)/losses
reviewing and establishing limits for credit exposure and continually
reclassified to net income* (5) (25)
assessing the creditworthiness of counterparties. The right of set-off
* Includes writedowns of $2.0 million in 2012. that exists under certain of these arrangements enables the legal
entities of the company subject to the arrangement to net amounts
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale debt
due to and from the counterparty reducing the maximum loss from
securities are less than one year at December 31, 2013.
credit risk in the event of counterparty default.

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These arrange- volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency
ments require the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company
Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values exceed contrac- with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as
tually established thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed or net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as the
can vary based on credit default swap pricing or credit ratings derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon maturity
received from the major credit agencies. The aggregate fair value which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the under-
of all derivative instruments under these collateralized arrangements lying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss potential
that were in a liability position at December 31, 2013 and 2012 was on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these hedging
$216 million and $94 million, respectively, for which no collateral relationships by de-designating or terminating the derivative instru-
was posted at either date. Full collateralization of these agreements ment in order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated
would be required in the event that the company’s credit rating falls as accounting hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset
below investment grade or if its credit default swap spread exceeds the changes in the fair value of the de-designated instruments from
250 basis points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the col- the date of de-designation until maturity.
lateral security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of derivative In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
instruments in net asset positions as of December 31, 2013 and futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps,
2012 was $719 million and $918 million, respectively. This amount depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a
represents the maximum exposure to loss at the reporting date as party to leveraged derivative instruments.
a result of the counterparties failing to perform as contracted. This A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
exposure was reduced by $251 million and $262 million at Decem- by underlying risk, follows.
ber 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, of liabilities included in master
netting arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, at Interest Rate Risk
December 31, 2013 and 2012, this exposure was reduced by $29 Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
million and $69 million of cash collateral, respectively, received by The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally
the company. At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the net exposure to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-effec-
related to derivative assets recorded in the Statement of Financial tive financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the
Position was $439 million and $587 million, respectively. At Decem- underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
ber 31, 2013 and 2012, the net amount related to derivative liabilities overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to con-
recorded in the Statement of Financial Position was $250 million vert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e.,
and $242 million, respectively. fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt issu-
In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the company ances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December 31,
does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master netting 2013 and 2012, the total notional amount of the company’s interest
arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables recognized rate swaps was $3.1 billion and $4.3 billion, respectively. The
upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the fair values of weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments at
the related derivative instruments. No amount was recognized in December 31, 2013 and 2012 was approximately 10.6 years and
other receivables at December 31, 2013 and 2012 for the right to 5.1 years, respectively.
reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized in accounts payable
for the obligation to return cash collateral totaled $29 million and Forecasted Debt Issuance
$69 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The com- The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
pany restricts the use of cash collateral received to rehypothecation, issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
and therefore reports it in prepaid expenses and other current starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest
assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. No payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps
amount was rehypothecated at December 31, 2013 and 2012. At are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have
December 31, 2013 and 2012 the company held $0 million and $31 any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at
million in non-cash collateral in U.S. Treasury securities. Per account- December 31, 2013 and 2012.
ing guidance, non-cash collateral is not recorded on the Statement At December 31, 2013 and 2012, net gains of approximately
of Financial Position. $1 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded in AOCI in
connection with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings.
Within these amounts, less than $1 million of gains, respectively,
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12
months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the
underlying transactions.

===== PAGE 105 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Foreign Exchange Risk At December 31, 2013, in connection with cash flow hedges of
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries foreign currency denominated borrowings, the company recorded
(Net Investment) net losses of $9 million (before taxes) in AOCI. Within this amount,
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt $3 million of losses is expected to be reclassified to net income
portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign sub- within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact
sidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by against the underlying exposure.
changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional cur-
rency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. dollar. Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign Asset/Liability Management
exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash
December 31, 2013 and 2012, the total notional amount of derivative of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to
instruments designated as net investment hedges was $3.0 billion convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the com-
and $3.3 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining matu- pany uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically
rity of these instruments at December 31, 2013 and 2012 was hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of
approximately 0.4 years for both periods. the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional cur- the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are
rency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments for recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated State-
royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. ment of Earnings. At December 31, 2013 and 2012, the total notional
subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the cur- currency exposure was $14.7 billion and $12.9 billion, respectively.
rency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange
forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward con- Equity Risk Management
tracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
of time over which the company is hedging its exposure to the vari-
market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
ability in future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2013 and
certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
2012, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as
these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not
$10.2 billion and $10.7 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average
designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
remaining maturity of 0.7 years at both year-end dates.
including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the expo-
At December 31, 2013 and 2012, in connection with cash flow
sures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the company
derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market
recorded net losses of $252 million and $138 million (before taxes),
indices or the total return on the company’s common stock. They
respectively, in AOCI. Within these amounts $166 million and $79
are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A
million of losses, respectively, are expected to be reclassified to net
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December
income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic
31, 2013 and 2012, the total notional amount of derivative instruments
impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.
in economic hedges of these compensation obligations was $1.3
billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign cur-
Other Risks
rency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company employs
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common
cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency denom-
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed deriva-
inated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional currency
tives because they contain net share or net cash settlement
of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for as cash flow
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of
hedges. The maximum length of time over which the company
these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
hedges its exposure to the variability in future cash flows is approxi-
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants
mately seven years. At December 31, 2013 the total notional amount
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2013 and 2012.
of cross currency swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay
currency denominated debt was $1.2 billion. At December 31, 2012,
amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes credit
no instruments relating to this program were outstanding.
default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. These
derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are recorded
at fair value with gains and losses reported in other (income) and
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company
did not have any derivative instruments relating to this program out-
standing at December 31, 2013 and 2012.

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the derivative and non-derivative instrument-related risk management activity as of
December 31, 2013 and 2012 as well as for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Balance
Sheet Sheet
At December 31: Classification 2013 2012 Classification 2013 2012
Designated as hedging instruments:
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Interest rate contracts current assets $ — $ 47 and liabilities $ 0 $ —
Investments and
sundry assets 308 557 Other liabilities 13 —
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets 187 135 and liabilities 331 267
Investments and Other
sundry assets 26 5 liabilities 112 78
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $522 $744 derivative liabilities $ 456 $ 345
Not designated as hedging instruments:
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Foreign exchange contracts current assets $ 94 $142 and liabilities $ 40 $ 152
Investments and Other
sundry assets 67 23 liabilities 1 —
Prepaid expenses Other accrued
and other expenses
Equity contracts current assets 36 9 and liabilities 4 7
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $197 $174 derivative liabilities $ 45 $ 159
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ 190 $ 578
Long-term debt N/A N/A $6,111 $3,035
Total $719 $918 $6,802 $4,116
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 107 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings
Line Item Recognized on Derivatives(1) Attributable to Risk Being Hedged(2)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $(109) $ 65 $ 271 $202 $ 59 $(117)
Interest expense (74) 55 205 138 50 (89)
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments (1)
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (328) (311) 352 N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 164 110 42 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Warrants and expense — — 10 N/A N/A N/A
Total $(347) $ (81) $ 880 $340 $108 $(206)
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings Effective Portion Ineffectiveness and Amounts
Effective Portion Recognized in OCI Line Item Reclassified from AOCI Excluded from Effectiveness Testing(3)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Interest expense $ — $ (6) $ (8) $— $ — $ —
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts 43 32 (266) and expense 162 237 (247) (0) 3 (3)
Cost of sales (34) 7 (182) — — —
SG&A expense 39 16 (74) — — —
Instruments in net investment hedges(4)
Foreign exchange contracts 173 (26) 45 Interest expense — — 0 3 11 (9)
Total $216 $ 6 $(221) $167 $253 $(511) $ 3 $14 $(12)
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under
these derivative contracts.
(2) T he amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated
hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, there Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 90
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings represent- and 91 for additional information on the company’s use of derivative
ing hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of financial instruments.
hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an
underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur (for
cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal
course of business.

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE E. Installment payment receivables, net of allowance for credit
InvEnTORIES losses of $41 million and $39 million at December 31, 2013 and
2012, respectively, are loans that are provided primarily to clients
($ in millions) to finance hardware, software and services ranging generally from
At December 31: 2013 2012 one to three years.
Finished goods $ 444 $ 475 Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables
Work in process and raw materials 1,866 1,812 financing contracts are priced independently at competitive market
Total $2,310 $2,287 rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms of these
separate financing agreements.
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
NOTE F.
lateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged
FInAnCInG RECEIvABlES
as collateral for borrowings were $769 million and $650 million at
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allowances December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. These borrowings are
for credit losses, including residual values. included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 112 to 114.
The company did not have any financing receivables held for
($ in millions) sale as of December 31, 2013 and 2012.
At December 31: 2013 2012
Current Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Net investment in sales-type The following tables present financing receivables on a gross basis,
and direct financing leases $ 4,004 $ 3,862 excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual value, by port-
Commercial financing receivables 8,541 7,750 folio segment and by class, excluding current commercial financing
Client loan receivables 5,854 5,395 receivables and other miscellaneous current financing receivables
Installment payment receivables 1,389 1,031 at December 31, 2013 and 2012. The company determines its allow-
Total $19,787 $18,038 ance for credit losses based on two portfolio segments: lease
receivables and loan receivables, and further segments the portfolio
Noncurrent
into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
Net investment in sales-type
and direct financing leases $ 5,700 $ 6,107
($ in millions)
Commercial financing receivables — 5
Major Growth
Client loan receivables 6,360 5,966 At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets Total
Installment payment receivables 695 733 Financing receivables
Total $12,755 $12,812 Lease receivables $ 6,796 $2,200 $ 8,996
Loan receivables 10,529 4,012 14,542
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates Ending balance $17,325 $6,212 $23,537
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms Collectively evaluated for impairment $17,206 $6,013 $23,219
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-type
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 119 $ 199 $ 318
and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual values
Allowance for credit losses:
of $737 million and $794 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012,
Beginning balance at
respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of $672 million
January 1, 2013
and $728 million, and net of the allowance for credit losses of $123
Lease receivables $ 59 $ 55 $ 114
million and $114 million at those dates, respectively. Scheduled
Loan receivables 121 84 204
maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at December
Total $ 180 $ 138 $ 318
31, 2013, expressed as a percentage of the total, are approximately:
Write-offs (23) (10) (33)
2014, 44 percent; 2015, 30 percent; 2016, 17 percent; 2017, 6 per-
cent; and 2018 and beyond, 3 percent. Provision (21) 105 84
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit Other 1 (6) (5)
losses of $23 million and $46 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, Ending balance at
respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts receivable December 31, 2013 $ 137 $ 228 $ 365
financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM products. Lease receivables $ 42 $ 80 $ 123
Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable financing gen- Loan receivables $ 95 $ 147 $ 242
erally range from 30 to 90 days. Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 45 $ 48 $ 93
Client loan receivables, net of allowance for credit losses of $201 Individually evaluated for impairment $ 93 $ 179 $ 272
million and $155 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively,
are loans that are provided primarily to clients to finance the pur-
chase of software and services. Separate contractual relationships
on these financing arrangements are for terms ranging generally
from one to seven years.

===== PAGE 109 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Impaired Loans
Major Growth The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated
At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets Total
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment,
Financing receivables
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following
Lease receivables $ 7,036 $2,138 $ 9,174
tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31, 2013
Loan receivables 9,666 3,670 13,336
and 2012.
Ending balance $16,701 $5,808 $22,510
Collectively evaluated for impairment $16,570 $5,684 $22,254 ($ in millions)
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 131 $ 125 $ 256 Recorded Related
At December 31, 2013: Investment Allowance
Allowance for credit losses:
Major markets $ 79 $ 67
Beginning balance at
Growth markets 122 116
January 1, 2012
Total $201 $183
Lease receivables $ 79 $ 40 $ 118
Loan receivables 125 64 189
Total $ 203 $ 104 $ 307 ($ in millions)
Recorded Related
Write-offs (14) (1) (15) At December 31, 2012: Investment Allowance
Provision (9) 38 28 Major markets $ 88 $ 77
Other 0 (2) (2) Growth markets 72 65
Ending balance at Total $160 $143
December 31, 2012 $ 180 $ 138 $ 318
Lease receivables $ 59 $ 55 $ 114
($ in millions)
Loan receivables $ 121 $ 84 $ 204 Interest
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 69 $ 29 $ 98 Income
Average Interest Recognized
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 111 $ 109 $ 220 Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2013: Investment Recognized Basis
Major markets $ 76 $0 $0
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evalu-
ated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually Growth markets 97 0 0
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected cash Total $173 $0 $0
flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential
loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss ($ in millions)
is probable, the company records a specific reserve. In addition, the Interest
Income
company records an unallocated reserve that is calculated by apply-
Average Interest Recognized
ing a reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2012: Investment Recognized Basis
have been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon
Major markets $ 90 $0 $0
credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan)
and loss history. Growth markets 65 0 0
Total $156 $0 $0
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing Credit Quality Indicators
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31, 2013 The company’s credit quality indicators are based on rating
and 2012. agency data, publicly available information and information pro-
vided by customers, and are reviewed periodically based on the
($ in millions) relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating
At December 31: 2013 2012 system that maps to Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services credit
Major markets $ 25 $ 27 ratings as shown on the following page. Standard & Poor’s does
Growth markets 34 21 not provide credit ratings to the company on its customers.
Total lease receivables $ 59 $ 47 The tables present the gross recorded investment for each class
Major markets $ 40 $ 67 of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2013 and
Growth markets 92 25 2012. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from AAA
Total loan receivables $132 $ 92 to BBB- are considered investment grade. All others are considered
non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do not reflect
Total receivables $191 $139
mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer credit risk
to third parties.

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Lease Receivables Lease Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
AAA – AA- $ 743 $ 68 AAA – AA- $ 646 $ 86
A+ – A- 1,513 168 A+ – A- 1,664 223
BBB+ – BBB- 2,111 957 BBB+ – BBB- 2,285 776
BB+ – BB 1,393 350 BB+ – BB 1,367 450
BB- – B+ 595 368 BB- – B+ 552 418
B – B- 365 214 B – B- 399 127
CCC+ – D 76 74 CCC+ – D 124 58
Total $6,796 $2,200 Total $7,036 $2,138
Loan Receivables Loan Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets At December 31, 2012: Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
AAA – AA- $ 1,151 $ 125 AAA – AA- $ 887 $ 148
A+ – A- 2,344 307 A+ – A- 2,286 382
BBB+ – BBB- 3,271 1,745 BBB+ – BBB- 3,139 1,333
BB+ – BB 2,158 638 BB+ – BB 1,878 773
BB- – B+ 922 672 BB- – B+ 758 718
B – B- 565 391 B – B- 548 218
CCC+ – D 118 134 CCC+ – D 170 99
Total $10,529 $4,012 Total $9,666 $3,670
At December 31, 2013, the industries which made up Global Financ- At December 31, 2012, the industries which made up Global
ing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (39 percent), Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (38 percent),
Government (14 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Services (8 Government (16 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail (9 per-
percent), Retail (8 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications cent), Services (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Communications
(6 percent) and Other (4 percent). (6 percent) and Other (4 percent).

===== PAGE 111 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2013: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 6 $ 6,789 $ 6,796 $ 5
Growth markets 19 2,181 2,200 11
Total lease receivables $25 $ 8,970 $ 8,996 $16
Major markets $ 9 $10,520 $10,529 $ 6
Growth markets 34 3,979 4,012 18
Total loan receivables $43 $14,499 $14,542 $25
Total $68 $23,469 $23,537 $41
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2012: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 8 $ 7,028 $ 7,036 $ 5
Growth markets 11 2,127 2,138 8
Total lease receivables $20 $ 9,154 $ 9,174 $13
Major markets $27 $ 9,639 $ 9,666 $ 8
Growth markets 36 3,634 3,670 31
Total loan receivables $63 $13,273 $13,336 $39
Total $82 $22,428 $22,510 $52
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE H.
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or after InvESTmEnTS AnD SunDRy ASSETS
January 1, 2012 and determined that there were no troubled debt
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2012 and 2013. ($ in millions)
At December 31: 2013 2012
NOTE G. Deferred transition and setup costs
and other deferred arrangements* $1,652 $1,630
PROPERTy, PlAnT AnD EquIPmEnT
Derivatives—noncurrent ** 401 585
($ in millions) Alliance investments
At December 31: 2013 2012 Equity method 110 120
Land and land improvements $ 706 $ 747 Non-equity method 200 226
Buildings and building improvements 9,680 9,610 Prepaid software 352 306
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 28,169 27,731 Long-term deposits 316 318
Plant and other property—gross 38,555 38,088 Other receivables 174 204
Less: Accumulated depreciation 25,576 25,234 Employee benefit-related 392 439
Plant and other property—net 12,979 12,854 Prepaid income taxes 305 459
Rental machines 1,920 2,414 Other assets 738 735
Less: Accumulated depreciation 1,078 1,271 Total $4,639 $5,021
Rental machines—net 842 1,142
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to
Total—net $13,821 $13,996 Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,”
on pages 86 and 87 for additional information.
** S ee note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 through 106 for the fair value of all
derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE I. The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased $84 million
InTAnGIBlE ASSETS InCluDInG GOODWIll during the year ended December 31, 2013, primarily due to intangible
asset additions resulting from acquisitions, offset by amortization. There
Intangible Assets was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2013 and 2012.
The following table details the company’s intangible asset balances Total amortization was $1,351 million and $1,284 million for the
by major asset class. years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The aggre-
gate amortization expense for acquired intangible assets (excluding
($ in millions) capitalized software) was $767 million and $709 million for the years
Gross Net ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. In addition, in 2013
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2013: Amount Amortization Amount the company retired $1,177 million of fully amortized intangible
Intangible asset class assets, impacting both the gross carrying amount and accumulated
Capitalized software $1,494 $ (699) $ 794 amortization by this amount.
Client relationships 2,148 (977) 1,171 The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated
Completed technology 2,910 (1,224) 1,687
Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at
In-process R&D 13 — 13
December 31, 2013:
Patents/trademarks 358 (154) 204
Other* 7 (5) 2
($ in millions)
Total $6,930 $(3,059) $3,871 Capitalized Acquired
Software Intangibles Total
2014 $484 $784 $1,267
($ in millions)
2015 247 637 884
Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying 2016 64 595 660
At December 31, 2012: Amount Amortization Amount
2017 — 477 477
Intangible asset class
2018 — 322 322
Capitalized software $1,527 $ (665) $ 861
Client relationships 2,103 (961) 1,142
Completed technology 2,709 (1,112) 1,597
In-process R&D 28 — 28
Patents/trademarks 281 (127) 154
Other* 31 (27) 3
Total $6,679 $(2,892) $3,787
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems.

===== PAGE 113 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2013 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2013
Global Business Services $ 4,357 $ — $ (0) $ (3) $ (21) $ 4,334
Global Technology Services 2,916 1,246 17 — (50) 4,129
Software 20,405 987 11 (4) (279) 21,121
Systems and Technology 1,568 13 33 — (14) 1,601
Total $29,247 $2,246 $61 $ (7) $(363) $31,184
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2012 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2012
Global Business Services $ 4,313 $ 5 $ (0) $ (2) $ 42 $ 4,357
Global Technology Services 2,646 264 — (0) 6 2,916
Software 18,121 2,182 (30) (6) 137 20,405
Systems and Technology 1,133 443 (0) (14) 6 1,568
Total $26,213 $2,894 $(30) $(22) $192 $29,247
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2013 and 2012 were related NOTE J.
to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, BORROWInGS
2012 or December 31, 2011, respectively, and were still subject to the
measurement period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the Short-Term Debt
acquisition date or when information becomes available. There were
($ in millions)
no goodwill impairment losses recorded in 2013 or 2012 and the
At December 31: 2013 2012
company has no accumulated goodwill impairment losses.
Commercial paper $2,458 $1,800
Short-term loans 551 1,789
Long-term debt—current maturities 3,854 5,593
Total $6,862 $9,181
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at both
December 31, 2013 and 2012 was 0.1 percent. The weighted-aver-
age interest rates for short-term loans was 5.1 percent and 1.8
percent at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2013 2012
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2013):
0.70% 2014 – 2015 $ 6,456** $ 7,131
3.05% 2016 – 2017 8,465 5,807
3.99% 2018 –2021 6,206 7,457
1.88% 2022 1,000 1,000
3.38% 2023 1,500 —
7.00% 2025 600 600
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.88% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 83 83
5.60% 2039 745 745
4.00% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.00% 2045 27 27
7.13% 2096 316 316
27,887 25,656
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2013, in parentheses):
Euros (2.8%) 2014 – 2025 5,894 2,338
Pound sterling (2.75%) 2017 – 2020 1,254 12
Japanese yen (0.6%) 2014 – 2017 1,057 878
Swiss francs (3.8%) 2015 – 2020 181 178
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 471 502
Other (8.81%) 2015 – 2017 291 95
37,036 29,660
Less: net unamortized discount 872 865
Add: fair value adjustment* 546 886
36,710 29,680
Less: current maturities 3,854 5,593
Total $32,856 $24,088
* The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the debt’s
carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
** Includes $17 million of debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital, LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance subsidiary of the company and will mature
in 2014. Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its vari- cross default provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness
ous credit facilities each contain significant covenants which of at least $500 million.
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt cov-
the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and lease- enants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The failure
back transactions to 10 percent of the company’s consolidated net to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event of
tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to merge or con- default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. If
solidate unless certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest on
include a covenant on the company’s consolidated net interest the debt to which such event of default applied would become
expense ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a immediately due and payable.

===== PAGE 115 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2013 2012
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $30,123 3.07% $24,049 3.43%
Floating-rate debt* 6,587 0.87% 5,631 1.91%
Total $36,710 $29,680
* I ncludes $3,106 million in 2013 and $4,252 million in 2012 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D,
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 through 106.)
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt outstanding commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an additional
at December 31, 2013, are as follows: $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agreement, the
company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay and rebor-
($ in millions) row amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time during the
Total Credit Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit
2014 $ 3,854 Agreement will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further
2015 4,566 described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement contains
2016 4,114 customary representations and warranties, covenants, events of
2017 5,386 default, and indemnification provisions. The company believes that
circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants or
2018 2,662
an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement, are remote.
2019 and beyond 16,453
As of December 31, 2013, there were no borrowings by the company,
Total $37,036
or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
Interest on Debt of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate.
Interest rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 credit vary from country to country, depending on local market
Cost of financing $ 587 $ 545 $553 conditions.
Interest expense 405 470 402
Net investment derivative activity (3) (11) 9 NOTE K.
OThER lIABIlITIES
Interest capitalized 22 18 9
Total interest paid and accrued $1,011 $1,022 $973
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2013 2012*
Refer to the related discussion on page 143 in note T, “Seg ment
Income tax reserves $3,189 $2,527
Infor mation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,673 1,501
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 through
106 for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps Disability benefits 699 890
in the company’s debt risk management program. Derivative liabilities 126 78
Special restructuring actions 440 430
Lines of Credit Workforce reductions 500 473
In 2013, the company extended the term of its five-year, $10 billion Deferred taxes 1,741 448
Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by one year to Novem- Other taxes payable 186 24
ber 10, 2018. The total expense recorded by the company related Environmental accruals 231 216
to this global credit facility was $5.4 million in 2013, $5.3 million in
Warranty accruals 171 167
2012 and $5.0 million in 2011. The Credit Agreement permits the
Asset retirement obligations 129 127
company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion
Acquisition-related accruals 205 35
on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will
Other 644 691
be unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also,
Total $9,934 $7,607
upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional
banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, increase the * Reclassified to conform with 2013 presentation.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In response to changing business needs, the company periodi- In addition, the company executed certain special restructuring-
cally takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, related actions prior to 2006. The table below provides a roll forward
cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent of the current and noncurrent liabilities associated with these special
contractually obligated future payments associated with these actions. The current liabilities presented in the table are included in
activities are reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement
previous table. of Financial Position.
(in millions)
Liability Liability
as of as of
January 1, Other December 31,
2013 Payments Adjustments* 2013
Current
Workforce $ 28 $(29) $29 $ 27
Space 2 (1) (1) 0
Total current $ 30 $(30) $28 $ 27
Noncurrent
Workforce $430 $ — $10 $440
Total noncurrent $430 $ — $10 $440
* The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, remeasurement of actuarial assumptions, foreign currency
translation adjustments and interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees who As of December 31, 2013, the company was unable to estimate
are no longer working for the company who were granted annual pay- the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain
ments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. Depending asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily
on the individual country’s legal requirements, these required pay- related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject
ments will continue until the former employee begins receiving pension to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-encap-
benefits or passes away. The space accruals are for ongoing obliga- sulated asbestos that the company would remediate only if it
tions to pay rent for vacant space that could not be sublet or space performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. Because
that was sublet at rates lower than the committed lease arrangement. these conditional obligations have indeterminate settlement dates,
These obligations for vacant space were settled through 2013. the company could not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec- values. The company will continue to assess its ability to estimate
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company fair values at each future reporting date. The related liability will be
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a recognized once sufficient additional information becomes available.
number of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts
facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Posi-
for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts tion, were $160 million and $171 million at December 31, 2013 and
have been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are 2012, respectively.
not probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO
environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect
actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $245 million and
$229 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Estimated
environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the con-
solidated financial position or consolidated results of the company’s
operations in future periods. However, estimates of future costs are
subject to change due to protracted cleanup periods and changing
environmental remediation regulations.

===== PAGE 117 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE L. Other Stock Transactions
EquITy ACTIvITy The company issued the following shares of common stock as part
of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur-
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000
chase plan: 9,961,389 shares in 2013, 15,091,320 shares in 2012,
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
and 20,669,785 shares in 2011. The company issued 1,849,883
1,054,390,937 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2013 and
treasury shares in 2013, 2,746,169 treasury shares in 2012 and
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par
4,920,198 treasury shares in 2011, as a result of RSU releases and
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2013.
exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired busi-
Stock Repurchases nesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s
stock-based compensation plans, 1,666,069 common shares at a
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM
cost of $336 million, 2,406,007 common shares at a cost of $468
common stock. The company repurchased 73,121,942 common
million, and 1,717,246 common shares at a cost of $289 million in
shares at a cost of $13,993 million, 61,246,371 common shares at a
2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively, were remitted by employees to
cost of $12,008 million and 88,683,716 common shares at a cost of
the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding
$15,034 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively. These amounts
requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock
reflect transactions executed through December 31 of each year.
balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the
Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may differ due
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At December 31,
2013, $14,659 million of Board common stock repurchase authoriza-
tion was still available. The company plans to purchase shares on the
open market or in private transactions from time to time, depending
on market conditions.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2013: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,335) $ (66) $(1,401)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (4) $ 2 $ (3)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (8) 2 (5)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (8) $ 3 $ (5)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 43 $ (15) $ 28
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 34 (14) 21
SG&A expense (39) 14 (25)
Other (income) and expense (162) 62 (99)
Interest expense 0 (0) 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (123) $ 47 $ (76)
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 16 $ (0) $ 16
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 5,369 (1,974) 3,395
Curtailments and settlements (3) 1 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (114) 40 (75)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,499 (1,195) 2,304
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 8,767 $(3,128) $ 5,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 7,301 $(3,144) $ 4,157
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to 141 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2012: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (44) $ 10 $ (34)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 8 $ (4) $ 4
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (42) 17 (25)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 20 (8) 12
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 32 $ (27) $ 5
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (7) (6) (13)
SG&A expense (16) 4 (12)
Other (income) and expense (237) 91 (146)
Interest expense 6 (3) 3
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (220) $ 59 $ (161)
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period $(7,489) $2,327 $(5,162)
Curtailments and settlements (2) 0 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (148) 59 (89)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,457 (874) 1,583
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(5,182) $1,513 $(3,669)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(5,460) $1,587 $(3,874)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to 141 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 119 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2011: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (693) $ (18) $ (711)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (231) 88 (143)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (241) $ 91 $ (150)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (266) $ 105 $ (162)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 182 (61) 121
SG&A expense 75 (23) 52
Other (income) and expense 247 (3) 244
Interest expense 8 (95) (88)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 245 $ (77) $ 167
Retirement-related benefit plans(1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (28) $ 7 $ (22)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (5,463) 1,897 (3,566)
Curtailments and settlements 11 (3) 7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (157) 62 (94)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,847 (619) 1,227
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(3,790) $1,343 $(2,448)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(4,479) $1,339 $(3,142)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 127 to 141 for additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2010 $ (96) $ 2,478 $(21,289) $164 $(18,743)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (162) (711) (3,581) (7) (4,461)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income 329 0 1,133 (143) 1,319
Total change for the period 167 (711) (2,448) (150) (3,142)
December 31, 2011 71 1,767 (23,737) 13 (21,885)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 5 (34) (5,164) 16 (5,177)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (167) 0 1,495 (25) 1,303
Total change for the period (161) (34) (3,669) (9) (3,874)
December 31, 2012 (90) 1,733 (27,406) 4 (25,759)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 28 (1,401) 3,409 0 2,036
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (103) 0 2,229 (5) 2,121
Total change for the period (76) (1,401) 5,639 (5) 4,157
December 31, 2013 $(165) $ 332 $(21,767) $ (1 ) $(21,602)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M. with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and proceedings,
COnTInGEnCIES AnD COmmITmEnTS including considerations of the procedural status of the matter in
question, the presence of complex or novel legal theories, and/or the
Contingencies ongoing discovery and development of information important to the
As a company with a substantial employee population and with clients matters. The company reviews claims, suits, investigations and pro-
in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff or defen- ceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made with respect to
dant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, investigations, tax recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing reasonably possible
matters and proceedings that arise from time to time in the ordinary losses or range of losses (individually or in the aggregate), to reflect
course of its business. The company is a leader in the information the impact and status of settlement discussions, discovery, proce-
technology industry and, as such, has been and will continue to be dural and substantive rulings, reviews by counsel and other
subject to claims challenging its IP rights and associated products information pertinent to a particular matter.
and offerings, including claims of copyright and patent infringement Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in
and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a
company enforces its own IP against infringement, through license material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, results
negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical for companies of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of variables,
of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to actions and pro- including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; the
ceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide range of labor and structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of the
employment issues (including matters related to contested employ- impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in the
ment decisions, country-specific labor and employment laws, and Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and cir-
the company’s pension, retirement and other benefit plans), as well cumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional
as actions with respect to contracts, product liability, securities, foreign factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously,
operations, competition law and environmental matters. These it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results
actions may be commenced by a number of different parties, includ- of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period
ing competitors, clients, current or former employees, government by the resolution of one or more of these matters.
and regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives of the The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
locations in which the company does business. Some of the actions involving the company.
to which the company is party may involve particularly complex tech- The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003
nical issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM).
laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, inter-
been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably esti- ference with contract and breach of contract with regard to the
mated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of code
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 to Linux. The company has asserted counterclaims, including
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. breach of contract, violation of the Lanham Act, unfair competition,
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com- intentional torts, unfair and deceptive trade practices, breach of
pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of the General Public License that governs open source distributions,
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com- promissory estoppel and copyright infringement. Motions for sum-
pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other mary judgment were heard in March 2007, and the court has not
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other yet issued its decision. On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for
companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee bankruptcy protection, and all proceedings in this case were
relations considerations. stayed. On August 25, 2009, the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and pro- District of Delaware approved the appointment of a Trustee of SCO.
ceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time that the The court in another suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held
likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, the pro- a trial in March 2010. The jury found that Novell is the owner of
cedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the company’s UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that
defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining claims, suits, SCO is obligated to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims
investigations and proceedings discussed in this note, the company against IBM and Sequent for breach of UNIX license agreements.
is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible losses or range On August 30, 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the
of losses, including losses in excess of amounts accrued, if any, for district court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June
the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations and proceedings 2013, the Federal Court in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen the
are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to predict the ultimate SCO v. IBM case. On July 10, 2013, the Court entered an order dis-
outcome of these matters. It is the company’s experience that missing seven of SCO’s ten claims, specifically its breach of contract
damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and and copyright claims, and one tortious interference claim.
unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful indi- On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf of
cators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the company is the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one another
unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of other factors in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the modernization of social

===== PAGE 121 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
service program processing in Indiana. The State terminated the con- (i) $5.3 million, representing profits gained as a result of the conduct
tract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and the State is seeking damages. alleged in the SEC’s complaint, (ii) prejudgment interest on that amount
IBM believes the State’s claims against it are without merit and is seeking of $2.7 million, and (iii) a civil penalty of $2 million. On July 25, 2013, the
payment of termination amounts specified in the contract. After six court approved that 2011 settlement and required that for a two-year
weeks of trial, on July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior Court in Marion period IBM make reports to the SEC and the court on certain matters,
County rejected the State’s claims in their entirety and awarded IBM $52 including those relating to compliance with the FCPA. In early 2012, IBM
million plus interest and costs. On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court notified the SEC of an investigation by the Polish Central Anti-Corruption
of Appeals reversed portions of the trial judge’s findings, found IBM in Bureau involving allegations of illegal activity by a former IBM Poland
material breach, and ordered the case remanded to the trial judge to employee in connection with sales to the Polish government. IBM is
determine the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana Court of Appeals cooperating with the SEC and Polish authorities in this matter. In April
also affirmed approximately $50 million of the trial court’s award of dam- 2013, IBM learned that the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) is also
ages to IBM. This matter remains pending in the Indiana courts. investigating allegations related to the Poland matter, as well as allega-
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceed- tions relating to transactions in Argentina, Bangladesh and Ukraine. The
ings in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the IBM DOJ is also seeking information regarding the company’s global FCPA
UK Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative benefi- compliance program and its public sector business. The company is
ciaries of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a cooperating with the DOJ in this matter.
declaration that it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the In May 2013, IBM learned that the SEC is conducting an inves-
UK Trust that it was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future tigation into how IBM reports cloud revenue. IBM is cooperating
accruals for most participants and in implementing the company’s with the SEC in this matter.
new retirement policy. The trial in the High Court concluded in April In December 2013, a putative class action lawsuit was filed
2013 and the company is awaiting a ruling from the Court. In addi- in the United States District Court for the Southern District of
tion, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 290 individual actions New York related to the company’s third-quarter 2013 financial
brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined benefits results disclosure. The company, its Chairman, President and
plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege constructive Chief Executive Officer, and a former Senior Vice President and
dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the Employ- Chief Financial Officer of the company are named as defendants.
ment Tribunal in Southampton UK and are currently stayed pending Plaintiffs allege that defendants violated Section 20(a) and Section
resolution of the above-referenced High Court proceedings. 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and Rule 10b-5
In a separate but related proceeding, in March 2011, the Trustee thereunder.
of the IBM UK Trust was granted leave to initiate a claim before the The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after
High Court in London against IBM UK and one member of the UK January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York,
Trust membership, seeking an order modifying certain documents county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com-
and terms relating to retirement provisions in IBM UK’s largest plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including
defined benefit plan (the C Plan) dating back to 1983. The trial of for negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass.
these proceedings began in May 2012 and finished in early June. Plaintiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim dam-
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued its ruling, ages in unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries and
holding that the 1983 Trust Deeds and Rules should be modified to property damages allegedly arising out of the presence of ground-
allow certain categories of current IBM UK employees who are water contamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater
members of the C Plan to retire from the age of 60 (rather than from contaminants into certain structures in which plaintiffs reside or
the age of 63) without actuarial reduction of their defined benefit resided, or conducted business, allegedly resulting from the
pension. In a supplementary ruling on December 13, 2012, the Court release of chemicals into the environment by the company at its
declined to similarly modify the Trust Deeds and Rules for former former manufacturing and development facility in Endicott. These
employees who were C Plan members and who left the company complaints also seek punitive damages in an unspecified amount.
prior to retirement. On February 7, 2013, the Court issued an order The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
agreed to by all parties, under which there will be no appeals of the brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the
October 2012 and December 2012 judgments. As a result of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and
October 2012 ruling, IBM recorded an additional pre-tax retirement- Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to
related obligation of $162 million in the third quarter of 2012. CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to
In March 2011, the company announced that it had agreed to settle participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership
a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange Commis- of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investiga-
sion (SEC) relating to activities by employees of IBM Korea, LG IBM, IBM tions, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several
(China) Investment Company Limited and IBM Global Services (China) current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits,
Co., Ltd., during the period from 1998 through 2009, allegedly in violation administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local
of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977. As part of that settlement, environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims
IBM consented to the entry of a judgment relating to the books and concerning certain current or former operating sites.
records and internal control provisions of the securities laws, and also The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and
agreed to pay a total of $10 million, categorized by the SEC as follows: governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is NOTE N.
involved in various challenges with Brazilian authorities regarding TAxES
non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters.
($ in millions)
These matters include claims for taxes on the importation of com-
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
puter software. In November 2008, the company won a significant
Income before income taxes
case in the Superior Chamber of the federal administrative tax court
U.S. operations $ 6,857 $ 9,668 $ 9,716
in Brazil, and in late July 2009, the company received written con-
Non-U.S. operations 12,667 12,234 11,287
firmation regarding this decision. The total potential amount related
to the remaining matters for all applicable years is approximately Total income before income taxes $19,524 $21,902 $21,003
$700 million. The company believes it will prevail on these matters
and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability. The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as
follows:
Commitments
($ in millions)
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
include unused amounts of $5,028 million and $4,719 million at
U.S. operations $ 993 $2,582 $2,141
December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. A portion of these
Non-U.S. operations 2,048 2,716 3,007
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to sup-
port their working capital needs. In addition, the company has Total provision for income taxes $3,041 $5,298 $5,148
committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection
with client purchase agreements for approximately $1,769 million The components of the provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdic-
and $1,513 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. tion are as follows:
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor
($ in millions)
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a
U.S. federal
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
Current $1,406 $1,361 $ 268
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect Deferred (652) 403 909
to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of 754 1,764 1,177
contracts entered into by the company, under which the company U.S. state and local
customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless against losses Current 178 134 429
arising from a breach of representations and covenants related Deferred (321) 289 81
to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP rights, specified (143) 423 510
environmental matters, third-party performance of nonfinancial
Non-U.S.
contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these
Current 3,067 3,006 3,239
circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other
Deferred (637) 105 222
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in
2,430 3,111 3,461
the particular contract, the procedures of which typically allow the
Total provision for income taxes 3,041 5,298 5,148
company to challenge the other party’s claims. While typically
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual maximum Provision for social security,
real estate, personal property
on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these
and other taxes 4,198 4,331 4,289
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim,
Total taxes included in net income $7,239 $9,629 $9,437
and in some instances, the company may have recourse against
third parties for certain payments made by the company.
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
effective tax rate is as follows:
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the con-
ditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts
For the year ended December 31: 2013* 2012* 2011*
and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Histori-
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
cally, payments made by the company under these agreements
have not had a material effect on the company’s business, financial Foreign tax differential (14) (11) (10)
condition or results of operations. State and local (0) 1 2
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial Domestic incentives (3) (1) (1)
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these Other (2) (0) (1)
financial guarantees was $44 million and $65 million at December Effective rate 16% 24% 25%
31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees
* Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is
not material.

===== PAGE 123 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili- Deferred Tax Liabilities
ation labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of foreign
($ in millions)
subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory
At December 31: 2013 2012*
rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of non-U.S.
Depreciation $1,346 $1,378
earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercompany trans-
Retirement benefits 1,219 257
actions. These items also reflect audit settlements or changes in
Goodwill and intangible assets 1,173 957
the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of
Leases 1,119 2,216
these items.
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Software development costs 558 542
concluded its examination of the company’s income tax returns for Deferred transition costs 424 440
2008 through 2010 and issued a final Revenue Agent Report (RAR). Other 841 993
The company agreed with all of the adjustments. The company has Gross deferred tax liabilities $6,680 $6,783
redetermined its unrecognized tax benefits, including similar items
* Reclassified to conform with 2013 presentation.
in open tax years, based on the agreed adjustments in the RAR and
associated information and analysis. For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and
The 2013 effective tax rate benefitted by 11.5 points from the domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $626 million,
completion of the IRS examination discussed above including associ- as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $1,007 mil-
ated reserve redeterminations. In addition, the effective tax rate also lion. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least
benefitted from the company’s geographic mix of pre-tax income and two years or are available for 10 years or more.
incentives, the impact of foreign tax credits, benefits realized during The valuation allowance at December 31, 2013 principally applies
the year related to the American Taxpayer Relief Act, a favorable tax to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, in the
agreement which required a reassessment of certain valuation allow- opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire unutilized.
ances on deferred taxes and certain non-U.S. audit settlements. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carry-
These benefits were partially offset by 2013 tax charges related to forwards are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation
certain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries and the allowance will reduce income tax expense.
tax costs associated with the intercompany licensing of certain IP. The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2013
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities decreased by $1,214 million in 2013 to $4,458 million. A reconciliation
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate. of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities is as follows:
that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
were as follows: ($ in millions)
2013 2012 2011
Deferred Tax Assets Balance at January 1 $ 5,672 $5,575 $5,293
($ in millions) Additions based on tax positions
related to the current year 829 401 672
At December 31: 2013 2012*
Additions for tax positions
Retirement benefits $ 3,704 $ 5,870
of prior years 417 215 379
Share-based and other compensation 1,262 1,666
Reductions for tax positions
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 982 954 of prior years (including impacts
Deferred income 964 1,018 due to a lapse in statute) (2,201) (425) (538)
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 651 681 Settlements (259) (94) (231)
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 592 586 Balance at December 31 $ 4,458 $5,672 $5,575
Depreciation 382 456
Other 1,774 1,659 The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain
Gross deferred tax assets 10,311 12,890
tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related matters and state
Less: valuation allowance 734 1,187
issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits
Net deferred tax assets $ 9,577 $11,703
for tax positions of prior years are primarily attributable to the com-
* Reclassified to conform with 2013 presentation. pletion of the IRS examination for 2008-2010, non-U.S. audits and
impacts due to lapses in statutes of limitation.
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of a
non-U.S. taxing authority with respect to certain foreign tax
losses. The tax benefit of these losses totals $1,141 million as of
December 31, 2013. The 2013 decrease was driven by currency

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and has been included in the 2013 reductions for tax positions of the company believes that adequate amounts of tax and interest
prior years. In April 2011, the company received notification that the have been provided for any adjustments that are expected to result
appeal was denied. In June 2011, the company filed a lawsuit chal- for these years.
lenging this decision. The company filed its latest brief in December In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax
2013. No final determination has been reached on this matter. assessment notice for approximately $866 million from the Indian
The liability at December 31, 2013 of $4,458 million can be Tax Authorities for 2009. The company believes it will prevail on
reduced by $556 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with these matters and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of
the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state liability. At December 31, 2013, the company has recorded $433
income taxes and timing adjustments. The net amount of $3,902 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A significant portion of this
million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s effective balance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to protect the
tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2012 and 2011 were company’s right to appeal various income tax assessments made
$5,099 million and $5,090 million, respectively. by the Indian Tax Authorities.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included The company has not provided deferred taxes on $52.3 billion
in income tax expense. During the year ended December 31, 2013, of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31,
the company recognized a $93 million benefit in interest expense 2013, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these earn-
and penalties; in 2012, the company recognized $134 million in inter- ings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodically
est expense and penalties, and in 2011, the company recognized repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it does not
$129 million in interest expense and penalties. The company has $417 incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the deferred tax
million for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings is not
31, 2013, and had $533 million accrued at December 31, 2012. practicable.
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated
NOTE O.
with certain positions may be reduced. The company expects that cer-
RESEARCh, DEvElOPmEnT AnD EnGInEERInG
tain foreign and state issues may be concluded in the next 12 months.
The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits at December RD&E expense was $6,226 million in 2013, $6,302 million in 2012
31, 2013 could be reduced by approximately $101 million. and $6,258 million in 2011.
The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various state The company incurred expense of $5,959 million, $6,034 million
and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state and foreign and $5,990 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively, for scientific
taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer subject to research and the application of scientific advances to the develop-
tax examinations for years prior to 2008. The company is no longer ment of new and improved products and their uses, as well as
subject to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax return for services and their application. Within these amounts, software-
years prior to 2011. The open years contain matters that could be related expense was $3,077 million, $3,078 million and $3,097 million
subject to differing interpretations of applicable tax laws and regula- in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
tions related to the amount and/or timing of income, deductions and Expense for product-related engineering was $267 million,
tax credits. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, $268 million and $267 million in 2013, 2012 and 2011, respectively.
NOTE P.
EARnInGS PER ShARE OF COmmOn STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic 1,094,486,604 1,142,508,521 1,196,951,006
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 6,751,240 10,868,426 14,241,131
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 1,804,313 2,072,370 2,575,848
Assuming dilution 1,103,042,156 1,155,449,317 1,213,767,985
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $16,483 $16,604 $15,855
Less—net income applicable to contingently issuable shares 1 1 0
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $16,483 $16,603 $15,855
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.94 $ 14.37 $ 13.06
Basic $ 15.06 $ 14.53 $ 13.25

===== PAGE 125 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 8,797 common shares shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would have been
in 2013 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation antidilutive. There were no stock options outstanding in 2012 and
of diluted earnings per share because the exercise price of the 2011 that were considered antidilutive and not included in the diluted
options was greater than the average market price of the common earnings per share calculation.
NOTE Q.
REnTAl ExPEnSE AnD lEASE COmmITmEnTS
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and fixed expense as accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum
assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was $1,759 mil- rental commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related
lion in 2013, $1,767 million in 2012 and $1,836 million in 2011. Rental to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions, sublease
expense in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent income commitments and capital lease commitments. These
increases is recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. amounts reflect activities primarily related to office space, as well as
Contingent rentals are included in the determination of rental manufacturing facilities.
($ in millions)
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Beyond 2018
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,492 $1,286 $1,016 $799 $620 $778
Vacant space $ 24 $ 16 $ 6 $ 4 $ 1 $ 0
Sublease income commitments $ 22 $ 16 $ 14 $ 9 $ 4 $ 7
Capital lease commitments $ 16 $ 12 $ 13 $ 3 $ 9 $ 5
NOTE R. Incentive Awards
STOCK-BASED COmPEnSATIOn Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen-
on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over the employee
sation and Management Resources Com mittee of the Board of
requisite service period. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,”
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans prin-
on page 90 for additional information.
cipally include stock options, restricted stock units, performance
The following table presents total stock-based compensation
share units or any combination thereof.
cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under the
company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 2013. In
($ in millions)
addition, certain incentive awards granted under previous plans, if and
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
when those awards were canceled, could be reissued under the com-
Cost $ 122 $ 132 $ 120
pany’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million additional awards were
Selling, general and administrative 435 498 514
considered authorized to be issued under the company’s existing
Research, development
Plans as of December 31, 2013. There were 118.6 million unused shares
and engineering 57 59 62
available to be granted under the Plans as of December 31, 2013.
Other (income) and expense — (1 ) —
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
Pre-tax stock-based
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
compensation cost 614 688 697
approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the
Income tax benefits (213) (240) (246)
number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or
Total stock-based
formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant. All
compensation cost $ 402 $ 448 $ 450
awards for senior management are approved by the Committee. All
awards for employees other than senior management are approved
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested
by senior management pursuant to a series of delegations that were
awards at December 31, 2013 and 2012 was $995 million and $1,101
approved by the Committee, and the grants made pursuant to these
million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2013 is expected
delegations are reviewed periodically with the Committee. Awards
to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately
that are given as part of annual total compensation for senior man-
three years.
agement and other employees are made on specific cycle dates
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation
scheduled in advance. With respect to awards given in connection
cost at December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
with promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval
of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date of
the promotion or the date of hire.

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend
granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual
and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards, which future events or the value ultimately realized by employees who
generally vest 25 percent per year, are fully vested four years from receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indicative
the date of grant and have a contractual term of 10 years. of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value made
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date by the company.
of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and During the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, the
assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options include company did not grant stock options.
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
2013 2012 2011
Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $94 11,389,721 $90 20,662,322 $ 94 39,197,728
Options exercised 90 (5,585,127) 86 (9,080,170) 98 (18,144,309)
Options canceled/expired 86 (181,643) 75 (192,431) 107 (391,097)
Balance at December 31 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721 $ 90 20,662,322
Exercisable at December 31 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721 $ 90 20,662,322
The shares under option at December 31, 2013 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted-Average
Weighted- Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$85 and under $ 82 468,427 $ 49,244,658 2.1
$86 – $105 98 4,908,689 440,012,196 1.1
$106 and over 106 245,835 20,055,475 0.2
$ 97 5,622,951 $509,312,330 1.1
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
additional 0.6 million stock-based awards, consisting of stock with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury
options and restricted stock units, outstanding at December 31, shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2013 and 2012 were
2013, as a result of the company’s assumption of stock-based approximately 1,153 million and 1,080 million shares, respectively.
awards previously granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-
average exercise price of these awards was $67 per share. Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, the company currently grants its employees
Exercises of Employee Stock Options stock awards. These awards are made in the form of Restricted
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $614 million, $1,005 million (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs).
and $1,269 million, respectively. The total cash received from
employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for the
years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was approximately
$505 million, $785 million and $1,786 million, respectively. In con-
nection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the
company for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011
were $199 million, $341 million and $412 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 127 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011.
RSUs
2013 2012 2011
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $148 9,841,461 $129 12,218,601 $110 11,196,446
RSUs granted 189 2,541,081 184 2,635,772 154 5,196,802
RSUs released 131 (2,952,363) 117 (4,338,787) 106 (3,508,700)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 154 (794,862) 139 (674,125) 122 (665,947)
Balance at December 31 $166 8,635,317 $148 9,841,461 $129 12,218,601
PSUs
2013 2012 2011
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $151 3,172,201 $122 3,686,991 $111 3,649,288
PSUs granted at target 195 869,875 185 1,004,003 154 1,055,687
Additional shares earned above target* 118 152,069 102 550,399 118 230,524
PSUs released 118 (1,321,784) 102 (1,998,746) 118 (1,189,765)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 170 (48,067) 131 (70,446) 118 (58,743)
Balance at December 31** $178 2,824,294 $151 3,172,201 $122 3,686,991
* Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the company’s
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately
to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a received by the employee depends on the company’s performance
one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents are not against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period.
paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed on the For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair value of each
grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted for the PSU is determined on the grant date, based on the company’s stock
exclusion of dividend equivalents. price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents, and
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at assumes that performance targets will be achieved. Over the per-
December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 is the same as the period over formance period, the number of shares of stock that will be issued
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which is adjusted upward or downward based upon the probability of
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during achievement of performance targets. The ultimate number of shares
the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $481 million, issued and the related compensation cost recognized as expense
$486 million and $803 million, respectively. The total fair value of will be based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to
RSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31, the specified targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during
2013, 2012 and 2011 was $386 million, $509 million and $373 mil- the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $170 mil-
lion, respectively. As of December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, there lion, $186 million and $165 million, respectively. Total fair value of
was $871 million, $938 million and $1,021 million, respectively, of PSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31,
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The 2013, 2012 and 2011 was $156 million, $203 million and $141 million,
company received no cash from employees as a result of employee respectively.
vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs,
2013, 2012 and 2011. In the second quarter of 2011, the company the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
granted equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 were $312 million, $454 million
to about 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were and $283 million, respectively.
made under the Plans and vest in December 2015.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first method
Pur chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits based
purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 5 per- on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-specific
cent discount off the average market price on the day of purchase factors. The second method is a cash balance formula that calcu-
through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensa- lates benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual salary, as
tion. Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by well as an interest crediting rate.
the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for offering peri- Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
ods during which shares may be purchased and continues as long December 31, 2007 for all participants.
as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP partici-
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
pants are restricted from purchasing more than $25,000 of common
Executive Reten tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
Employees purchased 1.5 million, 1.6 million and 1.9 million
based on average earnings, years of service and age at termination of
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 2013,
employment.
2012 and 2011, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31,
the company on its common stock also include cash dividends on
2007 for all participants.
the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are
paid on full and fractional shares and can be reinvested in the ESPP.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered out-
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
standing and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to
for purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined
Approximately 2.3 million, 3.8 million and 5.4 million shares were
contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code.
available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2013, 2012
Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible
and 2011, respectively.
employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions up
to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to January
NOTE S.
1, 2005, and, generally up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for
RETIREmEnT-RElATED BEnEFITS
those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employ-
Description of Plans ees receive automatic contributions from the company equal to 1, 2
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution or 4 percent of eligible compensation based on their eligibility to
plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a supplemental participate in the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees gener-
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension ally receive automatic contributions and matching contributions after
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical the completion of one year of service. Further, through June 30,
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents. 2009, IBM contributed transition credits to eligible participants’
401(k) Plus Plan accounts. The amount of the transition credits was
U.S. Plans based on a participant’s age and service as of June 30, 1999.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and
IBM Personal Pension Plan participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen- invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections.
sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in company
IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts out of
plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January company stock to another investment choice, other than excessive
1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal trading rules applicable to such investments. Effective January 1,
Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred 2013, matching and automatic contributions are made once annually
to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as at the end of the year. In order to receive such contributions each year,
the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions a participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year.
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of However, if a participant separates from service prior to December
participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, 15, and has completed certain service and/or age requirements,
provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans. then the participant will be eligible to receive such matching and
automatic contributions following separation from service.

===== PAGE 129 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Execu tive U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, defined The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to
401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution plan. eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance
Employees who are eligible to participate in the 401(k) Plus Plan and for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company estab-
whose eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS com- lished a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who were more
pensation limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees who were within
Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide ben- five years of retirement eligibility are covered under the company’s
efits that would be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan prior retiree health benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or
if the compensation limits did not apply. the prior retiree health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping cost to the company for retiree health benefits. Effective January 1,
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 2014, the company amended the plan to establish a Health Reim-
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts bursement Arrangement (HRA) for each Medicare-eligible plan
in investments which mirror the primary investment options available retiree, surviving spouse and long-term disability plan participant
under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) are also who is eligible for company subsidized coverage and who enrolls in
eligible to receive company match and automatic contributions on an individual plan under the Medicare Exchange. The company also
eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on com- amended its life insurance plan. Employees retiring on or after Janu-
pensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code pay limit ary 1, 2015, will no longer be eligible for life insurance. Existing
once they have completed one year of service. Through June 30, retirees and employees retiring during 2014 continue to be eligible
2009, eligible participants also received transition credits. Amounts for retiree life insurance.
deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company contributions Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are not
are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial eligible for company subsidized nonpension postretirement benefits.
Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contri-
butions are recorded once annually at the end of the year. In order Non-U.S. Plans
to receive such contributions each year, a participant must be Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States spon-
employed on December 15 of the plan year. However, if a participant sor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover
separates from service prior to December 15, and has completed substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds
certain service and/or age requirements, then the participant will under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities
be eligible to receive such matching and automatic contributions under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Ben-
following separation from service. efits under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on
years of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during
a fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual
credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S.
defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments
within the various countries.
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries spon-
sor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide medical
and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible depen-
dents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. retirees.
However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local government-
sponsored and -administered programs.

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Defined benefit pension plans $(223) $(526) $(774) $1,396 $1,040 $ 734 $1,173 $ 515 $ (40)
Retention Plan 21 18 15 — — — 21 18 15
Total defined benefit
pension plans (income)/cost $(202) $(507) $(759) $1,396 $1,040 $ 734 $1,195 $ 533 $ (25)
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
and non-U.S. plans $ 785 $ 857 $ 875 $ 575 $ 621 $ 608 $1,361 $1,478 $1,483
Excess 401(k) 24 29 30 — — — 24 29 30
Total defined contribution plans cost $ 809 $ 885 $ 905 $ 575 $ 621 $ 608 $1,384 $1,506 $1,513
Nonpension postretirement
benefit plans cost $ 218 $ 268 $ 269 $ 79 $ 82 $ 76 $ 298 $ 350 $ 345
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $ 826 $ 646 $ 415 $2,051 $1,743 $1,418 $2,876 $2,389 $1,832
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $49,315 $ — $53,954 $ — $ 4,639 $ —
Underfunded plans
Qualified PPP $ — $ 54,907 $ — $53,630 $ — $ (1,277)
Excess PPP 1,425 1,576 — — (1,425) (1,576)
Retention Plan 294 327 — — (294) (327)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 4,633 5,282 177 433 (4,456) (4,849)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 6,352 $ 62,092 $ 177 $54,063 $ (6,175) $ (8,029)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $ 9,336 $ 6,944 $10,240 $ 7,889 $ 904 $ 945
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 10 12 11 12 1 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $ 9,346 $ 6,956 $10,251 $ 7,901 $ 905 $ 945
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $32,697 $ 35,956 $29,223 $30,169 $ (3,474) $ (5,788)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 6,587 6,418 — — (6,587) (6,418)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 822 1,007 81 107 (741) (900)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $40,106 $ 43,381 $29,304 $30,276 $(10,802) $(13,106)
Total overfunded plans $58,661 $ 6,956 $64,205 $ 7,901 $ 5,544 $ 945
Total underfunded plans $46,458 $105,473 $29,481 $84,338 $(16,977) $(21,134)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2013, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 102 percent funded compared to the benefit
obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 109 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined benefit pension plans
were 94 percent funded.

===== PAGE 131 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement
Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 132 represent financial information plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding defined postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S.
contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. Nonp ension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the Reten- The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/
tion Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the Consoli-
postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans consists of all dated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 501 $ 443 $ 505
Interest cost 1,980 2,196 2,456 1,524 1,779 1,843
Expected return on plan assets (3,981) (4,043) (4,043) (2,195) (2,303) (2,521)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 (0) (0)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 10 10 10 (119) (154) (162)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,790 1,331 818 1,600 1,027 957
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 0 1
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — 85 247 111
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (202) $ (507) $ (759) $ 1,396 $ 1,040 $ 734
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Service cost $ 35 $ 36 $ 33 $10 $14 $ 11
Interest cost 164 200 236 60 64 67
Expected return on plan assets (1) — — (9) (9) (10)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) — — — (5) (4) (4)
Recognized actuarial losses 21 32 — 23 17 13
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 0 —
Total net periodic cost $218 $268 $269 $79 $82 $ 76
* The 2012 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $162 million related to the IBM UK pension litigation. See page 132 for additional information.

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $56,810 $54,085 $49,319 $ 42,861 $ 5,282 $ 5,273 $1,019 $ 901
Service cost — — 501 443 35 36 10 14
Interest cost 1,980 2,196 1,524 1,779 164 200 60 64
Plan participants’ contributions — — 42 47 191 200 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 89 26 (2) 2 (0) —
Actuarial losses/(gains) (4,344) 3,810 (362) 6,365 (481) 104 (89) 76
Benefits paid from trust (3,303) (3,184) (1,920) (1,987) (557) (551) (6) (6)
Direct benefit payments (108) (97) (464) (454) (43) (35) (28) (27)
Foreign exchange impact — — (115) 77 — — (89) (24)
Medicare/Government subsidies — — — — 30 53 — —
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 6 161 15 — (44) 21
Benefit obligation at December 31 $51,034 $56,810 $48,620 $ 49,319 $ 4,633 $ 5,282 $ 832 $1,019
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $53,630 $51,218 $38,058 $ 35,362 $ 433 $ 38 $ 119 $ 112
Actual return on plan assets 3,626 5,596 2,515 3,742 0 0 5 10
Employer contributions — — 449 557 110 746 0 1
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 35 40 — — 0 —
Plan participants’ contributions — — 42 47 191 200 — —
Benefits paid from trust (3,303) (3,184) (1,920) (1,987) (557) (551) (6) (6)
Foreign exchange impact — — 121 305 — — (14) (8)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 164* (8) — — (12) 10
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 $53,954 $53,630 $39,464 $ 38,058 $ 177 $ 433 $ 92 $ 119
Funded status at December 31 $ 2,920 $ (3,180) $ (9,157) $(11,261) $(4,456) $(4,849) $ (740) $ (900)
Accumulated benefit obligation** $51,034 $56,810 $47,806 $ 48,369 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* I ncludes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. The
assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three-year period, starting June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with approximately $204 million returned during 2013. The
remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2013 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan
assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012
Prepaid pension assets $ 4,639 $ 0 $ 912 $ 944 $ 0 $ 0 $ 1 $ 0
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits (107) (102) (364) (356) (256) (239) (16) (20)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefit obligations (1,612) (3,078) (9,705) (11,849) (4,200) (4,610) (725) (880)
Funded status—net $ 2,920 $(3,180) $(9,157) $(11,261) $(4,456) $(4,849) $(740) $(900)

===== PAGE 133 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and the
changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-related
benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012 2013 2012
Net loss at January 1 $19,488 $18,561 $22,188 $18,309 $ 806 $734 $269 $211
Current period loss/(gain) (3,989) 2,258 (814) 4,905 (480) 104 (85) 75
Curtailments and settlements — — 3 2 — — 0 —
Amortization of net loss included
in net periodic (income)/cost (1,790) (1,331) (1,600) (1,027) (21) (32) (23) (17)
Net loss at December 31 $13,709 $19,488 $19,777 $22,188 $ 304 $806 $161 $269
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 130 $ 139 $ (614) $ (768) $ — $ — $ (6) $ (10)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — 0 — 15 — (31) —
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 119 154 — — 5 4
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 120 $ 130 $ (496) $ (614) $ 15 $ — $ (32) $ (6)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ (0) $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — 0 (0)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ (0) $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $13,829 $19,618 $19,281 $21,574 $ 319 $806 $129 $263
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 116 through 118 for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic
(income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2014.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,076 $1,461 $ — $11
Prior service costs/(credits) 10 (127) (7) (6)
Transition (assets)/liabilities — 0 — 0
During the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011, the result of the ruling, the company recorded an additional pre-tax
company paid $14 million, $22 million and $16 million, respectively, retirement-related obligation of $162 million in 2012 in selling, general
for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage premiums and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada and the UK). ings. See note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 120
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the company for additional information.
amended the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. A plan
amendment effective January 1, 2014, which established an HRA Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
for Medicare eligible participants increased the benefit obligation Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
$91 million. A plan amendment which ended life insurance eligibility periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
for employees who retire on or after January 1, 2015 reduced the use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years
benefit obligation $76 million. of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
against IBM United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
Holdings Limited, both wholly-owned subsidiaries of the company, mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a
in litigation involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for retirement-
related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.60% 4.20% 5.00% 3.23% 4.28% 4.33%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets 8.00% 8.00% 8.00% 6.21% 6.26% 6.41%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.51% 2.43% 2.37%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 4.50% 3.60% 4.20% 3.32% 3.23% 4.28%
Rate of compensation increase* N/A N/A N/A 2.52% 2.51% 2.43%
* Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2013 2012 2011 2013 2012 2011
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.30% 3.90% 4.80% 6.43% 7.37% 7.75%
Expected long-term returns
on plan assets 0.35% N/A N/A 9.01% 9.01% 9.07%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 4.10% 3.30% 3.90% 7.78% 6.43% 7.37%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes in
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed the discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net periodic
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. and cost for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012 and 2011 and
certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds resulted in a decrease in the APBO of $298 million and an increase
is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from the company’s of $252 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
expected benefit obligation payments are then matched to the yield
curve to derive the discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where Expected long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic
well developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used (income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate corporate assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets.
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, as the Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long-
benchmark for developing the respective discount rates. term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the strategies as described on page 135. These rates of return are
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/cost developed by the company and are tested for reasonableness
and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted against historical returns. The use of expected long-term returns on
in a decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $162 million, a decrease plan assets may result in recognized pension income that is greater
in 2012 net periodic income of $258 million and a decrease in 2011 or less than the actual returns of those plan assets in any given year.
net periodic income of $171 million. The changes in the discount Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed
rate assumptions resulted in a decrease in the PBO of $4,785 million to approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in
and an increase of $3,414 million at December 31, 2013 and 2012, a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely matches
respectively. the pattern of the services provided by the employees. Differences

===== PAGE 135 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
between actual and expected returns are recognized as a compo- For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.2 per-
nent of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized as a component cent for the year ended December 31, 2013, from 1.1 percent for the
of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy year ended December 31, 2012, resulted in a decrease in 2013 net
of the plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts periodic income of $6 million. The change in the interest crediting
exceed certain thresholds provided by accounting standards. The rate to 1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2012, from 1.3
market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair percent for the year ended December 31, 2011, resulted in an
value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the increase in 2012 net periodic income of $10 million. The change in
expected return on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost. the interest crediting rate to 1.3 percent for the year ended Decem-
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the ber 31, 2011, from 1.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2010,
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent resulted in an increase in 2011 net periodic income of $4 million.
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2013, 2012
and 2011 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net healthcare Cost Trend Rate
periodic (income)/cost. For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the com-
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company pany reviews external data and its own historical trends for
maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely pay- healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. How-
ments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2013, ever, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect on
2012 and 2011, the expected long-term return on plan assets and plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan which
the actual return on those assets were not material. limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The company
assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2014 will be 6.5
Rate of Compensation Increases and mortality Rate percent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend rate
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com pany, will decrease to 5 percent over the next three years. A one percent-
based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate of age point increase or decrease in the assumed healthcare cost
compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit trend rate would not have had a material effect on 2013, 2012 and
pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all 2011 net periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of December 31,
participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on life expec- 2013 and 2012.
tancy and death rates for different types of participants. Mortality
rates are periodically updated based on actual experience. healthcare legislation
The expected effects of the U.S. healthcare reform legislation
Interest Crediting Rate enacted in March 2010 were incorporated into the remeasurements
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a of the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at December 31,
cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an 2013 and 2012. The impact was insignificant as a result of the terms
interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/ of the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants.
cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting
the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the benefits
that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based
on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury
Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Assets Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $6,809 million
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and measured of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private market assets
at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” consisting of private equities and private real estate investments,
on pages 91 and 92. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valua- which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As of December
tions, these fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the 31, 2013, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,830 million in commit-
amounts the company could realize in current market transactions. ments for future investments in private markets to be made over a
number of years. These commitments are expected to be funded
Investment Policies and Strategies from plan assets.
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
future obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed
will be settled depends on future events, including the retirement income management, including duration, interest rate management
dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obliga- and credit exposure, cash equitization and to manage currency and
tions are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the commodity strategies.
current economic environment and other pertinent factors described Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
on pages 132 through 134. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-average
strategy balances the requirement to generate returns, using poten- target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 33 percent equity securi-
tially higher yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need ties, 54 percent fixed-income securities, 2 percent real estate and
to control risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed- 11 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation
income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in decisions made by the company’s management. The table on page
equity values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan 136 details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other
to become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concen- percentage allocation to fixed income is required to manage sol-
tration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio vency and funding risks. In others, the responsibility for managing
among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into the investments typically lies with a board that may include up to 50
account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, percent of members elected by employees and retirees. This can
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. As a result, result in slight differences compared with the strategies previously
the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 42 percent equity described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid
securities, 47 percent fixed-income securities, 6 percent real estate assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan
and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the alloca- and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management,
tion decisions made by the company’s management and is similar credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 136 details the The company’s defined benefit pension plans include invest-
actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types of invest- ments in certain European government securities. At December
ments in the Qualified PPP portfolio. 31, 2013, the U.S. plan held $828 million and the non-U.S. plans
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and held approximately $11 billion in European sovereign debt invest-
investment professionals who are employees of the company. They are ments, primarily in AAA-rated securities. Investments in government
bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s man- debt securities in Italy, Spain and Ireland were de minimis in the U.S.
agement and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among plan and represented less than 1 percent of total non-U.S. plan
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing assets. The plans hold no direct investments in government debt
security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and securities of Greece and Portugal.
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies. The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains
a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit
payments.

===== PAGE 137 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2013.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $15,929 $ — $ — $15,929 $6,489 $ — $ — $ 6,489
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 216 2,593 — 2,809 132 8,325 — 8,457
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 7,093 1 7,094 — 8,682 42 8,724
Corporate bonds (e) — 14,639 5 14,644 — 1,881 4 1,885
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 691 19 709 — 8 — 8
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 221 716 274 1,211 75 8,596 — 8,670
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,196 — 1,196
Cash and short-term investments (g) 427 1,915 — 2,343 154 451 — 605
Hedge funds — 1,368 860 2,228 — 740 — 740
Private equity (h) — — 3,771 3,771 — — 410 410
Private real estate (h) — — 3,038 3,038 — — 655 655
Derivatives (i) 1 6 — 7 1 150 — 151
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 36 1,518 — 1,554
Subtotal 16,795 29,021 7,968 53,784 6,886 31,547 1,110 39,544
Other (k) — — — 170 — — — (80)
Fair value of plan assets $16,795 $29,021 $7,968 $53,954 $6,886 $31,547 $1,110 $39,464
(a) R epresents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $83 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $31 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) C ommingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $9 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $1 million
representing 0.001 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $177 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $92 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and
South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in
the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2012.
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $15,161 $ 1 $ — $15,163 $6,395 $ — $ — $ 6,395
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 96 2,556 — 2,652 138 7,641 — 7,779
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 12,945 6 12,951 — 8,978 76 9,054
Corporate bonds (e) — 8,499 11 8,510 — 1,878 5 1,883
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 922 45 968 — 9 — 9
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 155 804 267 1,226 78 8,018 — 8,096
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,019 — 1,019
Cash and short-term investments (g) 244 3,198 — 3,442 134 373 — 507
Hedge funds — 1,402 756 2,159 — 646 — 646
Private equity (h) — — 4,085 4,085 — — 353 353
Private real estate (h) — — 2,861 2,861 — — 609 609
Derivatives (i) (6) 62 — 56 0 856 — 857
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 12 907 — 919
Subtotal 15,650 30,390 8,032 54,072 6,757 30,325 1,042 38,124
Other (k) — — — (442) — — — (66)
Fair value of plan assets $15,650 $30,390 $8,032 $53,630 $6,757 $30,325 $1,042 $38,058
(a) R epresents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $113 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $40 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) C ommingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $6 million, representing 0.01 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $2 million
representing 0.004 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $433 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $119 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and
South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in
the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 139 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2013
and 2012 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2013 $ 6 $11 $ 45 $267 $756 $4,085 $2,861 $ 8,032
Return on assets held at end of year 0 (0) (1) 7 104 1,104 889 2,103
Return on assets sold during the year 0 (0) (0) — (0) (528) (412) (939)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (5) 3 (0) — (0) (891) (301) (1,194)
Transfers, net 0 (8) (26) — — — — (33)
Balance at December 31, 2013 $ 1 $ 5 $ 19 $274 $860 $3,771 $3,038 $ 7,968
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2012 $ 29 $12 $45 $246 $713 $4,098 $2,790 $7,932
Return on assets held at end of year 0 0 1 21 56 855 202 1,135
Return on assets sold during the year 0 2 1 — 14 (334) (41) (359)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (1) (2) (9) — (26) (533) (90) (660)
Transfers, net (22) (1) 8 — — — — (15)
Balance at December 31, 2012 $ 6 $11 $45 $267 $756 $4,085 $2,861 $8,032
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2013
and 2012 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2013 $ 76 $ 5 $353 $609 $1,042
Return on assets held at end of year (12) (0) 1 33 22
Return on assets sold during the year 1 (0) 18 (3) 16
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (24) (1) 26 1 1
Foreign exchange impact 2 0 12 15 29
Balance at December 31, 2013 $ 42 $ 4 $410 $655 $1,110
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2012 $ 96 $ 39 $262 $580 $ 977
Return on assets held at end of year 3 (1) 9 (5) 6
Return on assets sold during the year 3 1 9 0 14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (26) (29) 62 14 21
Transfers, net (2) (5) (0) (3) (10)
Foreign exchange impact 1 (0) 11 23 34
Balance at December 31, 2012 $ 76 $ 5 $353 $609 $1,042

===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
valuation Techniques Expected Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to Defined Benefit Pension Plans
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valua- It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions
tion techniques during 2013 and 2012. sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New The company contributed $449 million and $557 million in cash
York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are typically to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $57 million and $60
valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the administrator million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during the years
of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the ended December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. The cash contri-
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities butions to multi-employer plans represent the annual cost included
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding. These in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated State-
assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 depending on ment of Earnings. The company has no liability for participants in
availability of quoted market prices. multi-employer plans other than its own employees. As a result, the
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char- impact on the company’s financial statements.
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as In 2014, the company is not legally required to make any con-
Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded. depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. during the year.
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law in
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other provi-
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations sions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S.
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension plan
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and raises tax
assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related benefit plans.
periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine The additional funding requirements by the Act apply to plan years
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by the
investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation methodology is Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which revised
applied consistently from period to period. the funding requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension plans
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price may smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months. At December
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 31, 2013, no mandatory contribution was required for 2014.
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. In 2014, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for exam- $600 million, which will be mainly contributed to defined benefit
ple, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign pension plans in Japan, the UK and Switzerland. This amount
exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial
depending on availability of quoted market prices. market performance in 2014 could increase the legally mandated
minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly or
daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also
elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount based
on market conditions or other factors.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company contributed $1,361 million and $1,478 million in cash
to the defined contribution plans during the years ended December
31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. In 2014, the company estimates
cash contributions to the defined contribution plans to be approxi-
mately $1.3 billion.

===== PAGE 141 =====
140 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans Expected Benefit Payments
The company contributed $80 million and $693 million to the non- Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
pension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to
December 31, 2013 and 2012, respectively. These contribution defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments have been
amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on page estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the
141. The 2012 amount includes a $400 million voluntary cash contribu- plans’ PBO at December 31, 2013 and include benefits attributable
tion to the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. This advanced to estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
funding was to be utilized to fund post-2012 benefit payments for
Medicare-eligible prescription drugs. In 2013, the prefunding was used
for this purpose. However, effective January 1, 2014, IBM will not be
eligible for the Medicare subsidy. The remainder of the prefunding is
being utilized to fund other eligible benefits under the plan.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2014 $ 3,393 $109 $ 2,026 $ 382 $ 5,910
2015 3,430 112 2,021 382 5,945
2016 3,460 114 2,062 385 6,022
2017 3,477 116 2,086 394 6,073
2018 3,441 118 2,121 407 6,087
2019–2023 17,454 600 11,327 2,325 31,706
The 2014 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These payments
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2013.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2014 $ 427 $ 8 $ 32 $ 467
2015 422 8 36 466
2016 416 9 39 464
2017 409 10 42 461
2018 393 10 46 449
2019–2023 1,799 63 286 2,148
The 2014 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 142 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement and The company is also expected to receive additional subsidies after
Modernization Act of 2003, the company qualified to receive a federal 2013 to true up the final subsidy amount due to IBM under the Act.
subsidy through 2013. Due to benefit plan changes effective January The company has included the impact of its portion of the sub-
1, 2014, the company will not qualify for the subsidy as of that date. The sidy in the determination of net periodic cost for the U.S. nonpension
company received total subsidies of $30 million and $53 million for postretirement benefit plan for the years ended December 31, 2013,
prescription drug-related coverage during the years ended December 2012, and 2011. The impact of the subsidy resulted in a reduction in
31, 2013 and 2012, respectively, which were utilized to reduce the com- 2013, 2012 and 2011 net periodic cost of $45 million, $35 million and
pany contributions to the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. $37 million, respectively.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of plan
assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on page 131.
($ in millions)
2013 2012
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $41,003 $29,223 $99,184 $83,799
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 40,315 29,213 98,263 83,677
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 58,651 64,194 6,944 7,889
NOTE T.
SEGmEnT InFORmATIOn
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
Global Tech nol ogy Services, Global Business Services, Software, to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a
Systems and Technology, and Global Financing. The segments result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the
represent components of the company for which separate financial segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain
information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting,
executive officer in determining how to allocate resources and evalu- Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources, and Billing and
ate performance. The segments are determined based on several Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technology, on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount. When a clear
delivery channels and similar economic characteristics. and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
Information about each segment’s business and the products allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in the management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based on
“Description of Business” section on pages 32 to 34, and in “Seg- the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared expenses,
ment Details,” on pages 35 to 40 in the Management Discussion. which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments.
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions These expenses are associated with the elimination of internal
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, transactions and other miscellaneous items.
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used by
Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are pri-
marily sourced internally from Systems and Technology and
Software. For providing IT services that are used internally, Global
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover cost,
as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-
length value of providing the services. The Global Services segments
enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to market rates
with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of equipment used
in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are reviewed
annually, and reset if appropriate.

===== PAGE 143 =====
142 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and measurement
system utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior
management, both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2013
External revenue $38,551 $18,396 $25,932 $ 14,371 $2,022 $ 99,273
Internal revenue 1,063 714 3,191 593 2,282 7,843
Total revenue $39,615 $19,109 $29,123 $14,964 $4,304 $107,115
Pre-tax income $ 6,983 $ 3,214 $11,106 $ (507) $2,171 $ 22,967
Revenue year-to-year change (4.3)% (0.9)% 1.4% (18.4)% 5.7% (4.2)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 0.3% 7.7% 2.7% (141.3)% 6.8% (4.4)%
Pre-tax income margin 17.6% 16.8% 38.1% (3.4)% 50.4% 21.4%
2012
External revenue $40,236 $18,566 $25,448 $ 17,667 $2,013 $103,930
Internal revenue 1,166 719 3,274 676 2,060 7,896
Total revenue $41,402 $19,286 $28,722 $18,343 $4,073 $111,826
Pre-tax income $ 6,961 $ 2,983 $10,810 $ 1,227 $2,034 $ 24,015
Revenue year-to-year change (1.7)% (4.0)% 1.8% (7.5)% (2.9)% (2.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 10.8% (0.8)% 8.4% (24.9)% 1.1% 4.8%
Pre-tax income margin 16.8% 15.5% 37.6% 6.7% 49.9% 21.5%
2011
External revenue $40,879 $19,284 $24,944 $ 18,985 $2,102 $106,194
Internal revenue 1,242 797 3,276 838 2,092 8,246
Total revenue $42,121 $20,081 $28,219 $19,823 $4,195 $114,440
Pre-tax income $ 6,284 $ 3,006 $ 9,970 $ 1,633 $2,011 $ 22,904
Revenue year-to-year change 6.6% 5.6% 10.9% 5.6% 2.8% 7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 14.3% 18.1% 5.3% 12.2% 2.8% 9.5%
Pre-tax income margin 14.9% 15.0% 35.3% 8.2% 47.9% 20.0%

===== PAGE 144 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Immaterial Items
($ in millions) Investment in Equity Alliances
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
Revenue The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and
Total reportable segments $107,115 $111,826 $114,440 (losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments
Other revenue and adjustments 478 577 722 did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial
Elimination of internal transactions (7,843) (7,896) (8,246) results of the segments.
Total IBM consolidated revenue $ 99,751 $104,507 $106,916
Segment Assets and Other Items
Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property and
($ in millions) equipment including the assets associated with the outsourcing
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
business, goodwill, accounts receivable, deferred services arrange-
Pre-tax income ment transition costs, maintenance parts inventory and acquired
Total reportable segments $22,967 $24,015 $22,904 intangible assets. Global Business Services assets are primarily
Amortization of acquired goodwill and accounts receivable. Software assets are mainly good-
intangible assets (758) (703) (629) will, acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Systems
Acquisition-related charges (46) (36) (46) and Technology assets are primarily plant, property and equipment,
Non-operating retirement- goodwill, manufacturing inventory and accounts receivable. Global
related (costs)/income (1,062) (538) 72 Financing assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets
Elimination of internal transactions (1,480) (1,197) (1,243) under operating leases.
Unallocated corporate amounts* (98) 361 (56) To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
Total IBM consolidated ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment
pre-tax income $19,524 $21,902 $21,003 assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets
* The 2013 and 2012 amounts include the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions dives- is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
titure. The 2011 amount includes gains related to the sale of Lenovo common stock. ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system
and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 144. In those cases,
there will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax
income and segment assets.
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be con-
sistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ pre-tax
income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income reflect
occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are not specifi-
cally identified by the management reporting system. Capital
expenditures that are reported by each segment also are consistent
with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense associated
with the Global Financing business, including the intercompany
financing activities discussed on pages 33 and 34, as well as
the income from investment in cash and marketable securities.
The explanation of the difference between cost of financing and
interest expense for segment presentation versus presentation in
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is included on page 75 of
the Management Discussion.

===== PAGE 145 =====
144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology Financing Segments
2013
Assets $18,048 $8,311 $27,101 $7,960 $40,138 $101,558
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,670 72 1,211 855 574 4,383
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,938 69 540 781 467 3,796
Interest income — — — — 1,904 1,904
Interest expense — — — — 405 405
2012
Assets $15,884 $8,022 $26,291 $8,232 $38,882 $ 97,310
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,597 75 1,157 786 853 4,470
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,760 42 618 1,106 708 4,233
Interest income** — — — — 1,972 1,972
Interest expense — — — — 410 410
2011
Assets $15,475 $8,078 $23,926 $7,649 $36,427 $ 91,557
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,713 83 1,062 737 1,145 4,739
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,838 56 469 1,032 930 4,325
Interest income** — — — — 2,176 2,176
Interest expense — — — — 538 538
* Segment pre-tax income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
** Reclassified to conform with 2013 presentation.

===== PAGE 146 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 145
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Geographic Information
($ in millions) The following provides information for those countries that are
At December 31: 2013 2012 2011 10 percent or more of the specific category.
Assets
Revenue*
Total reportable segments $101,558 $ 97,310 $ 91,557
Elimination of internal transactions (4,740) (4,943) (5,407) ($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
Unallocated amounts
United States $34,809 $ 36,270 $ 37,041
Cash and marketable securities 9,697 9,779 10,575
Japan 9,071 10,697 10,968
Notes and accounts receivable 2,741 3,769 3,526
Other countries 55,871 57,540 58,906
Deferred tax assets 4,532 5,194 4,865
Total IBM consolidated revenue $99,751 $104,507 $106,916
Plant, other property
and equipment 2,505 2,555 2,918 * Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
Pension assets 5,551 945 2,837
Other 4,378 4,604 5,562 Plant and Other Property—Net
Total IBM consolidated assets $126,223 $119,213 $116,433 ($ in millions)
At December 31: 2013 2012 2011
United States $ 6,723 $ 6,555 $ 6,271
Major Clients
Other countries 6,257 6,299 6,186
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s
Total $12,979 $12,854 $12,457
total revenue in 2013, 2012 or 2011.

===== PAGE 147 =====
146 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue by Classes of NOTE U.
Similar Products or Services SuBSEquEnT EvEnTS
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of
On January 23, 2014, the company and Lenovo Group Limited
products or services within the company’s reportable segments.
(Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement in which Lenovo will
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services,
acquire the company’s x86 server portfolio. See the caption, “Dives-
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other
titures,” on page 98 for additional information.
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software,
On January 28, 2014, the company announced that the Board
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support are
of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.95 per common
reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, educa-
share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2014 to shareholders of
tion, training and other product-related services are reported as
record on February 10, 2014.
Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics original
On January 31, 2014, the company completed the initial closing
equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from the sale
of the sale of its customer care business process outsourcing ser-
of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue includes
vices business to SYNNEX. See the caption, “Divestitures” on page
circuit and component design services and technology and manu-
98 for additional information.
facturing consulting services. See “Description of the Business,”
On February 6, 2014, the company issued $4.5 billion in bonds
beginning on page 28 for additional information.
as follows: $1 billion of 2-year floating-rate bonds priced at 3-month
LIBOR plus 7 basis points; $750 million of 5-year floating-rate bonds
($ in millions)
priced at 3-month LIBOR plus 37 basis points; $750 million of 5-year
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011
fixed-rate bonds with a 1.95 percent coupon; and $2 billion of
Global Technology Services
10-year fixed-rate bonds with a 3.625 percent coupon.
Services $29,953 $31,161 $31,746
Maintenance 7,111 7,343 7,515
Systems 1,322 1,574 1,478
Software 164 159 140
Global Business Services
Services $18,065 $18,216 $18,956
Software 221 208 211
Systems 109 142 118
Software
Software $23,420 $23,144 $22,921
Services 2,512 2,304 2,022
Systems and Technology
Servers $ 9,646 $11,980 $12,362
Storage 3,041 3,411 3,619
Microelectronics OEM 1,463 1,572 1,975
Retail Store Solutions 6 357 753
Microelectronics Services 215 346 277
Global Financing
Financing $ 1,493 $ 1,471 $ 1,612
Used equipment sales 529 542 490

===== PAGE 148 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Revenue $ 99,751 $104,507 $106,916 $ 99,870 $ 95,758
Net income $ 16,483 $ 16,604 $ 15,855 $ 14,833 $ 13,425
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 17,959 $ 17,627 $ 16,318 $ 15,023 $ 13,452
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 14.94 $ 14.37 $ 13.06 $ 11.52 $ 10.01
Basic $ 15.06 $ 14.53 $ 13.25 $ 11.69 $ 10.12
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 16.28 $ 15.25 $ 13.44 $ 11.67 $ 10.03
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 4,058 $ 3,773 $ 3,473 $ 3,177 $ 2,860
Per share of common stock 3.70 3.30 2.90 2.50 2.15
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 3,623 $ 4,082 $ 4,108 $ 4,185 $ 3,447
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 83.8% 81.6% 71.2% 66.8% 80.4%
At December 31: 2013 2012 2011 2010 2009
Total assets $126,223 $119,213 $116,433 $113,452 $109,022
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 13,821 $ 13,996 $ 13,883 $ 14,096 $ 14,165
Working capital $ 11,196 $ 5,807 $ 8,805 $ 7,554 $ 12,933
Total debt $ 39,718 $ 33,269 $ 31,320 $ 28,624 $ 26,099
Total equity $ 22,929 $ 18,984 $ 20,236 $ 23,172 $ 22,755
* R efer to page 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the years 2009 and 2010 and
“GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 63 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2011. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 46 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP
financial information for 2013 and 2012.

===== PAGE 149 =====
148 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2013 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $23,408 $24,924 $23,720 $27,699 $99,751
Gross profit $10,678 $12,132 $11,380 $14,315 $48,505
Net income $ 3,032 $ 3,226 $ 4,041 $ 6,185 $16,483
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 3,376 $ 3,579 $ 4,387 $ 6,617 $17,959
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 2.70 $ 2.91 $ 3.68 $ 5.73 $ 14.94**
Basic $ 2.72 $ 2.93 $ 3.70 $ 5.77 $ 15.06**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 3.00 $ 3.22 $ 3.99 $ 6.13 $ 16.28**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.85 $ 0.95 $ 0.95 $ 0.95 $ 3.70
Stock prices+
High $215.90 $214.89 $200.94 $187.79
Low 190.39 187.68 181.10 172.57
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth Full
2012 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Year
Revenue $24,673 $25,783 $24,747 $29,304 $104,507
Gross profit $11,118 $12,281 $11,732 $15,167 $ 50,298
Net income $ 3,066 $ 3,881 $ 3,824 $ 5,833 $ 16,604
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 3,265 $ 4,077 $ 4,155 $ 6,129 $ 17,627
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 2.61 $ 3.34 $ 3.33 $ 5.13 $ 14.37**
Basic $ 2.65 $ 3.38 $ 3.36 $ 5.19 $ 14.53**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.78 $ 3.51 $ 3.62 $ 5.39 $ 15.25**
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.75 $ 0.85 $ 0.85 $ 0.85 $ 3.30
Stock prices+
High $209.12 $210.69 $208.32 $211.79
Low 177.34 187.00 181.85 184.78
* Refer to page 64 of the company’s first-quarter 2013 Form 10-Q filed on April 30, 2013, pages 80 and 81 of the company’s second-quarter 2013 Form 10-Q filed on July 30, 2013,
pages 81 and 82 of the company’s third-quarter 2013 Form 10-Q filed on October 29, 2013 and page 52 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-
GAAP information for the quarterly periods of 2013 and 2012. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 46 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year
2013 and 2012.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
+ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.

===== PAGE 150 =====
Performance Graph 149
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM,
S&P 500 STOCK INDEx AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEx
The adjacent graph compares the five-year cumulative total returns 280
for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative return of
certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact that IBM is
a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the SEC’s rules
require the use of that index. Under those rules, the second index 240
used for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-busi-
ness index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index.
IBM is also included in this index.
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial 200
year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons
assume that all dividends are reinvested.
160
120
80
08 09 10 11 12 13
(U.S. Dollar) 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $158.61 $181.26 $230.96 $244.67 $244.22
S & P 500 Index 100.00 126.46 145.51 148.59 172.37 228.19
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 161.72 178.20 182.50 209.55 269.13

===== PAGE 151 =====
150 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Alain J.P. Belda Shirley Ann Jackson Virginia M. Rometty
Managing Director President Chairman, President and
Warburg Pincus LLC Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Chief Executive Officer
IBM
William R. Brody Andrew N. Liveris
President Chairman, President and Joan E. Spero
Salk Institute for Biological Studies Chief Executive Officer Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
The Dow Chemical Company Columbia University School of
Kenneth I. Chenault International and Public Affairs
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer W. James McNerney, Jr.
American Express Company Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Sidney Taurel
The Boeing Company Senior Advisor
Michael L. Eskew Capital Royalty L.P.
Retired Chairman and James W. Owens
Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and Lorenzo H. Zambrano
United Parcel Service, Inc. Chief Executive Officer Chairman and
Caterpillar Inc. Chief Executive Officer
David N. Farr CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Emerson Electric Co.
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Rodney C. Adkins John E. Kelly III Linda S. Sanford
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Director Senior Vice President
Corporate Strategy Research Enterprise Transformation
Colleen F. Arnold Robert J. LeBlanc Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Sales and Distribution Software and Cloud Solutions Group and Chief Financial Officer
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
Michelle H. Browdy Steven A. Mills
Vice President, Assistant Senior Vice President Timothy S. Shaughnessy
General Counsel and Secretary and Group Executive Senior Vice President
Software and Systems GTS Solutions
Erich Clementi
Senior Vice President Robert J. Picciano Stanley J. Sutula III
Global Technology Services Senior Vice President Vice President and Treasurer
Information and Analytics Group
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President Michael D. Rhodin Senior Vice President
Sales and Distribution Senior Vice President Global Business Services
IBM Watson Group
Diane J. Gherson Robert C. Weber
Senior Vice President Virginia M. Rometty Senior Vice President
Human Resources Chairman, President and Legal and Regulatory Affairs,
Chief Executive Officer and General Counsel
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President Thomas W. Rosamilia
Marketing and Communications Senior Vice President
Systems and Technology Group
James J. Kavanaugh and IBM Integrated Supply Chain
Vice President and Controller

===== PAGE 152 =====
Stockholder Information 151
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services Annual Meeting
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
April 29, 2014, at 10 a.m. in the Prime F. Osborn III Convention Center,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
Jacksonville, Florida.
P.O. Box 43078
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078
(888) IBM-6700 Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
should call (781) 575-2727. Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
P.O. Box 43078
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
(888) IBM-6700
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694. The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by
IBM on the Internet
early May, August and November.
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM An audio recording of the 2013 Annual Report will be available for
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address. sight-impaired stockholders in June 2014.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values and
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its innovative
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC. strategies to transforming communities through global citizenship.
The full Corporate Responsibility Report is online with downloadable
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information
sections at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility.
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material General Information
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can receive online account information and
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website. answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the
also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington,
online through the Internet at this site.
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States,
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM
stock certificates for safe keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations,
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, 1 New Orchard
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.

===== PAGE 153 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AIX, Algorithmics, BladeCenter, Cognos, DemandTec, Emptoris, IBM,
IBM Flex System, IBM SmartCloud, InfoSphere, Kenexa, Netezza,
OpenPOWER, POWER, POWER7+, POWER8, Power Systems, PureData,
PureSystems, Q1 Labs, Rational, Smarter Analytics, Smarter Cities,
Smarter Commerce, Smarter Planet, SoftLayer, SPSS, StoredIQ, Storwize,
System x, System z, Tealeaf, Tivoli,TRIRIGA, Varicent, Vivisimo, WebSphere,
Worklight and Xtify are trademarks or registered trademarks of International
Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Lenovo
is a trademark of Lenovo Group Limited in the United States, other
countries, or both. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in
the United States, other countries, or both. Oracle is a registered trademark
of Oracle Corporation. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open
Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, product
and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-04
Design: VSA Partners, Inc. Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 154 =====
