

===== PAGE 1 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report
2014
IBM
Annual
Report

===== PAGE 2 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 1
Dear IBM Investor:
The cover of our report to you last year asked: “What will we make
of this moment?”
This was the critical and urgent decision that we — and our clients — faced.
Would we seize upon the major shifts that are reordering our industry and
opening up vast new applications of information technology?
In my letter, I described our answer:
• IBM would help transform industries and professions with data.
• We would remake enterprise IT for the era of cloud.
• W e would reimagine work by helping clients build systems of
engagement, underpinned by the imperative of security.
At the same time, we would address significant challenges in some of
our businesses, principally hardware.
We knew we faced a critical year of transformation. It proved to be just
that. The work of transforming IBM continues, and much remains to
be done. But I am pleased to report that we made significant progress
and built momentum in 2014.
In this letter I will describe what we have done, and continue to do,
to transform and differentiate your company and to position ourselves
for leadership in the new era now taking shape.

===== PAGE 3 =====
2
VIRGINIA M. ROMETTY
Chairman, President
and Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 4 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 3
Continuing to move to higher value
Information technology is one of the most dynamic, fast-
changing and fiercely competitive industries in the world,
characterized by relentless cycles of innovation and
commoditization. Our choice is clear: We pursue a model
of high-value innovation, rather than commodity technology,
products and services. Our commitment to this model
compels us to reinvent businesses continually; grow new
ones organically and through acquisitions; and occasionally
divest businesses that do not fit our profile.
You see all of this reflected in our 2014 results — a dynamic
shift of our portfolio underneath our $92.8 billion in revenue, 2014
$21 billion in operating pre-tax income and operating $92.8 billion
earnings per share of $16.53 from continuing operations.
Revenue
Consider that we completed or announced the divestiture
of three businesses in 2014 that a year earlier drove $21 billon
$7 billion in revenue, but lost about $500 million in profit —
Operating pre-tax
what I call “empty calories.” At the same time, we are
making significant investments in line with the strategy income
I described to you last year.
$16.53
Throughout the year you saw the bold moves we made:
Operating EPS
• $1 billion to accelerate the commercialization of IBM
Watson, bringing cognitive computing to more clients
and partners in more industries.
• $1.2 billion to expand our SoftLayer cloud centers around
the world. We expect to have 46 locations by the end
of 2015.
• $1 billion to create IBM Bluemix, our cloud platform-as-
a-service for software developers.
• Further scaling our global IBM Cloud business through
partnerships with SAP and Tencent.

===== PAGE 5 =====
4
• IBM Watson Analytics, offering powerful cognitive and For example, the planetwide footprint of cloud centers that
visually intuitive analytics in the palm of your hand. we are building will provide clients the combination of
global and localized data access and security that they
• A landmark partnership with Apple to bring mobility to
need. This is unmatched in the industry.
the enterprise and reimagine the work of professionals.
Engagement, underpinned by security. In mobile,
• A strategic alliance with Twitter to bring an entire new
our growth more than tripled in 2014. Going forward, we
category of Big Data to business.
expect this to benefit from the apps from our strategic
These investments will contribute to the strong growth we alliance with Apple and our global network of digital design
are seeing in our strategic imperatives, which deliver high studios. Further, IBM is the global leader in enterprise
value and now represent a significant part of IBM. Together, security, grounded not only in technology and our 3,700
cloud, analytics, mobile, social and security generated patents, but in our experience-based understanding
$25 billion of revenue in 2014, growing by 16 percent. Five years of the changing nature of the challenge. Enter prises and
ago, these businesses represented just 13 percent of our institutions discover that they cannot wall out attackers.
revenue. Today, that has risen to 27 percent of IBM’s revenue. Twenty-first century security is a Big Data problem —
which is why our security business, with unequalled data
Big Data and analytics. Our analytics business grew
and analytics capability, grew 19 percent in 2014.
7 percent to $17 billion in 2014. We are driving growth by
helping our clients integrate all data sources — structured At the same time that we have been growing new businesses,
and unstructured — and apply a range of analytics — we have been reinventing our core franchises. Last year
descriptive, predictive and prescriptive. We combine we promised to address challenges in our Systems and
this capability with deep knowledge of industries and Technology business. We did so in 2014, with hardware going
professions. Our analytics portfolio draws upon more than from losses in the first half to nearly $400 million of profit in
30 acquisitions and includes nine Analytics Solutions the fourth quarter alone. That is a remarkable swing.
Centers with an ecosystem of more than 6,000 business
In transforming this business, we took several important actions:
partners. Further, we are creating the next stage of Big
Data and analytics with cognitive computing. • We sold our x86 server business and announced
the divestiture of our commercial semiconductor
Cloud. Our cloud business is growing rapidly — up 60
technology business.
percent to $7 billion in 2014, with “as-a-service” at $3 billion,
up nearly 80 percent and exiting the year with a run rate of • We committed $3 billion over the next five
$3.5 billion. IBM Cloud is set apart by focusing on hybrid years to the development of next-generation
environments optimized for data and security, shaped by semic onductor technologies.
our knowledge of the requirements of enterprise clients.

===== PAGE 6 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 5
Engines of Growth:
IBM’s Strategic Imperatives
Today, our strategic imperatives
have become a significant part of IBM.
Together, cloud, analytics, mobile, In 2014, our strategic
social and security represented imperatives generated
27 percent of IBM’s revenue in 2014. $ 25B
IBM generated more than 3,000 patents
in these areas in 2014 and remains
in revenue, growing
differentiated in our ability to integrate
by 16 percent.
these technologies with our clients’ core
business processes, data and systems.
STRATEGIC IMPERATIVE STRATEGIC IMPERATIVE
REVENUE MIX REVENUE GROWTH VS THE MARKET*
23%
27% 20%
18%
17%
16% 16%
13%
10%
9% 9% 9%
2010 2014 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
IBM Strategic Imperatives
Served Market Strategic Imperatives
* Data reflects actual currency rates.

===== PAGE 7 =====
6
• We introduced major technological advances with 2015: Our transformation continues
POWER8 and software defined storage — built for cloud
Our direction is clear. We remain confident in our strategy,
and Big Data.
and we have made much progress. In 2015 we will build on
• In January 2015 we launched our new z13 mainframe. our momentum:
Built for the mobile era, it processes massive volumes
1. We will shift an additional $4 billion of spending
of transactions while tapping back-office data and
to data, cloud and engagement this year, aimed at
simultaneously applying real-time analytics for deeper
deepening our differentiation in the marketplace.
insights and fraud detection.
In February we introduced innovations to make hybrid
• Historically, we kept our industry-leading Power technology cloud a reality for the enterprise. We are also growing our
all to ourselves. Today, we see greater value by enabling portfolio of industry-specific analytics solutions in areas
an OpenPOWER ecosystem, which allows partners to ranging from counter-fraud and oil and gas exploration, to
innovate and build on the Power technology. Launched airline maintenance and the Internet of Things. And we
in 2013, the OpenPOWER Foundation began with five began the year by establishing a number of business units
members and now stands at more than 100 around the focused on markets and industries being transformed by
world. The U.S. Department of Energy recently awarded our strategic imperatives: IBM Commerce, IBM Analytics,
IBM a long-term, $325 million contract to create future IBM Security and IBM Cloud. We have announced plans
supercomputers based on OpenPOWER technology. for an IBM Healthcare unit.
All of this speaks to the enduring quality of IBM as a high- 2. We will continue to bring innovation to our core
value innovation company. Last year we again spent about franchises — innovation highly valued by our clients.
6 percent of our revenue on research and development — I previously mentioned the entirely refreshed line of
and the ratio within our software business is double that. mainframes, IBM Power Systems and storage. We will
We invested $4 billion on capital expenditures. IBMers are continue to apply breakthroughs from IBM Research to
prolific innovators. For the 22nd straight year, we earned the our products and services. In software, we will accelerate
most U.S. patents of any organization, averaging 20 a day. our march to “as-a-service.” In services, we will deploy
advanced automation to delivery. And we will continue
helping new and existing outsourcing clients transform
their infrastructure and processes by leveraging IBM’s
hybrid cloud platform. This was an important differentiator
in helping us to sign nearly 50 contracts worth greater

===== PAGE 8 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 7
than $100 million in 2014 and to maintain a services
backlog of $128 billion.
These core franchises also provide the foundation for
future innovation and growth. One example is our
partnership with Apple. Together, we are placing powerful
“ IBM lives at the intersection analytics capabilities in the hands of professionals.
These apps are integrated with critical business systems,
of technology and business.
work flows and data sets. That’s what enables an airline
This enables us to change the attendant to rebook a flight while en route; a financial
advisor to model a portfolio in the client’s living room;
way the world works, and in
an in-store sales assistant to act as a trusted fashion
so doing, to be essential to our advisor; or an emergency responder to have real-time
situation-risk awareness, including live video.
clients and to society.”
3. We believe open ecosystems and partnerships
are key to our future innovation. This is a significant
new element of our growth strategy. We will add to and
scale partnerships with companies like Apple, Twitter,
SAP, Tencent and now, SoftBank. Also, the IBM Watson
Ecosystem is rapidly expanding, with 4,000 companies
in the pipeline.
Together, these actions will make IBM an even higher-value
business. We expect our strategic imperatives of cloud,
analytics, mobile, social and security to continue growing by
double digits and to become a greater percentage of IBM.
We will remain the enterprise leader in these markets.
Finally, we will continue to return substantial value to you,
our owners, through dividends and gross share repurchases.
Last year, these were $4.3 billion and $13.7 billion, respectively.
In 2014 we marked our 19th consecutive year of raising our
dividend and our 99th year of paying one.

===== PAGE 9 =====
8
An essential company
So I come back to this moment, full of rapid change, but
even more opportunity — and to IBM’s unique purpose as
an enterprise.
IBM lives at the intersection of technology and business.
This enables us to change the way the world works, and in
so doing, to be essential to our clients and to society.
We work with 90 percent of the world’s top banks, 9 of the
top 10 oil and gas companies, 40 of the top 50 retailers and
92 of the top 100 healthcare organizations. IBM systems
manage banking, reservations, transportation, retail, trading
and healthcare systems. Our mainframes alone process
75 percent of the world’s business data.
Today we are building upon this foundation to create an
entirely new generation of critical systems. IBM’s clients are
unclogging city traffi c, exploring a cure for cancer, improving
the safety of food supplies, reducing risk, and serving their
own customers, employees, citizens and patients with
greater levels of understanding, personalization and intimacy.
A new world is taking shape before our eyes, remade by
data, rewritten in code and growing smarter every day.
This is the work that energizes me and all of my fellow IBMers.
I am deeply grateful to the IBM team for bringing us here,
and to you, our shareholders, for your support. I hope you
share our excitement about your company’s path and the
shared opportunity we have, together, to do something that
is truly essential.
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP fi nancial measures that are
made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance.
This letter also includes certain historical information on strategic imperatives revenue which has
been measured on a consistent basis. For information about the company’s fi nancial results
related to operating pre-tax income and operating earnings per share, on a continuing operations
Virginia M. Rometty basis, which are non-GAAP measures, see the company’s 2014 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13
to the Form 10-K submitted to the SEC on February 24, 2015. For reconciliation and other
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Offi cer information concerning these items refer to page 45 of the company’s 2014 Annual Report.

===== PAGE 10 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 9
WWhhaatt WWee AArree MMaakkiinngg
of this Moment:
AA yyeeaarr ooff ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn
OOnnee yyeeaarr aaggoo,, wwee ddeessccrriibbeedd oouurr ssttrraatteeggyy ttoo lleeaadd aa rraappiiddllyy
rreeoorrddeerriinngg iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn tteecchhnnoollooggyy iinndduussttrryy.. WWee ssaaiidd tthhaatt aa nneeww
era was driving the reinvention of all enterprises — including
our own. And we committed to accelerate that transformation.
IInn tthhee yyeeaarr tthhaatt ffoolllloowweedd,, tthhee ppaaccee ooff cchhaannggee ppiicckkeedd uupp,,
aanndd wwee mmaaddee mmuucchh pprrooggrreessss.. IInn tthhee ffoolllloowwiinngg ppaaggeess,, wwee sshhaarree
hhiigghhlliigghhttss ooff tthhaatt ssttoorryy —— ssoommee ooff tthhee wwaayyss wwee aarree::
• Transforming industries and professions with data.
• Remaking enterprise IT for the era of cloud.
• RReeiimmaaggiinniinngg wwoorrkk tthhrroouugghh mmoobbiillee aanndd ssoocciiaall tteecchhnnoollooggiieess..
• Rethinking the challenge of security.
• Creating new infrastructure for a new era.

===== PAGE 11 =====
10
Transforming
industries
and professions
with data
To mine and refi ne the world’s vast new natural resource
of Big Data requires a new class of advanced analytics.
IBM’s unmatched analytics capabilities draw upon more than
30 acquisitions and include nine Analytics Solutions Centers
with an ecosystem of more than 6,000 business partners.
Our global leadership in analytics was also key to last year’s
alliance between IBM and Twitter. Together, we will help
enterprises unlock insights from the 500 million Tweets
generated every day — bringing a whole new category of data
to the enterprise and using it to develop unique solutions for
fi nancial services, consumer products, retail and more.
THE WORLD’S FIRST COGNITIVE IBM WATSON SOLUTIONS
SYSTEM: IBM WATSON AND APPLICATIONS
IBM Watson enables entirely new A growing portfolio of Watson applications
kinds of discovery, as well as new ways is extending the expertise of leading
for humans and computers to work professionals — wealth managers,
together. In 2014 we turned this researchers, retailers and more — to their
technology breakthrough into a thriving, peers around the world. For example,
multidimensional business. Through the doctors at Bumrungrad International
cloud-based IBM Watson Ecosystem, Hospital in Bangkok treat 1.1 million patients
developers and partners can now embed from 190 countries each year, and will
cognitive computing APIs (application be using IBM Watson for Oncology,
program interfaces) into their apps. trained by Memorial Sloan Kettering
Since November 2014, 6,800 developers Cancer Center, to plan the most effective
have built more than 7,000 cognitive treatments based on each cancer
apps. Finally, IBM Watson Analytics patient’s profi le.
brings intuitive visualization and predictive
analytics to every business user.

===== PAGE 12 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 11
Business analytics
revenue was
$ 17B
in 2014
Business analytics
revenue increased
7%
in 2014
$ 1B
investment in IBM
Watson, including
$100 million dedicated
to venture capital
to support start-ups
IBM Watson doubled
its client base
every quarter in 2014.
It now spans
17
industries in
24 countries

===== PAGE 13 =====
12
Remaking
enterprise
SPEECH TO TEXT
(IBM WATSON)
IT for the era
of cloud
INTERNET OF THINGS
QUESTION AND ANSWER
(IBM WATSON)
TRADEOFF ANALYTICS
(IBM WATSON)
TIME SERIES DATABASE
CLOUDANT NoSQL DB
DASHDB
GEOSPATIAL ANALYTICS

===== PAGE 14 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 13
Cloud
revenue was
$ 7B
in 2014
Cloud revenue
increased
6 0%
in 2014
IBM’s cloud business has grown rapidly, thanks to increasing 4 6
client demand for high-value solutions across public, private and
hybrid clouds. Cloud revenue grew 60 percent, to $7 billion, IBM Cloud data
in 2014. One reason for this growth is that we understand the data centers worldwide
will be in place
and architectural requirements of enterprise clients. In 2014 we
by the end of 2015
globally scaled our hybrid cloud platform with new data centers.
These feature our SoftLayer “pod” design, giving clients local
access to virtual and bare metal servers, all integrated with low-
$ 4B
latency networking capabilities. IBM’s cloud footprint is designed
for a business IT future that will be both global and local.
invested in software-
as-a-service
acquisitions for
business professionals
IBM BLUEMIX FORGING PARTNERSHIPS
We are investing $1 billion in IBM Bluemix Our partnership with SAP is delivering
to give developers cloud-based tools to world-leading enterprise applications as
design, deploy and manage enterprise- services on the IBM Cloud. And our alliance
grade apps at start-up speed. It is offered with Chinese Internet giant Tencent will
on the IBM Cloud marketplace, which bring cloud-based transformation to that
features nearly 500 IBM and third-party country’s growing enterprise economy.
cloud services.
MAKING HYBRID REAL FOR
THE ENTERPRISE
Major innovations for hybrid cloud,
introduced in February 2015, offer clients
control, visibility and security as they use
open standards to break down barriers
among environments. As we advance
IBM’s leadership in this space, more
than half of our cloud development team
is devoted to hybrid cloud services and
platforms on open standards.

===== PAGE 15 =====
14
Reimagining
work
Mobile and social technologies are changing the way
organizations engage with the world, and especially with
individuals — consumers, employees, patients, students and
citizens. This means reimagining work itself — the ways in
which professionals in any field do their jobs. That’s why
enterprises are now building new systems of engagement,
infused with their unique expertise and integrated with their
critical business systems and data sets. Enabling people to
work smarter means putting more real-time information and
decision-making power literally in the palms of their hands,
integrated securely with business processes and workflow.
IBM MOBILEFIRST IBM INTERACTIVE EXPERIENCE
Drawing upon thousands of patents in Reimagining work also means
mobile and social, our IBM MobileFirst transforming how products and services
solutions, built for the cloud, provide more are created, delivered and used. We are
than 5,000 enterprise clients with security, globally expanding our hybrid consulting
data and analytics integration and end- and digital agency services to help
to-end device management. Our mobile clients create new, personalized models
revenue more than tripled in 2014. of engagement through data and design.
The 10 new IBM Interactive Experience
studios allow clients to work side-by-side
with researchers and consultants, as well
as experts in experience design, mobile
and digital marketing.

===== PAGE 16 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 15
1
NO.
IBM Interactive
Experience is
the world’s largest
digital agency
We now have
6,000
IBM mobile
consultants
and experts
100
industry specific
IBM MobileFirst
for iOS apps to be
developed
APPLE + IBM
Apple and IBM are developing intuitive
business apps for professionals across
multiple industries — from flight crews and
retailers, to bankers, financial advisors,
insurance agents, government caseworkers
and law enforcement officers. We currently
have 14 IBM MobileFirst for iOS apps in
market, and many more are planned by the
end of 2015. Built exclusively for iPhone and
iPad, these apps are delivered in a security-
rich environment, embedded with analytics
and linked to core enterprise processes.

===== PAGE 17 =====
16
Rethinking
the
challenge
of security

===== PAGE 18 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 17
Cybersecurity attacks can go undetected for months. Security for 15B
complex, 21st century enterprises is no longer only about building
“firewalls” to keep intruders out. It’s now a Big Data problem — which events monitored
is why IBM is the global leader in enterprise IT security. Our unique and managed
each day
analytics capabilities anticipate and protect against a fluid threat
landscape and a new generation of organized cybercriminals. IBM’s
intelligent immune systems can detect even the smallest anomalies,
Security revenue
in time to protect an organization’s vital data. increased
19%
SECURITY ANALYTICS SECURITY OPERATIONS CENTERS in 2014
Our security software and services help Over the past decade, we have spent
clients protect against advanced threats. nearly $2 billion on security research and
We offer analytics, fraud protection, development resulting in 3,700 security-
Double-digit
identity and access management, and related patents. Our 10 global Security
revenue growth
leading application, data and infrastructure Operations Centers manage and monitor
in security for
security capabilities — as well as cloud 15 billion events daily. We help protect
and mobile solutions to help clients more than 10,000 clients worldwide. 9
innovate without increasing risk. For
example, in 2014 IBM introduced the
straight quarters
Threat Protection System which
includes an end-to-end architecture of
analytics and forensics software that
helps organizations continuously prevent,
detect and respond to ongoing and
sophisticated cyberattacks, and in many
cases, eliminate the threat before the
damage has occurred.

===== PAGE 19 =====
18
Creating new
infrastructure
for a
new era
With the onset of real-time Big Data, hybrid clouds and
an increasingly mobile economy, companies’ IT infrastructures
face unprecedented demands. The world’s leading banks, oil
and gas companies, retailers, healthcare organizations and more
rely on IBM to run their systems of record, manage their data,
help to ensure their security and integrate their applications and
processes. Our hardware and software foundation is essential
to their business — and to ours. Which is why we continuously
reinvent our core. During the last 18 months, we have reimagined
the mainframe for the tremendous growth of mobile workloads,
created a breakout IBM Power Systems strategy focused on
open innovation, developed next-generation software defined
storage technology and made strategic moves across our portfolio
to combine the strengths of middleware, servers and storage
for a modern IT backbone. At the same time, we exited businesses
that do not offer similar opportunities for innovation and growth.

===== PAGE 20 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report 19
One z13 mainframe
can perform
30,000
transactions per
second
IBM software defined
storage can reduce
storage costs by up to
90%
IBM z13
The new z13, launched in January
2015, reinvents the mainframe for the
growing mobile economy. Capable
of processing 2.5 billion transactions
a day, it incorporates real-time
encryption and analytics to exceed
consumers’ expectations for security,
speed and response time.
POWER8
IBM debuted new Power Systems servers
that allow data centers to manage Big Data
with unprecedented speed, on an open
server platform. Built on IBM’s POWER8
technology, IBM Power Systems servers
are the result of a $2.4 billion investment
and three-plus years of development,
leveraging the innovations in hundreds of
IBM patents.
OPENPOWER SOFTWARE DEFINED STORAGE
Through the OpenPOWER Foundation, Leveraging more than 700 patents in
industry leaders are building innovative, this space, the IBM Spectrum Storage
custom systems based on the portfolio helps clients unify their
POWER architecture for fully optimized storage management, store data of all
industry and workload-specific solutions. types, and flexibly deploy storage either
Today, the OpenPOWER Foundation as software, as an appliance or as a
has more than 100 members, including cloud-based service.
founders Google, IBM, Mellanox, NVIDIA,
Tyan and new member Rackspace.

===== PAGE 21 =====
20 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013
Revenue $ 92,793 $ 98,367
Net income $ 12,022 $ 16,483
Income from continuing operations $ 15,751 $ 16,881
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 16,702 $ 18,356
Earnings per share of common stock (continuing operations)
Assuming dilution $ 15.59 $ 15.30
Basic $ 15.68 $ 15.42
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 16.53 $ 16.64
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 16,868 $ 17,485
Capital expenditures, net 3,779 3,768
Share repurchases 13,679 13,859
Cash dividends paid on common stock 4,265 4,058
Per share of common stock 4.25 3.70
At December 31: 2014 2013
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 8,476 $ 11,066
Total assets 117,532 126,223
Working capital 9,822 11,196
Total debt 40,804 39,718
Total equity 12,014 22,929
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 991 1,054
Market capitalization $158,920 $197,772
Stock price per common share $ 160.44 $ 187.57
* See pages 45 and 46 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Report of Financials 21
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED
Overview 22 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 23 A Significant Accounting Policies 86
Management Discussion Snapshot 23 B Accounting Changes 96
Description of Business 26 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 97
Year in Review 33 D Financial Instruments 103
Prior Year in Review 53 E Inventories 110
Other Information 64 F Financing Receivables 110
Looking Forward 64 G Property, Plant and Equipment 113
Liquidity and Capital Resources 65 H Investments and Sundry Assets 113
Critical Accounting Estimates 68 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 114
Currency Rate Fluctuations 71 J Borrowings 115
Market Risk 72 K Other Liabilities 118
Financing Risks 72 L Equity Activity 118
Cybersecurity 73 M Contingencies and Commitments 122
Employees and Related Workforce 73 N Taxes 124
Global Financing 73 O Research, Development and Engineering 127
P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 127
Report of Management 78 Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 128
R Stock-Based Compensation 128
Report of Independent Registered
S Retirement-Related Benefits 131
Public Accounting Firm 79
T Segment Information 145
U Subsequent Events 150
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Earnings 80
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 151
Comprehensive Income 81
Financial Position 82 Selected Quarterly Data 152
Cash Flows 83
Changes in Equity 84 Performance Graph 153
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 154
Stockholder Information 155

===== PAGE 23 =====
22 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW based on a simple mathematical model that translates current
The financial section of the International Business Machines Cor- period results in local currency using the comparable prior
por ation (IBM or the company) 2014 Annual Report includes the year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State ments for countries where the functional currency is the local country
and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State ments. This Over- currency. This information is provided so that certain finan-
view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective cial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations
regarding the information contained in the financial section. in foreign currency rates, thereby facilitating period- to-period
comparisons of business performance. See “Currency Rate
Organization of Information Fluctuations” on page 71 for additional information.
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide • Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual
readers with an overview of the business and a narrative on Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to
the company’s financial results and certain factors that the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
may affect its future prospects from the perspective of the Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying
company’s management. The “Management Discussion whole-dollar numbers.
Snap shot,” beginning on page 23, presents an overview of
the key performance drivers in 2014. Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 33, the In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational
Manage ment Discussion contains the results of operations results of the business, the company separates business results
for each reportable segment of the business and a discus- into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earn-
sion of the company’s financial position and cash flows. ings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure that
Other key sections within the Management Discussion excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges, retire-
include: “Looking Forward” on page 64, and “Liquidity and ment-related costs, discontinued operations and their related tax
Capital Resources” on page 65. impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amor-
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured tization of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related
as a stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section charges such as in-process research and development, transac-
is included in the Management Discussion beginning on tion costs, applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax
page 73. charges related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and
pages 80 through 85. These statements provide an overview others as non-operating. The company includes defined benefit
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost,
its financial position. amortization of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribu-
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. tion plans in operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s cost includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement
accounting policies (pages 86 through 96), acquisitions and benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amor-
divestitures (pages 97 through 102), detailed information on tized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/
specific items within the financial statements, certain contin- settlements and multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency
gencies and commitments (pages 122 to 124) and costs and other costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are
retirement-related plans information (pages 131 to 145). primarily related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have which are tied to financial market performance and the company
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles considers these costs to be outside the operational performance
generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). of the business.
• In October 2014, the company announced a definitive agree- Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a
ment to divest its Microelectronics business. The assets and view of operating earnings as described above provides increased
liabilities of the Microelectronics business are reported as transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the
held for sale at December 31, 2014. The operating results of business and the performance of the company’s pension plans;
the Microelectronics business are reported as discontinued improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts on
operations. Prior periods have been reclassified to conform operational performance; enables better comparison to peer com-
to this presentation in the Management Discussion, the panies; and allows the company to provide a long-term strategic
Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes, where view of the business going forward. The company’s reportable
applicable, to allow for a meaningful comparison of continu- segment financial results reflect operating earnings from continu-
ing operations. ing operations, consistent with the company’s management and
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant measurement system.
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in
foreign currency rates. Certain financial results are adjusted

===== PAGE 24 =====
Management Discussion 23
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
FORWARD-LOOKING AND The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS earnings for 2014 and 2013.
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may consti-
tute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private ($ in millions except per share amounts)
Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
which it is made; the company assumes no obligation to update
Net income as reported $12,022 $16,483 (27.1)%
or revise any such statements. Forward-looking statements are
Loss from discontinued operations,
based on the company’s current assumptions regarding future
net of tax (3,729) (398) NM
business and financial performance; these statements, by their
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $16,881 (6.7)%
nature, address matters that are uncertain to different degrees.
Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncer- Non-operating adjustments
(net of tax):
tainties and other factors that could cause actual results to be
materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this Acquisition-related charges 670 747 (10.3)
Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities Non-operating retirement-related
and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the company’s 2014 costs/(income) 280 729 (61.5)
Form 10-K filed on February 24, 2015. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $16,702 $18,356 (9.0)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
earnings per share $ 16.53 $ 16.64 (0.7)%
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
* S ee pages 45 and 46 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
earnings.
Yr.-to-Yr.
NM—Not meaningful
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change In 2014, the company reported $92.8 billion in revenue, and
Revenue $ 92,793 $ 98,367 (5.7)%* delivered $20.0 billion in pre-tax income and diluted earnings
Gross profit margin 50.0% 49.5% 0.5 pts. per share from continuing operations of $15.59 as reported and
$16.53 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The results of continu-
Total expense and other (income) $ 26,421 $ 28,440 (7.1)%
ing operations exclude a net loss from discontinued operations of
Total expense and other
$3.7 billion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013 related to the expected
(income)-to-revenue ratio 28.5% 28.9% (0.4) pts.
divestiture of the Microelectronics business. On a consolidated
Income from continuing
basis, net income in 2014 was $12.0 billion, with diluted earnings
operations before income taxes $ 19,986 $ 20,244 (1.3)%
per share of $11.90. The company generated $16.9 billion in cash
Provision for income taxes
from operations and $12.4 billion in free cash flow in 2014 enabling
from continuing operations $ 4,234 $ 3,363 25.9%
shareholder returns of $17.9 billion in gross common stock repur-
Income from continuing
chases and dividends.
operations $ 15,751 $ 16,881 (6.7)%
Total consolidated revenue decreased 5.7 percent as reported
Income from continuing
and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency
operations margin 17.0% 17.2% (0.2) pts.
(2 points) in 2014 versus 2013. In 2014, the company divested its
Loss from discontinued
industry standard server and customer care businesses. The com-
operations, net of tax $ (3,729) $ (398) NM
pany’s strategy is focused on leading in the areas with the most
Net income $ 12,022 $ 16,483 (27.1)%
value in enterprise information technology (IT), and in 2014 the
Earnings per share from company made tremendous progress in repositioning its portfolio
continuing operations:
and making investments to shift into these areas.
Assuming dilution $ 15.59 $ 15.30 1.9% The company’s portfolio includes: strategic imperatives for
Consolidated earnings per share— growth, recurring core franchises and high value transactional
assuming dilution $ 11.90 $ 14.94 (20.3)% businesses. These areas of the portfolio span across all of the
Weighted-average shares company’s business segments. Each area of the portfolio has
outstanding different business model characteristics and objectives. The com-
Assuming dilution 1,010.0 1,103.0 (8.4)% pany’s results in 2014 reflected these characteristics.
Assets** $117,532 $126,223 (6.9)% First, the company has a set of strategic imperatives for growth
that are focused on the market shifts in data, cloud and engage-
Liabilities** $105,518 $103,294 2.2%
ment. The model for these combined strategic imperatives is to
Equity** $ 12,014 $ 22,929 (47.6)%
deliver double-digit revenue growth, with high contribution from
* (4.0) percent adjusted for currency; (1.5) percent adjusted for divestitures and Software, which drives a more profitable business mix. In 2014,
currency.
revenue from cloud, analytics, mobile, social and security solutions
** At December 31.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 25 =====
24 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
combined increased 16 percent with double-digit growth in each secular challenges faced in some parts of the hardware business
quarter. In total, the strategic imperatives generated $25 billion as the company works through the transitions resulting from the
in revenue, which represented approximately 27 percent of total actions taken to reposition the hardware business for high value.
revenue. Business analytics revenue of $17 billion increased 7 per- In 2014, the company divested businesses that no longer fit its
cent year to year with growth led by the consulting business as strategic profile—industry standard servers, customer care busi-
the company helps clients extract value from their data. Cloud ness process outsourcing services and the announced divestiture
revenue of $7 billion was up 60 percent year to year as client of the Microelectronics business. These three businesses gener-
demand grows for higher-value cloud solutions across public, ated approximately $7 billion of revenue when reported in 2013, but
private and hybrid clouds. Cloud delivered as a service revenue had a pre-tax loss of approximately $500 million. The divestitures
increased approximately 75 percent to $3 billion in 2014, and exited reduce revenue but improve the company’s profit profile, consis-
the year with an annual run rate of $3.5 billion. Cloud revenue also tent with the shift to higher value.
includes the company’s foundational offerings where it provides From a segment perspective, Global Services revenue declined
software, hardware and services to clients to build private clouds. 3.5 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for the
In engagement, the mobile business more than tripled year to year divestitures (2 points) and currency (2 points). Global Technology
with strong growth in MobileFirst driven by the integrated portfo- Services (GTS) declined 3.7 percent as reported, but increased
lio of offerings. In addition, Social was up 3 percent and Security 2 percent adjusted for the divestitures (3 points) and currency
increased 19 percent year to year. (3 points) with growth in Outsourcing and Integrated Technology
The company is continuing to shift its investments and Services. Global Business Services revenue decreased 3.1 percent
resources to the strategic imperatives and solutions that address (1 percent adjusted for currency) with Application Outsourcing rev-
clients’ most critical needs. During 2014, the company spent enue down 8 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency). Software
approximately 6 percent of revenue in research and development revenue declined 1.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency).
and invested approximately $4 billion on capital investments— Total middleware revenue was flat as reported, but increased
supporting actions in a number of areas that will yield financial 1 percent at constant currency. Systems and Technology revenue
benefits in the future. For example: decreased 23.0 percent as reported and 17 percent adjusted for
• Launched Bluemix, the company’s cloud platform-as-a- the divested industry standard server business (5 points) and cur-
service for the enterprise. rency (1 point). Performance reflected the impact of the System z
• Investing to globally expand the SoftLayer cloud datacenters. product cycle as well as declines in Power Systems and Stor-
• Investing to bring Watson’s capabilities to the enterprise and age. In 2014, the company took significant actions to reposition
building a partner ecosystem, effectively creating a market the Systems and Technology business for higher value, and rein-
for cognitive computing. forced its commitment to driving innovation in high-end systems
• Introduced cloud application innovations around Watson and storage.
Analytics and Verse. From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets
• Launched POWER8, and building the OpenPOWER consortium. declined 4.3 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for the
• Formed a partnership with Apple for enterprise mobility, with divestitures (2 points) and currency (1 point). Growth markets reve-
Twitter for big data, and with SAP and Tencent for cloud. nue decreased 9.9 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for
the divestitures (3 points) and currency (4 points) compared to the
The recurring core franchises include the annuity businesses, and prior year. Within the growth markets, the BRIC countries (Brazil,
the highly recurring portions of the transactions business, such as Russia, India and China) decreased 10.7 percent as reported
mainframe revenue from the largest clients. This content has annu- and 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency
ity characteristics, and in many cases, it supports mission critical (3 points).
processes for clients. The model for these combined businesses The consolidated gross profit margin of 50.0 percent improved
is to have stable revenue, with improving margins. In 2014, rev- 0.5 points year to year. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
enue was down approximately 3 percent with a modest decline in of 50.6 percent increased 0.1 points compared to the prior year
margin. The decline was primarily driven by the mainframe product primarily driven by an improved mix toward Software.
cycle and currency. Total expense and other (income) decreased 7.1 percent in 2014
The company’s high-value transactional businesses include versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and
project-based work in services, transactional software, Power Sys- other (income) decreased 6.3 percent compared to the prior year.
tems and Storage—in areas other than the strategic imperatives.
The objective for these businesses is to optimize the business
model and maintain margins. In 2014, revenue declined year to year,
with gross margins over 40 percent. Performance reflected the

===== PAGE 26 =====
Management Discussion 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The year-to-year drivers were approximately: At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) and marketable securities at year end was $8.5 billion, a decrease
• Currency* (1) point (1) point of $2.6 billion from December 31, 2013. Key drivers in the balance
• Acquisitions** 2 points 2 points sheet and total cash flows were:
• Base expense (8) points (7) points Total assets decreased $8.7 billion ($2.7 billion adjusted for
currency) from December 31, 2013 driven by:
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. • Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($3.4 billion), property,
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is plant and equipment ($3.1 billion) driven primarily by the
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.
expected divestiture of the Microelectronics business
($2.4 billion), cash and cash equivalents ($2.2 billion) and
The reported base expense reflects not only the ongoing run rate total receivables ($1.7 billion); partially offset by
of the business, but also the impact of divestitures and work- • Increased deferred taxes ($2.2 billion).
force rebalancing charges. The company recorded pre-tax gains
of $1.6 billion in 2014 related to the divestitures of the industry Total liabilities increased $2.2 billion ($7.0 billion adjusted for cur-
standard server ($1.4 billion) and customer care ($0.2 billion) busi- rency) from December 31, 2013 driven by:
nesses. Workforce rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1.5 billion, • Increases in pension liabilities ($2.0 billion) and total debt
an increase of $0.4 billion year to year. Excluding the gains from ($1.1 billion).
the divested businesses and the impact of workforce rebalancing
charges, operating (non-GAAP) base expense decreased 3 points Total equity of $12.0 billion decreased $10.9 billion from Decem-
year to year versus the 7 point as reported decrease. Within ber 31, 2013 as a result of:
base expense, the company is continuing to shift resources and • Increased treasury stock ($13.5 billion) primarily from share
spending to areas with the most opportunity—including Watson, repurchases, and increased losses in accumulated other
SoftLayer, Bluemix and support of strategic partnerships, including comprehensive income/(loss) ($6.3 billion), driven primarily
the Apple partnership. by the year-end remeasurement of the retirement-related
Pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 1.3 per- liabilities; partially offset by
cent and the pre-tax margin was 21.5 percent, an increase of • Higher retained earnings ($7.8 billion) and higher common
1.0 points versus 2013. The continuing operations effective tax stock ($1.1 billion).
rate for 2014 was 21.2 percent, an increase of 4.6 points versus
The company generated $16.9 billion in cash flow provided by
the prior year primarily driven by benefits in the 2013 rate associ-
operating activities, a decrease of $0.6 billion when compared
ated with discrete items. Income from continuing operations of
to 2013, driven primarily by a higher level of cash tax payments
$15.8 billion decreased 6.7 percent and the net income margin was
($1.7 billion). Net cash used in investing activities of $3.0 billion
17.0 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2013. Losses from
was $4.3 billion lower than 2013, primarily due to a decrease in
discontinued operations, net of tax, were $3.7 billion in 2014 com-
cash used for acquisitions ($2.4 billion) and an increase in cash
pared to $0.4 billion 2013. Net income of $12.0 billion decreased
provided from divestitures ($2.1 billion). Net cash used in financing
$4.5 billion year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income
activities of $15.5 billion increased $5.6 billion compared to the
from continuing operations decreased 4.4 percent year to year
prior year, driven primarily by lower net cash proceeds from total
and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing
debt ($5.2 billion).
operations improved 0.3 points to 22.8 percent versus the prior
In 2014, the company made significant progress in its con-
year. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations
tinuing transformation, investing to position the business for the
of $16.7 billion decreased 9.0 percent and the operating (non-
longer term. In January 2015, the company disclosed that it is
GAAP) income margin from continuing operations of 18.0 percent
expecting GAAP earnings in the range of $14.35 to $15.10 and
decreased 0.7 points. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
operating (non-GAAP) earnings between $15.75 and $16.50 per
rate from continuing operations in 2014 was 21.0 percent versus
diluted share from continuing operations for 2015. The company
17.0 percent in 2013.
also stated that it expects free cash flow in 2015 to be relatively
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of
flat compared to 2014.
$15.59 increased 1.9 percent year to year reflecting the benefits
For the first quarter of 2015, the company expects mid sin-
of the common stock repurchase program. In 2014, the company
gle-digit earnings per share growth from continuing operations,
repurchased 71.5 million shares of its common stock. Operat-
primarily driven by the large workforce rebalancing charge that
ing (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $16.53 decreased
was recorded in the first quarter of 2014.
0.7 percent versus the prior year driven primarily by the impacts
of decreased revenue and the higher tax rate, partially offset by
the impact of share repurchases. Diluted earnings per share from
discontinued operations was ($3.69) in 2014 compared to ($0.36)
in 2013.

===== PAGE 27 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS 1. Our Strategic Imperatives
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the Data: transforming industries and professions
SEC on February 24, 2015 for a more detailed version of this Des- Fueled by the proliferation of mobile devices, social media and the
cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.” infusion of technology into virtually all aspects of business, data
is the world’s new natural resource. Without powerful analytics,
The company creates value for clients through integrated solu-
however, it is just data.
tions and products that leverage: data, information technology,
Across all industries, enterprises are working hard to harvest
deep expertise in industries and business processes, and a broad
new insights from the explosion of available data—the new basis
ecosystem of partners and alliances. IBM solutions typically create
for today’s competitive advantage. The advantage for enterprises
value by enabling new capabilities for clients that transform their
increases as they apply more sophisticated approaches to refin-
businesses and help them engage with their customers and
ing their data, turning them into insights that are actionable and
employees in new ways. These solutions draw from an industry-
add value. The advent of cognitive computing, which mirrors the
leading portfolio of consulting and IT implementation services,
same cognitive process that people use every day to understand
cloud and cognitive offerings, and enterprise systems and software;
the world around them, is profoundly redefining the relation-
all bolstered by one of the world’s leading research organizations.
ship between humans and information. Cognitive systems learn,
navigate the language and protocols of expert communities, and
Strategy
communicate in natural language.
In a time of unprecedented technological change, IBM’s strategy
IBM has invested more than $26 billion, including over $17
remains one of innovation and a constant drive to deliver higher
billion on more than 30 acquisitions, to build its capabilities in
value for our clients.
big data and analytics. One third of IBM Research’s spending is
focused on data, analytics and cognitive computing.
Key tenets of the company’s strategy include:
In 2014, IBM reported nearly $17 billion in business analyt-
1. Our strategic imperatives: Data, cloud and engagement are ics revenue, and the company established the Watson Group
fundamentally transforming the IT industry, the company and our to develop and commercialize cognitive computing innovations.
clients’ businesses. The tremendous growth of data is redefin- The company has committed a $1 billion investment to Watson,
ing today’s competitive advantage. With data as the world’s new including $100 million dedicated to venture investments to support
“natural resource,” it is fundamentally transforming industries and start-ups building cognitive apps through the Watson Developer
professions. Yet as with all natural resources, only by refining data Zone on Bluemix. The company is also making Watson more
into actionable insights through analytics does it become valuable widely available through the Watson Ecosystem, which has grown
to the customer’s business. Cloud computing—the delivery of IT to more than 160 partners with nearly 4,000 future partners seek-
and business processes as digital services—offers opportunities ing to build a new generation of cognitive apps. IBM also launched
for enterprises to reinvent not just their operations, but their entire Watson Analytics, a breakthrough natural language-based cogni-
business model and approaches to innovation. Engagement, tive service that provides instant access to powerful predictive
including mobile and social technologies, is profoundly changing and visual analytic tools for businesses. Through Watson Analyt-
how people interact and the way work gets done. Finally, these ics, IBM is extending analytics to the end user, not just the data
transformations are all supported and protected by high levels scientist. IBM’s goal is to give every business professional access
of security to ensure privacy and integrity of action. These three to advanced cognitive-powered predictive analytics, coupled with
imperatives—data, cloud and engagement—are the foundation of new forms of data.
IBM’s strategy today and its vision for the future. In addition in 2014, the company made bold moves by estab-
lishing key alliances. In the data space, the company announced a
2. Our unique strength: Our ability to connect new technologies ground-breaking partnership with Twitter to incorporate Twitter’s
with the systems currently running today’s enterprises is a key massive data streams into IBM’s cloud-based analytics, customer
value-added service and market differentiator for IBM. Clients engagement platforms and consulting services. Enterprises will
today want more than just adopting new technologies—they want now be able to understand customer sentiment more deeply and
IBM to fuse new solutions with their existing systems. This “bring- anticipate sudden shifts in moods and markets by tapping into the
ing together” is what the company calls Hybrid Cloud, and IBM is Twitter data in powerful new ways. This capability will also allow
uniquely able to bring this value to its clients. clients to integrate Twitter data into their own cloud services and
mobile apps.
3. Our migration to higher levels of business value: Clients look
to IBM to solve their business challenges and opportunities rather
than just providing technology. Our evolution over decades—from
hardware to software and services, and increasingly to full-fledged
business solutions—reflects this critical shift in meeting client
needs. IBM brings together the full breadth of its integrated offer-
ings and industry expertise to be essential to its clients and deliver
higher value.

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud: reinventing IT Engagement: re-imagining work
Cloud is at the heart of the digital revolution. No enterprise is Social, mobile and unprecedented access to data are changing
untouched by this revolution and the shifts are occurring rapidly. how individuals and institutions work together. A new class of
Enterprises are benefitting from cloud by using it to transform customer has emerged: one who is empowered with knowledge,
their IT and business processes into digital services. Much has enriched by networks and expects value in return for sharing infor-
been written about how cloud enables the sharing of infrastruc- mation. Enterprises must create a systematic approach to engage
ture—this is true. However the real promise of cloud is much more these newly empowered customers through more personalized
profound. By forcing greater levels of standards up and down the interactions. IBM calls these new forms of interactions “engage-
technology value chain, new products and services, and even ment”—and includes social collaboration and mobile—both
entire business models, are able to be created in weeks rather underpinned by high levels of security.
than months or years. In 2014, the mobile, social and security portfolio generated
Cloud is a catalyst for innovation. IBM has invested more than double-digit growth with mobile revenue more than tripling versus
$8 billion to acquire 18 companies related to cloud, and is investing 2013, security revenue up 19 percent and social business growing
more than $1 billion to expand its global footprint to 40 datacen- 3 percent. In addition, IBM has acquired 23 companies related to
ters worldwide. IBM now has more than 120 software-as-a-service mobile, social and security.
(SaaS) offerings, and IBM Cloud supports 24 of the top 25 Fortune On the mobile front, IBM and Apple formed an historic part-
500 companies, driving $7 billion of revenue for cloud-based solu- nership to transform enterprise mobility as we know it today.
tions in 2014. Together, IBM and Apple are joining forces to bring the ease-of-use
• SoftLayer is the foundation for IBM’s expansive infrastruc- of personal apps to the enterprise environment. Together, the two
ture-as-a-service portfolio. It offers bare metal, private cloud companies are bringing the first wave of industry-specific apps to
and virtual server instances, which means it can cover many the market—targeting the needs of individual workers and helping
different workloads with unprecedented performance. Soft- to solve long-standing industry challenges.
Layer offers a built-in private network which can handle huge In addition, MobileFirst remains IBM’s unified approach to help
capacity and gives users the ability to isolate public/private clients and partners deliver best-in-class mobile solutions, take
networks with controls for access and location of data. advantage of more commercial opportunities and provide a supe-
• Bluemix is IBM’s platform-as-a-service, built on the open rior customer experience.
standards foundation of Cloud Foundry and powered by On the social collaboration front, in 2014, IDC named IBM the
SoftLayer’s cloud infrastructure. SoftLayer offers cloud- worldwide market share leader in Enterprise Social Software for
based services, APIs and leading third-party services to the fifth consecutive year.(1) In addition, IBM Verse, powered by IBM
developers in an integrated platform. Bluemix also allows analytics and advanced search, is a new cloud-based messag-
them to mix and match different tools to build apps in ing and social collaboration solution to manage the workday. It
the cloud for mobile, Web, big data and analytics—to name provides a seamless user experience across social networking,
just a few. meetings, chat, documents, mail, and an array of intelligent, secu-
• IBM Cloud marketplace brings together the company’s vast rity-rich and engaging social apps on mobile devices or the Web.
portfolio of cloud capabilities, delivering a self-service, digital Security is a boardroom-level issue. It is also a key enabler
experience for developers, IT and business leaders. Visitors for the continued growth of data, cloud and engagement. Enter-
have access to a growing portfolio of cloud capabilities from prises—and their clients—demand that these activities be secure
IBM and qualified third-party vendors. Open integration as a requirement for participation.
including pre-built APIs and hybrid options enable enterprise The magnitude, sophistication and complexity of today’s secu-
integration and composable business models. rity threats are growing. With the proliferation of data on mobile
devices, in social media and in the cloud, breaches are more vis-
The IBM Cloud is the most powerful choice for enterprise-grade ible and occur on a heightened scale. IBM Security solutions use
environments—bringing unparalleled levels of security, perfor- sophisticated analytics to identify and thwart attacks in real time—
mance and scalability. As a result, in 2014, IBM formed a strategic protecting our clients’ information, processes and people.
alliance with SAP to run its business applications on IBM’s cloud. IBM Security brings to our clients high-end consulting,
advanced fraud and threat protection, identity and access man-
agement, application and data security, mobile and cloud security,
network and end-point protection with services for cloud.
(1) I DC Worldwide Enterprise Social Networks 2014–2018 Forecast and 2013 Vendor
Shares, July 23, 2014.

===== PAGE 29 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2. Our Unique Strength Summary
Data, cloud and engagement are powerful forces changing the One constant throughout IBM’s over 100-year history has been the
landscape of technology and businesses. However, enterprise need to continually transform the company in an ever-changing
clients need more. Enterprises need to bring this new world of industry. Our industry, our clients—and IBM itself—is in the midst
technology together with the existing systems that currently run of such a fundamental transformation.
their businesses if they are to capture their full value. This combina- This is a transformation of unparalleled growth and promise:
tion is what we refer to as Hybrid Cloud. • The promise of technology to bring extraordinary levels of
Without bringing these worlds together, these new tech- insight to human endeavors through advances in analytics
nologies become “islands” within the enterprise. For example, a and cognitive computing.
business that invests in a social media platform engages with and • The promise of the cloud as a catalyst for innovation, freeing
captures the sentiment of individual customers. These can be valu- enterprises to focus more on the uses of technology rather
able interactions. However, much deeper insight into the needs than just the technology itself.
and wants of an individual customer comes when combining the • The promise of enterprises engaging with their customers,
social media interactions with the historical purchase and engage- their employees and their business partners through richer,
ment records of that customer—as stored in existing systems. By more personalized means.
combining these insights, the enterprise personalizes interactions • All underscored by security to help protect the integrity of
in ways that are relevant and meaningful to that customer. every interaction.
IBM is unique in bringing this Hybrid world to its clients with our
unparalleled strength in both the existing and the new worlds of IT. We are excited about the prospects for growth and value for our
IBM supports its clients’ mission critical processes, and clients—and for IBM—and we look forward to helping our clients
remains the “go-to” platform for the enterprise. For example, transform their businesses for the future.
more than 90 percent of the top 100 banks and the top 25 U.S.
Business Model
retailers run on IBM systems. In addition, nearly half of the Fortune
100 companies outsource IT operations to IBM. The company’s The company’s business model is built to support two principal
leadership in enterprise computing provides the foundation for goals: helping enterprise clients to become more innovative, effi-
strategic partnerships as leading companies want to work with cient and competitive through the application of business insight
IBM, as evidenced by the Apple, SAP, Twitter and Tencent partner- and IT solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders.
ships announced in 2104. The business model has been developed over time through strate-
Combine this with the company’s strength in the new worlds gic investments in capabilities and technologies that have superior
of data, cloud and engagement—and IBM brings a unique and long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the value
important capability to the market. they deliver to clients.
The company’s global capabilities include services, software,
3. Our Migration to Higher Value systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad
Technology by itself does not create value for a business. Tech- mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
nology enables a business to achieve its aspirations by facilitating grated solutions to the company’s clients.
richer interactions with clients and ecosystems, by unlocking The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously
deeper insight and by enabling faster actions. changing market and economic environment. The company con-
IBM has continuously evolved its mission to deliver increasingly tinues to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position
higher levels of business value to its clients. Starting primarily as through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-
a hardware company, IBM has added a rich portfolio of software value areas. In addition, the company has transformed itself into
and services to add higher value. a globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall pro-
This next phase of IBM’s transformation will realize the full ductivity and is driving investment and expanding participation in
breadth of the portfolio by bringing higher-value added solutions markets with significant long-term opportunity.
to our clients. Examples include: This business model, supported by the company’s financial
• Using predictive analytics to reduce customer attrition rates model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash
through the IBM Customer Data solution. flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
• Detecting fraudulent claims before payments are made
Business Segments and Capabilities
through the IBM Counter Fraud solution.
• Preventing costly and unscheduled downtime of equipment The company’s major operations consists of five business seg-
through early detection of anomalies with the IBM Predictive ments: Global Technology Services and Global Business Services,
Asset Optimization solution. which the company collectively calls Global Services, Software,
Systems and Technology and Global Financing.
The focus on integrated solutions will make IBM a stronger partner
with its clients as the company takes another step in its continuous
evolution to higher levels of value.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services: is a critical component of the company’s strategy Technology Support Services (Maintenance Services): delivers
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to a complete line of support services from product maintenance
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software through solution support to maintain and improve the availability
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client of clients’ IT infrastructures.
solution requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global
Services segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
outsourcing and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across two
backlog provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within primary business areas: Consulting and Systems Integration and
Global Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech- Application Management Services. These professional services
nology Services and Global Business Services. deliver business value and innovation to clients through solu-
tions which leverage industry and business process expertise.
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra- The role of GBS is to drive initiatives that integrate IBM content
structure and business process services, creating business value and solutions and drive the progress of the company’s strategic
for clients through unique technology and IP integrated services imperatives. As clients transform themselves in response to market
within its global delivery model. By leveraging insights and experi- trends like big data, social and mobile computing, GBS helps cli-
ence drawn from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with ents use these technologies to reinvent relationships with their
applied innovation from IBM Research, clients gain access to customers and realize new standards of efficacy and efficiency
leading-edge, high-quality services with improved productivity, in the internal processes, data and applications that they use to
flexibility, cost and outcomes. run their businesses.
GTS Capabilities GBS Capabilities
Strategic Outsourcing: delivers comprehensive IT outsourcing ser- Consulting and Systems Integration: delivering client value with
vices dedicated to transforming clients’ existing infrastructures solutions in Strategy and Transformation, Application Innovation
to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk manage- Services, Enterprise Applications and Smarter Analytics. Consult-
ment and financial value. The company integrates long-standing ing is also focused on bringing to market client solutions that drive
expertise in service management and technology with the ability Smarter Commerce, Cloud, Mobile and Social Business.
to exploit the power of new technologies from IBM systems and
software, such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, Application Management Services: delivers application manage-
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to ment, maintenance and support services for packaged software,
achieve business objectives. as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered
through advanced capabilities in areas such as application test-
Global Process Services: included within Strategic Outsourcing, ing and modernization, cloud application services, the company’s
delivers a range of offerings consisting of standardized through highly differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry
transformational solutions including processing platforms and knowledge and the standardization and automation of applica-
business process outsourcing. These services deliver improved tion management.
business results to clients through the strategic change and/or
operation of the client’s business processes, applications and Software consists primarily of middleware and operating sys-
infrastructure. Global Process Services will be integrated within tems software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate
Global Business Services beginning in 2015. systems, processes and applications across a standard software
platform to improve their business results, solve critical prob-
Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project- lems and gain competitive advantage within their industries. IBM
based and managed services that enable clients to transform and middleware is designed on open standards, making it easier to
optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and integrate disparate business applications, developed by different
productivity, while reducing costs. The standardized portfolio is methods and implemented at different times. Operating systems
built around key assets and patented software, and incorporates are the software engines that run computers. Approximately
best practices and proven methodologies that ensure predictive 70 percent of external Software segment revenue is annuity based,
quality of delivery, security and compliance. coming from recurring license charges, software sold “as a ser-
vice” and ongoing post-contract support. The remaining revenue
Cloud: delivers a comprehensive set of cloud services ranging relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which clients
from assisting clients with building their own private clouds, to pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically, the
building customized dedicated managed clouds, to allowing cli- sale of OTC software includes one year of post-contract support.
ents to leverage standardized cloud infrastructure services from Clients can also purchase ongoing post-contract support after
the SoftLayer and Cloud Managed Services offerings, to creating the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades and
hybrid environments linking their private and public workloads technical support.
together. This portfolio of cloud offerings spans across the GTS
business lines.

===== PAGE 31 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Capabilities Mobile: spans middleware and offers customers true end-to-end
WebSphere: delivers capabilities that enable organizations to run mobile solutions across platform and application development,
high-performance business applications. With these applications, mobile security, and mobile device management. Leveraging pow-
clients can integrate and manage business processes across their erful analytics and usage data, customers are provided with the
organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond ability to have more compelling interactions with their clients and
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture workforce, increasing touchpoints and deepening relationships.
(SOA), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social The mobile offerings provide the ability to increase workforce pro-
interactions, the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to ductivity through enhanced collaboration, improved knowledge
extend their reach and optimize interactions with their key con- sharing and increased response speed.
stituents. Smarter Commerce software helps companies better In January 2015, the company made several changes designed
manage and improve each step of their value chain and capitalize to more effectively align its key capabilities and resources to its
on opportunities for profitable growth, efficiency and increased strategic imperatives. These changes will enable the company to
customer loyalty. respond more quickly to critical client agendas and drive higher
value. Across Software, the company is transitioning its portfolio to
Information Management: enables clients to integrate, manage capture growth and continue to drive innovation. The focus will be
and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety of centered around analytics, security, and commerce—similar to the
sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their action the company implemented in 2014 with Watson—utilizing its
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real software assets to improve speed and agility in bringing integrated
value out of their data and use it to make better business decisions. solutions to its clients.
IBM’s middleware and integrated solutions include advanced
database management, information integration, data governance, Systems and Technology (STG) provides clients with innovative
enterprise content management, data warehousing, business ana- infrastructure technologies to help meet the new requirements of
lytics and intelligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics. data, cloud and engagement—from deploying advanced analytics,
to moving to digital service delivery with the cloud, and securing
Watson Solutions: the first commercially available cognitive com- mobile transaction processing. Approximately half of Systems and
puting platform that has the ability to interact in natural language, Technology’s server and storage sales transactions are through
processing vast amounts of big data, and learning from its interac- the company’s business partners; with the balance direct to end-
tions with people and computers. As an advisor, Watson is able user clients. In addition, Systems and Technology provides leading
to sift through and understand large amounts of data delivering semiconductor technology, products and packaging solutions for
insights with unprecedented speeds and accuracy. IBM’s own advanced technology needs.
Tivoli: helps clients optimize the value they get from their infrastruc- Systems and Technology Capabilities
tures and technology assets through greater visibility, control and Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to address
automation across their end-to-end business operations. These capacity, security, speed and compute power needs for busi-
asset management solutions foster integrated service delivery nesses, organizations and technical computing applications. After
for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint and the divestiture of the System x industry standard server business,
mobile device management, asset and facilities management, and the portfolio includes System z, a trusted enterprise platform for
storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software integrating data, transactions and insight, and Power Systems, a
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform system designed from the ground up for big data, optimized for
that enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise scale-out cloud and Linux, and delivering open innovation with
and prevent security breaches. OpenPOWER. The company is also a founding member of the
OpenPOWER foundation, a group of industry-leading companies
Workforce Solutions: enables businesses to connect people
working together to develop high-performance compute solutions
and processes for more effective communication and increased
based on the IBM POWER architecture.
productivity through collaboration, messaging and social network-
ing software. By remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients
IBM’s social business offerings help organizations reap real ben- to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital
efits associated with social networking, as well as create a more information. These solutions address critical client requirements
efficient and effective workforce. for information retention and archiving, security, compliance and
storage optimization including data deduplication, availability and
Rational: supports software development for both IT and com-
virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of software
plex embedded system solutions, with a portfolio of products and
defined storage solutions, disk and tape storage systems and
solutions supporting DevOps and Smarter Product Development,
Flash storage and solutions.
transforming the way lines of business, development and opera-
tions work together to deliver innovation via software.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Technology: the company’s continued leadership in systems Sales and Distribution
requires ongoing investments in semiconductor and material IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 175
science research and development that drives innovation that mat- countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribu-
ters for our clients. In 2014, the company announced a definitive tion of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and manufac- manages the IBM global footprint, with dedicated country-based
turing operations. This transaction is expected to close in 2015. operating units focused on delivering unique value and superior
experiences for clients. Within these units, client relationship
Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of information professionals work with integrated teams of consultants, prod-
technology systems, software and services by providing financ- uct specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to enable clients’
ing solutions in the areas where the company has the expertise. business growth and innovation. These teams deliver value by
The financing arrangements are predominantly for products or understanding the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring
services that are critical to the end users’ business operations. together capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of
These financing contracts are entered into after a comprehensive Business Partners to develop and implement solutions.
credit evaluation and are secured by legal contracts. As a captive By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s
financier, Global Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for
of its client base and a clear insight into the products and services local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and
financed. These factors allow the business to effectively manage timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic
two of the major risks, credit and residual value, associated with units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas.
financing while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financ- IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by
ing also maintains a long term partnership with the companies’ leveraging industry skills with marketing, Inside Sales and local
clients through various stages of IT asset life cycle—from initial Business Partner resources.
purchase and technology upgrades to asset disposition decisions. The company continues to invest to capture the long-term
opportunity in key growth markets around the world—China, India
Global Financing Capabilities and countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle
Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal East, Africa and Latin America. The company’s major markets
clients for terms up to seven years. Assets financed are primarily IT include the G7 countries of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
products and services where the company has expertise. Internal the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) plus Austria,
financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term the Bahamas, Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark,
client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Netherlands,
portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland.
management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at
arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions. Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate the
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts
company from its competitors. IBM annually invests approximately
receivable financing to dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM
6 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth,
products.
high-value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and
the company’s business units through global labs on near-term
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: used equipment is returned
and mid-term innovations. It contributes many new technologies
from lease transactions, or may be surplus equipment inter-
to IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients address their most
nally or externally purchased. These assets may be refurbished
difficult challenges. IBM Research also explores the boundaries of
or upgraded and sold or leased to new or existing clients both
science and technology—from nanotechnology to future systems,
externally or internally. Externally remarketed equipment reve-
big data analytics, secure clouds and to IBM Watson, a ‘‘cognitive’’
nue represents sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally
learning system.
remarketed equipment revenue primarily represents used equip-
IBM Research also focuses on differentiating IBM’s services
ment that is sold internally to Systems and Technology and Global
businesses, providing new capabilities and solutions. It has the
Services. Systems and Technology may also sell the equipment
world’s largest mathematics department of any public company,
that it purchases from Global Financing to external clients.
enabling IBM to create unique analytic solutions and actively
engage with clients on their toughest challenges.
IBM Worldwide Organizations
In February 2015, the company announced a new IBM Research
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s deliv-
lab to be located in South Africa. This will be IBM Research’s 13th
ery of value to its clients:
global lab.
• Sales and Distribution
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property
• Integrated Supply Chain

===== PAGE 33 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2014, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other Integrated Supply Chain
company for the 22nd consecutive year. IBM’s 7,534 patents IBM has an extensive integrated supply chain, procuring materials
awarded in 2014 represent a diverse range of inventions poised and services globally. In 2014, the company also managed approxi-
to enable significant innovations that will position the company to mately $21.8 billion in procurement spending for its clients through
compete and lead in the emerging opportunities represented by the Global Process Services organization. The supply, manufactur-
cloud, big data and analytics, security, social and mobile. These ing and logistics operations are integrated in one operating unit
inventions also will advance the new era of cognitive systems that has optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and streamlin-
where machines will learn, reason and interact with people in more ing internal processes has improved sales force productivity and
natural ways. It was the most U.S. patents ever awarded to one operational effectiveness and efficiency. Supply chain resiliency
company in a single year. enables IBM to reduce its risk during marketplace changes.
The company continues to actively seek intellectual property The company continues to derive business value from its own
(IP) protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on globally integrated supply chain providing a strategic advantage
other initiatives designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its supply
IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business trans-
products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM prod- formation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients’
ucts and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
various proprietary IP rights are important to its success, IBM Utilizing analytics, mobile, cloud and social—with numerous proj-
believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on ects, has allowed the integrated supply chain to drive positive
any particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents business outcomes for the company and its clients.
or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number of patents,
which vary in duration, relating to its products.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2014 versus 2013 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items; see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 145 to
150 for additional information.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $37,130 $38,551 (3.7)% 1.6%*
Gross margin 38.3% 38.1% 0.2 pts.
Global Business Services 17,825 18,396 (3.1)% (1.1)%
Gross margin 30.8% 30.9% 0.0 pts.
Software 25,434 25,932 (1.9)% (0.9)%
Gross margin 88.6% 88.8% (0.2) pts.
Systems and Technology 9,996 12,988 (23.0)% (16.8)%*
Gross margin 39.5% 40.8% (1.3) pts.
Global Financing 2,034 2,022 0.6% 3.0%
Gross margin 49.4% 45.6% 3.7 pts.
Other 374 478 (21.7)% (20.4)%
Gross margin (215.0)% (195.6)% (19.4) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $92,793 $98,367 (5.7)% (1.5)%*
Total consolidated gross profit $46,407 $48,684 (4.7)%
Total consolidated gross margin 50.0% 49.5% 0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 416 388 7.2%
Acquisition-related charges — 5 (100.0)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 173 629 (72.4)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $46,996 $49,706 (5.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.6% 50.5% 0.1 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.

===== PAGE 35 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
In 2014, the Global Services segments, Global Technology Services pre-tax margin decreased 0.8 points to 16.5 percent. Total outsourc-
(GTS) and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered revenue of ing revenue of $24,520 million decreased 6.3 percent as reported,
$54,954 million, a decrease of 3.5 percent as reported, but an but was flat year to year when adjusted for currency (2 points) and
increase of 1 percent adjusted for the divestitures of the customer the divestitures (4 points). Total transactional revenue of $23,581
care and industry standard server businesses (2 points) and cur- million decreased 0.4 percent, but increased 2 percent adjusted
rency (2 points). Pre-tax income decreased 8.4 percent and the for currency.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $54,954 $56,947 (3.5)% 0.7%*
Global Technology Services $37,130 $38,551 (3.7)% 1.6%*
Outsourcing 20,770 22,060 (5.8) 1.2*
Integrated Technology Services 9,506 9,380 1.3 3.7
Maintenance 6,853 7,111 (3.6) (0.1)*
Global Business Services $17,825 $18,396 (3.1)% (1.1)%
Outsourcing 3,750 4,097 (8.5) (6.1)
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,075 14,298 (1.6) 0.4
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Global Technology Services revenue of $37,130 million decreased July, the company announced a strategic partnership with Apple
3.7 percent as reported in 2014 compared to the prior year, but to deliver a new class of “enterprise ready” MobileFirst business
increased 2 percent adjusted for currency (3 points) and the dives- applications for iOS combining mobility and analytics. In the fourth
titures (3 points). Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue quarter of 2014, the first applications were launched with additional
grew 1.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) compared to applications focused on healthcare, energy and utilities expected
2013. The SoftLayer platform, which provides highly differenti ated in the first quarter of 2015. GBS Outsourcing revenue decreased
solutions for clients looking to deploy across public, private or 8.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2014, but had
hybrid clouds all unified on one platform, had strong performance. sequential improvement in the year-to-year growth rate in the last
Throughout the year, SoftLayer attracted new workloads to the two quarters of the year adjusted for currency. Throughout the
platform and the company is investing to expand its datacenter year, performance was impacted by pricing pressure and client
footprint globally. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 5.8 percent renegotiations, as well as a reduction in elective projects.
as reported in 2014, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency
(2 points) and the divestitures (5 points). Growth was driven by ($ in millions)
performance from the substantial new contracts brought on during Yr.-to-Yr.
2013. In 2014, clients continued to sign large outsourcing engage- Percent/
Margin
ments that leverage the company’s cloud, business analytics and For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
mobile solutions. Maintenance revenue decreased 3.6 percent Global Services
but was flat year to year adjusted for the divestiture of the industry
Global Technology Services
standard server business (1 point) and currency (2 points).
External gross profit $14,237 $14,691 (3.1)%
Global Business Services revenue of $17,825 million decreased
External gross profit margin 38.3% 38.1% 0.2 pts.
3.1 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior
year. Consulting and Systems Integration (C&SI) revenue declined Pre-tax income $ 6,340 $ 6,983 (9.2)%
1.6 percent as reported, but was flat adjusted for currency in 2014. Pre-tax margin 16.7% 17.6% (1.0) pts.
There was strong growth in the practices that are highly differenti- Global Business Services
ated in the marketplace which address cloud, analytics, mobile
External gross profit $ 5,493 $ 5,676 (3.2)%
and social, offset by declines in the more traditional parts of the
External gross profit margin 30.8% 30.9% 0.0 pts.
portfolio, such as back office implementations. As the new offer-
ings continue to become a larger part of the portfolio they will Pre-tax income $ 2,999 $ 3,214 (6.7)%
contribute more meaningfully to the revenue performance. In Pre-tax margin 16.3% 16.8% (0.5) pts.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit margin increased 0.2 points to 38.3 percent in differentiation, such as solutions that address the strategic imper-
2014. Pre-tax income decreased 9.2 percent to $6,340 million and atives, there was good growth and gross margin performance.
the pre-tax margin declined 1.0 points to 16.7 percent compared However, in the more traditional parts of the portfolio, there was
to the prior year. While there was a benefit from the pre-tax gain continued price and profit pressure. The company will continue
of $202 million related to the customer care divestiture in 2014, to invest in the strategic imperatives and accelerate the transi-
this benefit was offset by investments in areas like new resil- tion to global delivery. Additionally, Global Process Services, the
iency centers, additional security skills and the SoftLayer cloud business process outsourcing business, will be integrated with
hub expansion, plus the lost profit from the divested businesses. GBS beginning in 2015 to create a seamless end-to-end business
Overall, the profit performance in GTS reflects the actions that transformation capability for clients.
the company has taken to transform the business. The company
has invested in its strategic imperatives to accelerate growth, Global Services Backlog
continued to optimize its delivery platform through workforce The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2014
rebalancing and broader use of automation, and divested busi- was $128 billion. This included a backlog reduction in 2014 of $3.7
nesses, all impacting the year-to-year results. While these actions billion associated with the customer care and industry standard
all have near-term impacts to profit, they position the business server divestitures. Adjusting for the divested businesses, backlog
more effectively going forward and will enable it to deliver more was down 7.5 percent as reported, but flat adjusted for currency
value to clients. year to year. The estimated transactional backlog at December
GBS gross profit margin of 30.8 percent was flat year to 31, 2014 decreased 7.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency)
year compared to 2013. Pre-tax income decreased 6.7 percent from the December 31, 2013 levels. The estimated outsourcing
to $2,999 million and the pre-tax margin declined 0.5 points to backlog decreased 11.0 percent as reported, but increased 1 per-
16.3 percent. In 2014, profit was impacted by lower revenue on a cent adjusted for the customer care divestiture (4 points) and
relatively fixed cost base. In areas where the company has strong currency (8 points).
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Backlog
Total backlog $128.4 $142.8 (10.1)% (2.9)%
Adjusted for divested businesses (7.5) (0.2)
Outsourcing backlog 80.8 90.8 (11.0) (3.3)
Adjusted for customer care (7.1) 0.8
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s
GBS Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Main- commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement,
tenance. Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Outsourcing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and
and Systems Integration. Total backlog is intended to be a state- Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract exten-
ment of overall work under contract and therefore does include sions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the
Maintenance. Backlog estimates are subject to change and are extent of the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included
affected by several factors, including terminations, changes in the in signings as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state,
scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for revenue where revenues equal renewals.
not materialized and adjustments for currency. Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
the value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services con- company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
tract. There are no third-party standards or requirements governing recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or
the calculation of signings. The calculation used by management coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.

===== PAGE 37 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Total signings $51,569 $63,203 (18.4)% (15.7)%
Outsourcing signings $26,517 $35,027 (24.3)% (21.1)%
Transactional signings 25,052 28,176 (11.1) (8.9)
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,434 $25,932 (1.9)% (0.9)%
Middleware $21,474 $21,557 (0.4)% 0.6%
Key Branded Middleware 17,098 17,322 (1.3) (0.2)
WebSphere Family 2.7 3.5
Information Management (4.1) (3.0)
Workforce Solutions (6.1) (5.1)
Tivoli 2.0 3.0
Rational (3.3) (1.3)
Other middleware 4,376 4,235 3.3 4.2
Operating systems 2,119 2,447 (13.4) (12.6)
Other 1,841 1,929 (4.5) (3.7)
Software revenue of $25,434 million decreased 1.9 percent (1 per- been providing more flexibility on how clients deploy its software
cent adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. acquired through enterprise licensing agreements. This enables
Middleware decreased 0.4 percent (increased 1 percent adjusted clients to more effectively manage their capacity and commit to
for currency) while operating systems were down 13.4 percent the company’s platforms for the long term, however, it does impact
(13 percent adjusted for currency). The decline in operating sys- period transactional revenue.
tems impacted total software revenue growth year to year at Key branded middleware revenue, which accounted for
constant currency by approximately 1 point. The company had 67 percent of total Software revenue in 2014, decreased 1.3 per-
solid growth in many of its solution areas, including security, mobile cent (flat percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior
and cloud. In addition, across the software brands, software-as- year. While there was growth in several strategic areas like cloud,
a-service (SaaS) offerings grew rapidly throughout the year, mobile and security, other parts of the portfolio declined on a
increasing approximately 50 percent compared to 2013. In the first year-to-year basis.
quarter of 2014, the company launched Bluemix, a cloud platform- WebSphere revenue increased 2.7 percent (4 percent ad justed
as-a-service for the enterprise and, during the year, the Software for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Revenue per-
business completed five acquisitions adding to its capabilities formance was driven by growth in Application Server, Business
in mobile, cloud and security. Across Software, the company is Integration and Commerce offerings. In Commerce, there was
transitioning its portfolio to capture growth areas while continuing strong momentum in Commerce-as-a-service, which includes the
to drive innovation in its core franchises. It is growing and build- acquisitions of Silverpop and Aspera. MobileFirst, the comprehen-
ing capabilities in emerging areas like SaaS, mobile and security. sive portfolio of mobile software and services that enable clients
Performance in 2014 reflected business model changes that to manage, integrate and leverage mobile devices, contributed to
impacted the transactional revenue growth. Given clients’ sub- the significant growth of the company’s mobile business.
stantial investment in the IBM software platform, the company has

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Information Management revenue decreased 4.1 percent ($ in millions)
(3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
year. With the acquisition of Cloudant, the company has added Margin
database-as-a-service capability. Cloudant extends the com- For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
pany’s mobile and cloud platforms by enabling developers to Software
easily and quickly create next-generation mobile and Web-based External gross profit $22,533 $23,032 (2.2)%
applications.
External gross profit margin 88.6% 88.8% (0.2) pts.
Workforce Solutions revenue decreased 6.1 percent (5 percent
Pre-tax income $10,699 $11,106 (3.7)%
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Perfor-
Pre-tax margin 37.0% 38.1% (1.2) pts.
mance has been impacted by the transition from on premise Notes
to SaaS offerings. The company is working to transform this busi-
ness and build recurring revenue streams from the SaaS offerings. Software gross profit decreased 2.2 percent, with a gross profit
Tivoli revenue increased 2.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for margin of 88.6 percent. Software pre-tax income decreased
currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Year-to-year revenue 3.7 percent year to year and pre-tax margin declined 1.2 points.
growth was driven by security software, which grew at double Across software, the company continues to drive innovation and
digit rates again this year. As cybersecurity threats are a key issue capture growth areas, integrating analytics and security capabili-
faced by all customers, these strong results are being driven in ties that are needed to operate seamlessly in a hybrid environment.
part by incremental requirements for security with the expansion For example, the company is introducing several new offerings
into cloud and mobile computing. that further enable its analytics portfolio in a cloud environment.
Rational revenue decreased 3.3 percent (1 percent adjusted It recently announced IBM Verse, a cloud based email and col-
for currency) in 2014 year over year. laboration offering that integrates Watson capabilities. This type of
Operating systems revenue decreased 13.4 percent (13 percent continued innovation in offerings, together with expanding services
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to 2013. This decline was on the Bluemix platform-as-a-service, will better allow customers
primarily driven by declines in Power Systems. to move to a hybrid environment.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $9,996 $12,988 (23.0)% (16.8)%*
System z (23.3)% (22.6)%
Power Systems (18.9) (18.2)
Storage (12.0) (11.0)
System x (35.1) (34.9)
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Systems and Technology (STG) revenue of $9,996 million System z revenue decreased 23.3 percent (23 percent ad justed
decreased 23.0 percent as reported in 2014, 17 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year. The fourth quarter of 2014
for the divestiture of the industry standard server business marked the tenth quarter of the current product cycle. In Janu-
(5 points) and currency (1 point). In 2013, the STG business reported ary 2015, the company announced the z13, the new generation
a profit decline of $1,653 million compared to 2012. During 2014, the mainframe. The z13 system culminates a billion dollar investment
company worked to reposition this business and to stabilize profit. and five years of development, leverages the innovation of more
It divested the industry standard server business and announced than 500 new patents and represents a collaboration with more
the divestiture of the Microelectronics business. Performance in than 60 clients. The result of this effort is a mainframe that has the
2014 reflected year-to-year declines related to the System z prod- world’s fastest processor that can execute two-and-a-half billion
uct cycle as well as declines in Power Systems and Storage. STG transactions a day. With this generation of mainframe, the com-
grew profit in the fourth quarter, and was profitable for the year. pany has dramatically enhanced its capabilities around analytics,
Profit performance year to year was impacted by the divestiture
and currency, in addition to the revenue impacts.

===== PAGE 39 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
mobile, security and cloud to address the needs clients see in ($ in millions)
their businesses. These capabilities span from real-time insights Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
to real-time fraud detection in a system that can consistently run Margin
at 100-percent utilization with 100-percent uptime. The company For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
continues to innovate on the platform to address client needs and Systems and Technology
extend its leadership in high-end systems, a core franchise that External gross profit $3,945 $5,299 (25.6)%
has nearly doubled in installed capacity over the last five years.
External gross profit margin 39.5% 40.8% (1.3) pts.
Power Systems revenue decreased 18.9 percent (18 percent
Pre-tax income $ 34 $ 213 (84.1)%
adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. Although
Pre-tax margin 0.3% 1.6% (1.3) pts.
down year to year, there was sequential improvement in the year-
to-year revenue growth rate at constant currency in the last two
quarters of the year. The company has repositioned Power which is Systems and Technology’s gross profit margin of 39.5 percent
not only a systems business, but also an open chip processor and decreased 1.3 points versus the prior year. The decrease was
an IP income opportunity through the OpenPOWER foundation. In driven by lower margins in Power Systems (1.3 points) and Storage
June, scale-out systems based on POWER8 were introduced and (0.9 points), partially offset by an increase due to mix (0.7 points),
high-end POWER8-based enterprise systems were announced in driven by the divestiture of the industry standard server business.
October. These newly announced systems are highly scalable and Pre-tax income decreased $179 million or 84.1 percent and pre-tax
can handle the most data intensive, mission critical applications margin decreased 1.3 points in 2014 versus the prior year.
in the industry. In addition, the company saw continued expan- In 2014, the company took significant actions to reposition
sion of the OpenPOWER consortium, now with over 80 members, its Systems and Technology business for higher value, and rein-
14 of which are in greater China. Since the establishment of the forced its commitment to driving innovation in high-end systems
consortium a year ago, several offerings have been introduced and storage. It repositioned Power through the development of
by consortium members based on the POWER architecture. In the POWER8 systems which are built for cloud and big data,
addition, the company has initiated a strategic partnership with and it made available the POWER8 architecture through the
Suzhou PowerCore, which intends to use POWER architecture to OpenPOWER consortium to build an open ecosystem and an IP
develop and market processors for servers in China. opportunity. The company is divesting its Microelectronics busi-
Storage revenue decreased 12.0 percent (11 percent adjusted ness with future chip supply coming from an at-scale provider,
for currency) in 2014 compared to the prior year. However, at and has committed $3 billion of investment over five years in the
constant currency, it delivered sequential improvement in the next era of chip technology as it strengthens its semiconductor
year-to-year growth rate over the last three quarters of 2014. Full- research and development and systems innovation. The company
year performance included strong contribution from FlashSystem also divested System x, the industry standard server business,
and the Storwize portfolio. However, this was more than offset by and announced the z13, the new generation of the mainframe.
weakness in high-end disk and the continued wind-down of the With its portfolio repositioned and the introduction of the new
legacy storage-related OEM business. mainframe, this business segment should now see profit lever-
age going forward.
Global Financing
See pages 73 through 77 for an analysis of Global Financing’s seg-
ment results.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency*
Total revenue $92,793 $98,367 (5.7)% (1.5)%
Geographies $92,326 $97,800 (5.6)% (1.5)%
Americas 41,410 43,249 (4.3) (0.8)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 30,700 31,628 (2.9) (0.6)
Asia Pacific 20,216 22,923 (11.8) (4.1)
Major markets (4.3)% (1.0)%
Growth markets (9.9)% (3.2)%
BRIC countries (10.7)% (4.5)%
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Total geographic revenue of $92,326 million decreased 5.6 per- 1 percent adjusted for currency and divestitures. Australia, India
cent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and Korea, which are some of the larger countries within the Asia
and currency (2 points) in 2014 compared to the prior year. In total, Pacific growth markets, also declined compared to the prior year.
major market countries decreased 4.3 percent as reported and Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue decreased 10.7 per-
1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and currency (1 point). cent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points)
Growth market countries decreased 9.9 percent as reported and currency (3 points) compared to the prior year. On an adjusted
and 3 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency basis, this performance reflects growth in Brazil and Russia, more
(4 points) compared to 2013. than offset by the declines in China and India.
The year-to-year decline in growth markets revenue adjusted Americas revenue of $41,410 million decreased 4.3 percent as
for currency and the divestitures reflected growth in the Latin Amer- reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and
ican and Europe growth markets, more than offset by decreased currency (1 point) compared to the prior year. On an adjusted
revenue in the Asia Pacific growth markets. The Latin American basis, there was increased revenue in the growth markets offset
growth market countries decreased 1.0 percent as reported, but by year-to-year declines in the major market countries. Within the
grew 8 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and currency North American major markets, the U.S. declined 4.0 percent as
(7 points). Within Latin America, Brazil decreased 3.1 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points). Canada
reported, but grew 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (1 point) was down 9.8 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for
and currency (6 points). There was also growth in most other divestitures (1 point) and currency (7 points).
Latin American countries at constant currency. European growth Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue of $30,700 mil-
markets were down 5.3 percent as reported, but increased 1 per- lion decreased 2.9 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted
cent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (3 points) for divestitures (3 points) and offset by currency (1 point). Major
compared to the prior year. Asia Pacific growth market countries market countries were down 2.6 percent as reported and 1 per-
decreased 14.6 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for cent adjusted for divestitures (2 points), offset by currency (1 point).
divestitures (3 points) and currency (2 points). This performance This was offset by growth of 1 percent on an adjusted basis in the
was driven by China and several of the other larger growth market growth market countries. Major market performance adjusted for
countries. China decreased 17.2 percent as reported and 15 per- the divestitures and currency included growth in Germany, Italy
cent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (0 points), but and Spain, which was more than offset by declines in the UK and
reflected improvement in its sequential year-to-year growth rate France compared to the prior year.
in the last quarter of the year with strong software performance
and several large mainframe transactions. In the fourth quarter,
China revenue decreased 19.9 percent as reported, but declined

===== PAGE 41 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Asia Pacific revenue of $20,216 million decreased 11.8 percent Selling, General and Administrative
as reported and 4 percent adjusted for the divested businesses
($ in millions)
(3 points) and currency (5 points). Japan was down 7.6 percent
Yr.-to-Yr.
as reported, but increased 3 percent adjusted for divestitures Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
(3 points) and currency (8 points). On this basis, Japan reflected
Selling, general and
year-to-year growth in every quarter of 2014. However, this growth
administrative expense
was more than offset by declines in the Asia Pacific growth markets.
Selling, general and
administrative—other $18,532 $19,178 (3.4)%
Total Expense and Other (Income)
Advertising and promotional expense 1,307 1,294 1.1
($ in millions)
Workforce rebalancing charges 1,472 1,031 42.7
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Retirement-related costs 811 986 (17.8)
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Amortization of acquired
Total consolidated expense intangible assets 374 370 1.2
and other (income) $26,421 $28,440 (7.1)% Stock-based compensation 350 435 (19.4)
Non-operating adjustments Bad debt expense 334 156 113.8
Amortization of acquired Total consolidated selling, general
intangible assets (374) (370) 1.2 and administrative expense $23,180 $23,451 (1.2)%
Acquisition-related charges (12) (40) (70.0) Non-operating adjustments
Non-operating retirement-related Amortization of acquired
(costs)/income (180) (433) (58.4) intangible assets (374) (370) 1.2
Operating (non-GAAP) Acquisition-related charges (11) (25) (54.1)
expense and other (income) $25,855 $27,597 (6.3)%
Non-operating retirement-related
Total consolidated (costs)/income (257) (376) (31.7)
expense-to-revenue ratio 28.5% 28.9% (0.4) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
Operating (non-GAAP) selling, general and
expense-to-revenue ratio 27.9% 28.1% (0.2) pts. administrative expense $22,537 $22,680 (0.6)%
The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense
other (income) were approximately: decreased 1.2 percent in 2014 versus 2013. The decrease was
primarily driven by the effects of currency (2 points) and lower base
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) expense (1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spend-
• Currency* (1) point (1) point ing (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased
• Acquisitions** 2 points 2 points 0.6 percent primarily driven by the effects of currency (2 points),
• Base expense (8) points (7) points partially offset by acquisition-related spending (1 point). Workforce
rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1,472 million, an increase of
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. $440 million year to year, which resulted in a 2 point year-to-year
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is impact in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A base expense. Bad debt
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.
expense increased $178 million year to year driven by higher spe-
Base expense includes the gains from the divestitures of the indus- cific provision additions, primarily in China and Latin America. The
try standard server and customer care businesses, as well as the receivables provision coverage was 2.2 percent at December 31,
impact of higher workforce rebalancing charges year to year. 2014, an increase of 60 basis points from year-end 2013.
Excluding the gains from the divested businesses and the impact
of workforce rebalancing, operating (non-GAAP) base expense Research, Development and Engineering
decreased 3 points year to year versus the 7 point as reported ($ in millions)
decrease. Within base expense, the company is continuing to shift Yr.-to-Yr.
its resources and spending to the strategic imperatives. Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
For additional information regarding total expense and other
Total consolidated research,
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following analy-
development and engineering $5,437 $5,743 (5.3)%
ses by category.
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income 77 (57) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
development and engineering $5,514 $5,686 (3.0)%
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense in The increase in income of $1,605 million year over year was pri-
continuing operations was 5.9 percent of revenue in 2014 and marily driven by higher gains associated with divestitures ($1,710
5.8 percent of revenue in 2013. RD&E expense decreased 5.3 per- million), driven by the industry standard server ($1,400 million) and
cent in 2014 versus 2013 primarily driven by: lower base expense customer care ($202 million) transactions. Divestiture gains are
(7 points) and the effects of currency (1 point), partially offset by reflected in Other in the table above.
higher expense due to acquisitions (2 points). Operating (non-
GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 3.0 percent in 2014 compared to Interest Expense
the prior year, primarily driven by lower base expense (4 points) and
($ in millions)
the effects of currency (1 point), partially offset by higher expense
Yr.-to-Yr.
due to acquisitions (2 points). Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
Interest expense
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Total $484 $402 20.4%
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent The increase in interest expense in 2014 versus 2013 was primar-
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
ily driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower
Sales and other transfers
average interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of
of intellectual property $283 $352 (19.7)%
financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the
Licensing/royalty-based fees 129 150 (13.9)
related external borrowings are to support the Global Financing
Custom development income 330 320 3.1 external business. Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized
Total $742 $822 (9.8)% interest) in 2014 was $1,025 million, an increase of $36 million
year to year.
The timing and amount of Sales and other transfers of IP may vary
Stock-Based Compensation
significantly from period to period depending upon the timing of
divestitures, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $512 million
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no decreased $102 million compared to 2013. The decrease was pri-
significant individual IP transactions in 2014 or 2013. marily related to performance share units ($58 million), restricted
stock units ($26 million) and the company’s assumption of stock-
Other (Income) and Expense based awards previously issued by acquired entities ($18 million).
Stock-based compensation cost, and the year-to-year change,
($ in millions)
was reflected in the following categories: Cost: $121 million, down
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent $1 million; SG&A expense: $350 million, down $85 million; RD&E
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change expense: $54 million, down $3 million and Other (income) and
Other (income) and expense expense: ($13 million), down $13 million. The amount of stock-
Foreign currency transaction based compensation cost included in the loss from discontinued
losses/(gains) $ (599) $(260) 130.4% operations, net of tax, was immaterial.
(Gains)/losses on derivative
instruments 654 166 293.3
Interest income (90) (74) 22.1
Net (gains)/losses from securities
and investment assets (26) (29) (11.5)
Other (1,878) (137) NM
Total consolidated other
(income) and expense $(1,938) $(333) 482.4%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges (1) (16) (94.7)
Operating (non-GAAP)
other (income) and expense $(1,939) $(349) 456.2%
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 43 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Retirement-Related Plans Income Taxes
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement- The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2014 was 21.2 per-
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated cent, an increase of 4.6 points versus the prior year, driven by the
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) following factors:
relating to the job function of the plan participants. • The year-to-year impact of factors that benefited the 2013
rate (14.5 points), including completion of the U.S. 2008–2010
($ in millions) tax audit and the associated reserve redeterminations
Yr.-to-Yr. (11.1 points), the retroactive impact of the 2012 American
Percent Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points), a tax agreement which
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
required a reassessment of certain valuation allowances on
Retirement-related plans—cost
deferred tax assets (1.4 points), the resolution of certain
Service cost $ 482 $ 545 (11.5)%
non-U.S. tax audits (0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state
Amortization of prior tax legislation (0.6 points); and
service cost/(credits) (114) (114) (0.1)
• A tax charge related to the sale of the industry standard
Cost of defined contribution plans 1,253 1,384 (9.5) server business (0.9 points); partially offset by;
Total operating costs $ 1,621 $ 1,815 (10.7)% • A year-to-year benefit of reduced tax charges related to
Interest cost 3,994 3,728 7.1 certain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries
and the intercompany licensing of certain IP (3.7 points);
Expected return on plan assets (6,351) (6,187) 2.7
• An increased benefit in the utilization of foreign tax credits
Recognized actuarial losses 2,467 3,434 (28.2)
(4.7 points); and
Plan amendments/curtailments/ • A benefit due to a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax
settlements 25 0 NM
income in 2014 (2.5 points).
Multi-employer plan/other costs 218 86 154.5
Total non-operating costs/ The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate
(income) $ 353 $ 1,062 (66.7)% was 21.0 percent, an increase of 4.0 points versus 2013 principally
Total retirement-related driven by the same factors described above.
plans—cost $ 1,974 $ 2,876 (31.4)%
Earnings Per Share
NM—Not meaningful
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the
In 2014, total retirement-related plan cost decreased by $902 weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstand-
million compared to 2013, primarily driven by a decrease in rec- ing during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on
ognized actuarial losses ($967 million), higher actual return on plan the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common
assets ($165 million) and lower defined contribution plans cost stock outstanding plus the effect of dilutive potential common
($131 million), partially offset by higher interest cost ($266 million) shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock
and higher pension obligations related to litigation ($139 million). method. Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section stock options and stock awards.
on page 22, the company characterizes certain retirement-related
costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this char- Yr.-to-Yr.
acterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2014 were $1,621 Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
million, a decrease of $194 million compared to 2013, primarily
Earnings per share of common stock
driven by lower defined contribution plans cost ($131 million) and
from continuing operations
decreased service cost ($63 million). Non-operating costs of $353
Assuming dilution $15.59 $15.30 1.9%
million decreased $709 million in 2014, compared to the prior year,
driven primarily by the decrease in recognized actuarial losses Basic $15.68 $15.42 1.7%
($967 million) and higher actual return on plan assets ($165 million), Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $16.53 $16.64 (0.7)%
partially offset by higher interest cost ($266 million) and higher Weighted-average shares
pension obligations related to litigation ($139 million). outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution 1,010.0 1,103.0 (8.4)%
Basic 1,004.3 1,094.5 (8.2)%

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 2013 were Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea-
990.5 million and 1,054.4 million, respectively. The average number sures the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 93.0 million at December 31. At December 31, 2014, the overall net under-
shares lower in 2014 versus 2013. The decrease was primarily the funded position was $16,932 million, an increase of $5,498 million
result of the common stock repurchase program. from December 31, 2013 driven by a decrease in discount rates
and changes in U.S. mortality rate assumptions, partially offset
Results of Discontinued Operations by strong asset returns worldwide. At year end, the company’s
The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $3.7 bil- qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and the cash
lion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The loss in 2014 included a requirements related to these plans remain stable going forward
non-recurring pre-tax charge of $4.7 billion, or $3.4 billion, net of at approximately $600 million per year through 2019. In 2014, the
tax. The charge included an impairment to reflect the fair value return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was 10.1 percent
less estimated costs to sell the Microelectronics business, which and the plan was 102 percent funded at December 31. Overall,
the company initially reported as held for sale at September 30, global asset returns were 12.2 percent and the qualified defined
2014. The charge also included other estimated costs related benefit plans worldwide were 97 percent funded at December 31.
to the transaction, including cash consideration expected to be During 2014, the company generated $16,868 million in cash
transferred of approximately $1.5 billion. The cash consideration is from operations, a decrease of $616 million compared to 2013. In
expected to be paid over the next three years and will be adjusted addition, the company generated $12,372 million in free cash flow,
down by the amount of the working capital due from GLOBAL- a decrease of $2,649 million versus the prior year. See pages 66
FOUNDRIES, estimated to be $0.2 billion. In addition, discontinued to 67 for additional information on free cash flow. The company
operations includes the operational net losses from the Microelec- returned $17,944 million to shareholders in 2014, with $13,679 mil-
tronics business of $0.3 billion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The lion in gross share repurchases and $4,265 million in dividends. In
discontinued operations effective tax rate in 2014 was 30.2 per- 2014, the company repurchased approximately 71.5 million shares
cent compared to 44.8 percent in 2013. The year-to-year decrease and had approximately $6.3 billion remaining in share repurchase
in the rate was driven primarily by a one-time tax charge of $428 authorization at year end. The company’s cash generation permits
million in the third quarter of 2014 in connection with the disposal. the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most
See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 100 and 101 attractive long-term opportunities.
for additional information regarding the divestiture transaction. The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing
business are a significant part of the company’s financial posi-
Financial Position tion. The financial position amounts appearing on page 82 are the
Dynamics consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts
At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the finan- appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on
cial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash and page 73, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an under-
marketable securities at year end were $8,476 million. During the standing of the Global Financing business.
year, the company continued to manage the investment portfolio
to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives. Working Capital
Total debt of $40,804 million increased $1,087 million from ($ in millions)
prior year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at Decem- At December 31: 2014 2013
ber 31, 2014, was $650 million, a decrease of $1,808 million from
Current assets $49,422 $51,350
the prior year end. Within total debt, $29,103 million is in support
Current liabilities 39,600 40,154
of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1
Working capital $ 9,822 $11,196
ratio. The company continues to have substantial flexibility in the
market. During 2014, the company completed bond issuances Current ratio 1.25:1 1.28:1
totaling $6,852 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 10 years, and
interest rates ranging from 0.30 to 3.63 percent depending on Working capital decreased $1,374 million from the year-end 2013
maturity. The company has consistently generated strong cash position. The key changes are described below:
flow from operations and continues to have access to additional Current assets decreased $1,928 million (an increase of $1,119
sources of liquidity through the capital markets and its $10 billion million adjusted for currency), as a result of:
global credit facility, with 100 percent of the facility available on a • A decrease of $2,589 million in cash and cash equivalents
same day basis. and marketable securities; and
• A decline of $1,375 million ($734 million adjusted for currency)
in trade receivables primarily due to the decline in revenue
and improved customer collections; partially offset by

===== PAGE 45 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• An increase of $1,322 million ($1,378 million adjusted for Net cash used in investing activities decreased $4,325 million
currency) in other receivables driven by anticipated tax driven by:
refunds; and • A decrease in cash used for acquisitions of $2,401 million; and
• An increase in deferred taxes of $394 million ($507 million • An increase in cash provided by divestitures of $2,061 million.
adjusted for currency) primarily due to the expected Micro-
electronics business divestiture. Net cash used in financing activities increased $5,569 million as
compared to the prior year driven by the following factors:
Current liabilities decreased $554 million (an increase of $1,623 • Lower cash from debt transactions (including short-term
million adjusted for currency), as a result of: borrowings) of $5,177 million; and
• A decrease in short-term debt of $1,131 million ($1,074 million • An increase of $392 million in net cash used for equity trans-
adjusted for currency); and actions impacted by increased dividend payments in 2014.
• A decrease in deferred income of $680 million (an increase of
$42 million adjusted for currency) driven by currency; partially Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
offset by
($ in millions)
• Other accrued expenses and liabilities increases of $1,265
At December 31: 2014 2013
million ($1,840 million adjusted for currency) driven by
Noncurrent assets $68,110 $74,873
charges and expected payments related to the expected
Long-term debt $35,073 $32,856
divestiture of the Microelectronics business and workforce
rebalancing accruals. Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $30,844 $30,284
Cash Flow The decrease in noncurrent assets of $6,763 million ($3,790 million
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financ- adjusted for currency) was driven by:
ing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash • A decrease of $3,392 million ($3,260 million adjusted for
Flows on page 83 are summarized in the table below. These currency) in prepaid pension assets primarily driven by plan
amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global Financ- remeasurements;
ing business. • A decrease in property, plant and equipment, net of $3,050
million ($2,381 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven
($ in millions) by a charge of $2,358 million associated with the expected
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 divestiture of the Microelectronics business; and
Net cash provided by/(used in) continuing • A decrease of $1,646 million ($917 million adjusted for cur-
operations rency) in long term financing receivables; partially offset by
Operating activities $ 16,868 $17,485 • An increase in deferred taxes of $1,757 million ($2,054 million
adjusted for currency) driven by retirement related plan activity.
Investing activities (3,001) (7,326)
Financing activities (15,452) (9,883) Long-term debt increased $2,218 million ($3,042 million adjusted
Effect of exchange rate changes on for currency) driven by new debt of $7,657 million offset by
cash and cash equivalents (655) 28 reclasses to short-term debt of $4,809 million.
Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ (2,240) $ 304 Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $561 mil-
lion ($2,330 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $616 mil- • An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations
lion in 2014 driven by the following key factors: of $2,019 million ($3,210 million adjusted for currency) driven
• An increase in income taxes paid of $1,724 million primarily by plan remeasurements, partially offset by
driven by audit settlement payments and other prior period • Declines of $1,041 million ($708 million adjusted for currency)
discrete tax impacts settled in 2014; in other liabilities driven by declines in deferred taxes.
• A decrease in cash associated with deferred income of $814
million due to lower levels of customer prepayments; and Debt
• Performance-related declines within net income; partially The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored
offset by and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liabil-
• An increase in cash provided by receivables of $2,676 million, ity profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility
primarily driven by financing receivables; and to access global funding sources as needed.
• A decrease in cash payments for performance-related com-
pensation of $772 million.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) associated with the disposal of the Microelectronics business of
At December 31: 2014 2013 $3,381 million and declines from translation of $2,074 million due
Total company debt $40,804 $39,718 to the strengthening U.S. dollar.
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2014
Total Global Financing segment debt $29,103 $27,504
was 77.3 percent versus 63.4 percent at December 31, 2013 and
Debt to support external clients 25,531 24,471
was similarly impacted by the retirement plan remeasurements
Debt to support internal clients 3,572 3,033
and strengthening of the U.S. dollar as noted above.
Non-Global Financing debt 11,701 12,214
Equity
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com- Total equity decreased by $10,916 million from December 31, 2013
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract as a result of an increase in treasury stock of $13,474 million mainly
by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, due to gross common stock repurchases, an increase in other
generate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global comprehensive losses of $6,274 million primarily due to retirement
Financing asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global plan remeasurements, partially offset by an increase in retained
Services assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global earnings of $7,751 million. The retirement plan remeasurement
Financing asset base. The debt analysis above is further detailed impact to other comprehensive losses was driven by: changes
in the Global Financing section on pages 76–77. in discount rates ($7.4 billion) and in mortality rate assumptions
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt- ($1.7 billion), partially offset by improved asset returns ($3.1 billion).
to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and
equity as management believes this is more representative of the GAAP Reconciliation
company’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income
period to period as the company manages its global cash and statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earn-
debt positions. ings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financ- calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may
ing debt and equity) was 59.4 percent at December 31, 2014 differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
compared to 39.0 percent at December 31, 2013. The ratio was Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on
impacted by retirement-related declines in equity of $6,366 million page 22 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earn-
primarily driven by plan remeasurements, the non-recurring charge ings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $46,407 $ 416 $ 173 $46,996
Gross profit margin 50.0% 0.4 pts. 0.2 pts. 50.6%
SG&A $23,180 $(385) $(257) $22,537
RD&E 5,437 — 77 5,514
Other (income) and expense (1,938) (1) — (1,939)
Total expense and other (income) 26,421 (386) (180) 25,855
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 19,986 803 353 21,142
Pre-tax income margin from continuing operations 21.5% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 22.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,234 $ 133 $ 73 $ 4,440
Effective tax rate 21.2% (0.2) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.0%
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $ 670 $ 280 $16,702
Income margin from continuing operations 17.0% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 18.0%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (3,729) — $ — $ (3,729)
Net income $12,022 $ 670 $ 280 $12,973
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 15.59 $0.66 $0.28 $ 16.53
Discontinued operations $ (3.69) $ — $ — $ (3.69)
* T he tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effec-
tive tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 47 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $48,684 $ 394 $ 629 $49,706
Gross profit margin 49.5% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.5%
SG&A $23,451 $(394) $ (376 ) $22,680
RD&E 5,743 — (57) 5,686
Other (income) and expense (333) (16) — (349)
Total expense and other (income) 28,440 (410) (433) 27,597
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 20,244 804 1,062 22,110
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 20.6% 0.8 pts. 1.1 pts. 22.5%
Provision for income taxes* $ 3,363 $ 57 $ 333 $ 3,753
Effective tax rate 16.6% (0.4) pts. 0.7 pts. 17.0%
Income from continuing operations $16,881 $ 747 $ 729 $18,356
Income margin from continuing operations 17.2% 0.8 pts. 0.7 pts. 18.7%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (398) $ — $ — $ (398 )
Net income $16,483 $ 747 $ 729 $17,959
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 15.30 $0.68 $ 0.66 $ 16.64
Discontinued operations $ (0.36) $ — $ — $ (0.36 )
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2014 and 2013.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ ($ in millions except per share amounts)
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2014 2013 Change Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Revenue $24,113 $ 27,385 (11.9)%* For the fourth quarter: 2014 2013 Change
Gross profit margin 53.3% 52.4% 1.0 pts. Net income as reported $5,484 $6,185 (11.3)%
Total expense and other (income) $ 5,767 $ 7,235 (20.3)% Loss from discontinued operations,
net of tax (31) (32) (1.7)
Total expense and other
(income)-to-revenue ratio 23.9% 26.4% (2.5) pts. Income from continuing operations 5,515 6,216 (11.3)
Income from continuing operations Non-operating adjustments
before income taxes $ 7,094 $ 7,102 (0.1)% (net of tax):
Provision for income taxes from Acquisition-related charges 186 268 (30.5)
continuing operations $ 1,580 $ 885 78.4% Non-operating retirement-related
Income from continuing operations $ 5,515 $ 6,216 (11.3)% costs/(income) 84 164 (49.1)
Income from continuing Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $5,785 $ 6,649 (13.0)%
operations margin 22.9% 22.7% 0.2 pts. Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
Loss from discontinued operations, earnings per share $ 5.81 $ 6.16 (5.7)%
net of tax (31) (32) (1.7)%
* See page 52 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earning.
Net income $ 5,484 $ 6,185 (11.3)%
Earnings per share from continuing Snapshot
operations: In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company reported $24.1 billion
Assuming dilution $ 5.54 $ 5.76 (3.8)% in revenue and delivered diluted earnings per share from continu-
Consolidated earnings per share— ing operations of $5.54 as reported and $5.81 on an operating
assuming dilution $ 5.51 $ 5.73 (3.8)% (non-GAAP) basis. The results of continuing operations exclude a
Weighted-average shares outstanding net loss from discontinued operations of $31 million related to the
announced divestiture of the Microelectronics business. On a con-
Assuming dilution 995.4 1,080.0 (7.8)%
solidated basis, net income in the fourth quarter was $5.5 billion,
* (7.6) percent adjusted for currency; (2.3) percent adjusted for divestitures and currency.

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
with diluted earnings per share of $5.51. The company generated Total expense and other (income) decreased 20.3 percent in
$6.1 billion in cash from operations and $6.6 billion in free cash flow the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to the prior year. Total oper-
in the fourth quarter driving shareholder returns of $1.2 billion in ating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) also decreased
gross common stock repurchases and dividends. 20.3 percent year to year. The key drivers of the year-to-year
The company’s results in the fourth quarter were impacted change in total expense and other (income) were approximately:
by the dramatic strengthening of the U.S. dollar which began in
Total Operating
September and continued at a rapid pace. In addition, nearly all the Consolidated (non-GAAP)
currencies moved in an unfavorable direction for the company’s • Currency* (5) points (4) points
business profile and impacted revenue and earnings. Although the • Acquisitions** 1 points 1 points
company hedges a portion of its cross-border cash flows which • Base expense (17) points (17) points
defers the impacts of currency movement, it does not eliminate it.
The company’s hedges are designed to provide stability around * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
the receipt of cash, but there is no year-to-year benefit in the ** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.
income statement when a currency’s direction is sustained over
a longer period. The reported level of expense in the fourth quarter reflected not
In the fourth quarter, total consolidated revenue decreased only the ongoing run rate of the business, but also the impact of
11.9 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency the industry standard server divestiture and a charge for workforce
(5 points) and the divestitures of the industry standard server and rebalancing. The entire year-to-year decline was driven by the com-
customer care businesses (5 points). These impacts represented bination of the gain on the divestiture and the fact that the expense
approximately $2.8 billion in revenue and a 10-point impact to for the industry standard server business is no longer in the run
the year-to-year growth rate. In the fourth quarter, the company rate. Adjusting for this divestiture, total operating (non-GAAP)
continued its strong performance in its strategic imperatives expense and other (income) would have increased approximately
that address the market shifts in data, cloud and engagement. 2 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency and acquisitions)
Together they delivered double-digit growth, as they did in every including the workforce rebalancing charge of approximately $580
quarter during 2014. million, nearly all of which was a year-to-year increase.
Within the company’s segments, Global Services revenue Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $7.1 billion
declined 7.8 percent as reported, but was flat year to year adjusted decreased 0.1 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin was
for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (2 points). Global 29.4 percent, an increase of 3.5 points versus the fourth quar-
Technology Services revenue decreased 7.6 percent as reported, ter of 2013. The continuing operations effective tax rate for the
but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency (6 points) and the fourth quarter was 22.3 percent, up 9.8 points year to year. This
divested businesses (4 points) with growth across all business increase was primarily due to a benefit included in the prior year
lines. Global Business Services revenue decreased 8.4 percent rate associated with the settlement of a U.S. tax audit in the fourth
(3 percent adjusted for currency). Software revenue decreased quarter of 2013. Income from continuing operations of $5.5 billion
6.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency). Systems and decreased 11.3 percent year to year and the net income margin
Technology revenue decreased 39.0 percent as reported and was 22.9 percent, an increase of 0.2 points. Net income of $5.5
12 percent adjusted for the industry standard server divestiture billion decreased $701 million year to year. Operating (non-GAAP)
(24 points) and currency (3 points), reflecting the end of the product pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 2.3 per-
cycle in System z and declines in Power Systems and Storage. cent year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin
From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets was 30.7 percent, an increase of 3.0 points year to year. Operat-
declined 10.8 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for cur- ing (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations decreased
rency (5 points) and the divestitures (4 points). The growth markets 13.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin of
declined 15.7 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for the 24.0 percent decreased 0.3 points compared to the prior year. The
divestitures (9 points) and currency (5 points) compared to the operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations
fourth quarter of the prior year. Within the growth markets, the was 21.8 percent versus 12.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013
BRIC countries decreased 21.4 percent as reported and 8 percent driven by the same factor described above.
adjusted for the divestitures (9 points) and currency (4 points). Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $5.54
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 1.0 points decreased 3.8 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted
versus the fourth quarter of 2013 to 53.3 percent. The operating earnings per share of $5.81 decreased 5.7 percent versus the
(non-GAAP) gross margin of 53.9 percent increased 0.6 points fourth quarter of 2013. Diluted earnings per share from discontin-
year to year driven primarily by improvements in GBS, and a mix ued operations was ($0.03) in the fourth quarter of both years. In
away from the low margin industry standard server business. the fourth quarter of 2014, the company repurchased 0.7 million
shares of its common stock.

===== PAGE 49 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2014 versus the fourth quarter of 2013 reportable segment external revenue and gross
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arms-length transfer
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 9,167 $ 9,917 (7.6)% 1.6%*
Gross margin 38.5% 38.8% (0.3) pts.
Global Business Services 4,349 4,747 (8.4)% (3.0)%
Gross margin 32.0% 30.7% 1.4 pts.
Software 7,578 8,140 (6.9)% (3.4)%
Gross margin 90.0% 90.5% (0.6) pts.
Systems and Technology 2,406 3,947 (39.0)% (12.2)%*
Gross margin 49.6% 42.2% 7.3 pts.
Global Financing 532 534 (0.5)% 4.6%
Gross margin 48.7% 43.3% 5.3 pts.
Other 82 100 (17.7)% (14.2)%
Gross margin (401.7)% (234.8)% (166.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $24,113 $27,385 (11.9)% (2.3)%*
Total consolidated gross profit $12,862 $14,337 (10.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 53.3% 52.4% 1.0 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 101 103 (2.0)%
Acquisition-related charges — 1 (100.0)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 33 154 (78.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $12,996 $14,596 (11.0)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 53.9% 53.3% 0.6 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Global Services
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the Global Services segments, GTS Global Technology Services revenue of $9,167 million
and GBS, delivered revenue of $13,516 million, a decrease of decreased 7.6 percent as reported, but increased 2 percent
7.8 percent as reported, but flat year to year adjusted for currency adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divested businesses
(6 points) and the divested customer care and industry standard (4 points). Within GTS, outsourcing revenue of $5,109 million
server businesses (2 points). Pre-tax income in the fourth quar- decreased 9.6 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent
ter decreased 25.0 percent and the pre-tax margin decreased adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (5 points).
3.5 points to 15.9 percent. Total outsourcing revenue of $6,042 Clients are continuing to sign large outsourcing engagements
million decreased 9.3 percent as reported, but flat year to year that leverage the company’s cloud, business analytics and mobile
adjusted for currency (6 points) and the divestitures (3 points). solutions. Clients are using these outsourcing engagements as
Total transactional revenue of $5,839 million decreased 5.9 per- a way to optimize their IT infrastructure while at the same time
cent (flat adjusted for currency). enabling new services to their customers. Lufthansa and ABN
AMRO, both signings which were over $1 billion in contract

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
value, are recent examples of this. ITS revenue of $2,423 million Software
decreased 1.6 percent from the fourth quarter of the prior year as Software revenue of $7,578 million decreased 6.9 percent (3 per-
reported, but increased 4 percent adjusted for currency. The year- cent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter compared to the
to-year increase was driven largely by the company’s high-value prior year. Middleware decreased 5.6 percent (2 percent adjusted
security, mobility and resiliency offerings. SoftLayer continues to for currency), while operating systems were down 18.8 percent
attract new workloads to the platform, and in October, the com- (16 percent adjusted for currency). As expected, there was not a
pany announced that IBM was selected by SAP to be the global change in trajectory in the fourth quarter and performance was
cloud provider for their enterprise cloud solution. IBM’s ability to similar to the previous quarter. Total growth reflected a headwind
integrate public and private workloads within its hybrid cloud was from operating systems, driven by the divestiture of the indus-
a critical differentiator for SAP. The company has continued to try standard server business and Power Systems results. It also
expand its datacenter footprint and in the fourth quarter opened reflected business model changes, which impacted transaction
cloud centers in Melbourne, Paris, Mexico City, Tokyo and Frank- revenue growth as customers continue to use the flexibility that
furt. Maintenance revenue of $1,635 million decreased 9.2 percent has been provided in the deployment of software purchased
as reported, but was up 1 percent for the quarter, adjusted for through enterprise licensing agreements. This flexibility enables
currency (6 points) and the industry standard server divestiture clients to optimize their capacity on the company’s platform for
(4 points). The GTS gross profit margin of 38.5 percent decreased the long term. There was solid growth in many of the solution
0.3 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to prior year. areas, including security, mobile and cloud. Security software
In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income decreased 26.4 percent again grew at a double-digit rate, marking the ninth consecu-
to $1,464 million and the pre-tax margin declined 3.9 points to tive quarter of double-digit growth. With cybersecurity threats as
15.6 percent compared to the prior year. The year-to-year decrease one of the key issues that all customers are facing, the company
was driven by several key factors. First, GTS lost profit on a year-to- has brought its analytics, big data, research IP, mobile and cloud
year basis as a result of the customer care and industry standard capabilities together to create security offerings to address this
server divestitures. Second, the fourth quarter workforce rebalanc- market opportunity. The company’s software mobile offerings
ing charge of $277 million impacted profit. Finally, the company more than doubled in the quarter, as it leveraged the integrated
continued to invest in both offerings and operational capabilities. MobileFirst portfolio, and software-as-a-service offerings were
This includes targeted investments in mobility, security and cloud up nearly 50 percent.
which complement clients’ systems-of-record, as well as opera- Key branded middleware revenue, which accounted for
tional improvements such as the yield from the rebalancing action 72 percent of total Software revenue in the fourth quarter of
taken earlier in the year, and more broadly deployed automation in 2014, decreased 6.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency)
the delivery centers. compared to the prior year. Within key branded middleware, Web-
Global Business Services revenue of $4,349 million decreased Sphere revenue decreased 6.4 percent (4 percent adjusted for
8.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter currency). Information Management revenue decreased 9.1 per-
of 2014. Consulting and Systems Integration revenue of $3,416 cent (6 percent adjusted for currency). Tivoli revenue decreased
million declined 8.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 2.4 percent, but was up 1 percent adjusted for currency driven
in the fourth quarter. Revenue was down in the traditional back by security software. Workforce Solutions revenue decreased
office implementations, particularly in North America. However, 12.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). Rational revenue
the company again had strong double-digit growth in its practices increased 4.1 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency) in the
that address cloud, analytics, mobile and security. Through its fourth quarter with improved year-to-year performance compared
partnership with Apple, the company released the first 10 Mobile- to the earlier quarters of 2014.
First for iOS solutions in the fourth quarter. GBS Outsourcing The Software gross profit margin remained strong at 90.0 per-
revenue of $933 million decreased 7.5 percent (2 percent adjusted cent in the fourth quarter compared to 90.5 percent in fourth
for currency) in the fourth quarter, reflecting sequential improve- quarter of the prior year. Software pre-tax income of $3,765 mil-
ment at constant currency compared to the third quarter of 2014. lion in the fourth quarter decreased 11.2 percent year to year,
However, performance continued to be impacted by a challenging with a pre-tax margin of 44.7 percent, a decline of 2.3 points. The
pricing environment. fourth quarter of 2014 included a workforce rebalancing charge
The GBS gross profit margin of 32.0 percent expanded of $120 million that represented approximately 3 points of the
1.4 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to prior year, year-to-year decline.
which is a good indicator of the value its offerings deliver. Pre-tax
income decreased 22.0 percent to $733 million including a 15 point
impact from the workforce rebalancing charge, which will pay back
in 2015. Pre-tax margin declined 2.7 points to 16.4 percent com-
pared to the prior year. Although the company continued to see a
slowdown in back office implementations in the traditional parts
of the portfolio, it is investing in strategic partnerships and those
should yield benefits in 2015.

===== PAGE 51 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology Global Financing
Systems and Technology revenue of $2,406 million decreased Global Financing revenue of $532 million was down 0.5 percent
39.0 percent as reported and 12 percent adjusted for the dives- due to a decrease in used equipment sales revenue, partially offset
titure of the industry standard server business (24 points) and by an increase in financing revenue. The Global Financing fourth-
currency (3 points) in the fourth quarter of 2014, versus the same quarter pre-tax income decreased 10.8 percent to $526 million
period in 2013. and the pre-tax margin decreased 2.7 points to 47.0 percent. The
System z revenue decreased 25.8 percent (23 percent adjusted decrease in pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross
for currency), compared to the prior year period. This performance profit ($46 million) as well as an increase in financing receivable
reflected the fact that the product was in the tenth and final quar- provisions ($26 million), partially offset by a reduction in SG&A
ter of this product cycle. The last 10-quarter cycle was the z10. expenses ($11 million).
Comparing the current cycle to that of the z10, program-to-date
System z revenue and gross profit is right on top of that cycle. The Geographic Revenue
company continues to innovate on the platform, and in January Total geographic revenue of $23,990 million decreased 12.0 per-
2015 announced the z13, the new generation of the IBM mainframe. cent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (5 points)
Power Systems revenue decreased 13.4 percent (11 percent and currency (5 points) in the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to
adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year period which the prior year. Major market countries decreased 10.8 percent as
represented a modest sequential improvement at constant cur- reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and cur-
rency. Power has been repositioned and is not only a systems rency (5 points). Growth market countries decreased 15.7 percent
business, but also an open chip processor and an IP income as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (9 points) and
opportunity through the OpenPOWER foundation. There was currency (5 points).
double-digit growth in the low end, driven by entry-level POWER8- In the growth markets, the year-to-year performance adjusted
based systems, and in the fourth quarter, the company introduced for currency and the divestitures improved by approximately
its high-end POWER8 enterprise systems. In addition, the com- 2 points from the third quarter. This improvement was driven by
pany saw continued expansion of the OpenPOWER consortium, performance in China which decreased 19.9 percent as reported,
now with over 80 members. but only 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (18 points) and cur-
Storage revenue decreased 8.3 percent (5 percent adjusted rency (1 point). On an adjusted basis, this represented a significant
for currency) in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year sequential improvement compared to the prior quarter. China’s
period representing a modest sequential improvement compared fourth quarter performance was driven by strength in software
to the rate in the prior quarter. There was strong growth again in the and several large mainframe transactions, with four of the compa-
FlashSystems and Storwize portfolio. This growth was offset by ny’s five largest banking clients in China adding substantial new
the wind down of the legacy OEM business and continued weak- mainframe capacity. Within the BRIC countries, combined revenue
ness in high-end disk. decreased 21.4 percent as reported and 8 percent adjusted for
Systems and Technology’s gross profit margin of 49.6 percent divestitures (9 points) and currency (4 points) in the fourth quar-
increased 7.3 points in the fourth quarter of 2014 versus the prior ter. On an adjusted basis, this performance was consistent with
year. The increase was primarily due to mix (7.6 points) driven the third quarter, with the improvement in China offset by weaker
by the divestiture of the industry standard server business. This performance in Brazil.
improvement was offset by a decrease due to margin. Lower mar- Americas revenue of $11,090 million decreased 9.0 percent
gins in Power Systems (0.8 points) and Storage (0.6 points) were as reported and 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points)
partially offset by higher margins in System z (0.6 points). and currency (2 points) compared to the fourth quarter of 2013.
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income of $388 million North America declined 8.1 percent as reported and 4 percent
increased 12.2 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.5 percent, up adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (1 point). The
7 points year to year. This performance included a workforce rebal- Latin American growth markets declined 14.7 percent as reported
ancing charge of $32 million in the fourth quarter of 2014 which and 4 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and currency
impacted year-to-year growth by approximately 9 points and pre- (7 points). The decrease in North America was driven by declines
tax margin in the fourth quarter by approximately 1 point. in Global Business Services, though signings grew for the second
consecutive quarter. Declines in the Latin American growth mar-
kets were driven by the weak performance in Brazil.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
EMEA revenue of $8,001 million decreased 12.8 percent as Total expense and other (income) decreased 20.3 percent in the
reported, but only 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (5 points) fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 23.9 percent
and currency (7 points) year to year in the fourth quarter of 2014. compared to 26.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2013. Total oper-
Major market countries were down 13.2 percent as reported ating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) also decreased
and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and currency 20.3 percent in the fourth quarter. The decrease in total oper-
(7 points). Growth market countries were down 9.7 percent, ating expense and other (income) was primarily driven by lower
but were up 7 percent adjusted for divestitures (10 points) and base expense (17 points) and currency (4 points), partially offset
currency (6 points). On an adjusted basis, Europe’s overall perfor- by increased expense from acquisitions over the past 12 months
mance improved from the third quarter. In the major markets, there (1 point). The decline in base expense was driven by the gain
were improvements in the UK and Italy, and continued growth in from the industry standard server divestiture, partially offset by
Spain. Compared to the prior year, the UK decreased 10.0 percent the workforce reduction charge recorded in the fourth quarter.
as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (7 points) and Other (income)/expense included the pre-tax gain from the indus-
currency (2 points) compared with a decline of 5 percent on an try standard server divestiture of $1.4 billion; while selling, general
adjusted basis in the prior quarter. Italy decreased 7.5 percent as and administrative expense included the workforce rebalancing
reported, but grew 5 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) change of approximately $580 million. Additionally, expense asso-
and currency (9 points) compared with a decline of 2 percent on ciated with the industry standard server business is no longer in
an adjusted basis in the prior quarter. Spain decreased 7.8 per- the run rate which also contributed to the year-to-year decline in
cent as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for divestitures the fourth quarter.
(2 points) and currency (9 points). The increase in the growth mar-
kets when adjusted for currency and the divestitures was driven Results of Discontinued Operations
by strength in the central and eastern European countries. Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $31 million in
Asia Pacific fourth quarter revenue decreased 16.7 percent as the fourth quarter of 2014 compared to $32 million in 2013.
reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (8 points) and
currency (7 points) year over year. Japan decreased 14.5 percent Cash Flow
as reported, but grew 2 percent adjusted for divestitures (4 points) The company generated $6,059 million in cash flow provided by
and currency (12 points). Asia Pacific growth market countries operating activities, a decrease of $468 million compared to the
decreased 18.1 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted fourth quarter of 2013, driven primarily by declines in operational
for divestitures (11 points) and currency (3 points) year to year. performance within net income and an increase in cash taxes paid
Although there was improved performance this quarter in China ($203 million). Net cash used in investing activities of $1,236 mil-
on an adjusted basis, there were continued year-to-year declines lion decreased $1,666 million compared to the prior year, primarily
in some of the other larger growth market countries. due to cash proceeds received from the divestiture of the industry
standard server business. Net cash used in financing activities
Total Expense and Other (Income) of $5,699 million increased $2,686 million compared to the prior
year primarily due to debt retirements during the quarter, offset
($ in millions)
by decreased cash used for gross common stock repurchases
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ ($5,665 million).
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2014 2013 Change
Total consolidated expense
and other (income) $5,767 $7,235 (20.3)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (93) (93) (0.1)
Acquisition-related charges (2) (16) (87.5)
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income (74) (104) (28.5)
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other (income) $5,598 $7,023 (20.3)%
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue ratio 23.9% 26.4% (2.5) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 23.2% 25.6% (2.4) pts.

===== PAGE 53 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 22 for the
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $12,862 $ 101 $ 33 $12,996
Gross profit margin 53.3% 0.4 pts. 0.1 pts. 53.9%
SG&A $ 6,034 $ (94) $ (95) $ 5,845
RD&E 1,320 — 21 1,341
Other (income) and expense (1,506) (1) — (1,506)
Total expense and other (income) 5,767 (95) (74) 5,598
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 7,094 196 107 7,398
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 29.4% 0.8 pts. 0.4 pts. 30.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,580 $ 10 $ 24 $ 1,613
Effective tax rate 22.3% (0.5) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.8%
Income from continuing operations $ 5,515 $ 186 $ 84 $ 5,785
Income margin from continuing operations 22.9% 0.8 pts. 0.3 pts. 24.0%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (31) $ — $ — $ (31)
Net income $ 5,484 $ 186 $ 84 $ 5,753
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 5.54 $0.19 $0.08 $ 5.81
Discontinued operations $ (0.03) $ — $ — $ (0.03)
* T he tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $14,337 $ 105 $ 154 $14,596
Gross profit margin 52.4% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 53.3%
SG&A $ 5,987 $(101) $ (90) $ 5,796
RD&E 1,452 — (14) 1,438
Other (income) and expense (116) (8) — (124)
Total expense and other (income) 7,235 (109) (104) 7,023
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 7,102 213 258 7,574
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 25.9% 0.8 pts. 0.9 pts. 27.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 885 $ (55) $ 94 $ 925
Effective tax rate 12.5% (1.1) pts. 0.8 pts. 12.2%
Income from continuing operations $ 6,216 $ 268 $ 164 $ 6,649
Income margin from continuing operations 22.7% 1.0 pts. 0.6 pts. 24.3%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (32) $ — $ — $ (32)
Net income $ 6,185 $ 268 $ 164 $ 6,617
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 5.76 $0.25 $0.15 $ 6.16
Discontinued operations $ (0.03) $ — $ — $ (0.03)
* T he tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the earnings for 2013 and 2012.
company’s financial performance in 2013 as compared to 2012.
As discussed in the “Organization of Information” section on page ($ in millions except per share amounts)
22, 2013 and 2012 financial performance has been reclassified to Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
reflect discontinued operations presentation.
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Net income as reported $16,483 $16,604 (0.7)%
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Loss from discontinued operations,
Yr.-to-Yr.
net of tax (398) (395) 0.6
Percent/
Margin Income from continuing operations $16,881 $16,999 (0.7)%
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Non-operating adjustments
Revenue $ 98,367 $102,874 (4.4)%*
(net of tax):
Gross profit margin 49.5% 49.0% 0.5 pts.
Acquisition-related charges 747 641 16.5
Total expense and other (income) $ 28,440 $ 27,821 2.2%
Non-operating retirement-related
Total expense and other costs/(income) 729 381 91.2
(income)-to-revenue ratio 28.9% 27.0% 1.9 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $18,356 $18,022 1.9%
Income before income taxes from
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
continuing operations $ 20,244 $ 22,540 (10.2)%
earnings per share $ 16.64 $ 15.60 6.7%
Provision for income taxes from
continuing operations 3,363 5,541 (39.3)% * See page 63 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-
GAAP earnings.
Income from continuing
operations $ 16,881 $ 16,999 (0.7)%
Snapshot
Income from continuing
In 2013, the company reported revenue of $98.4 billion, expanded
operations margin 17.2% 16.5% 0.6 pts.
gross and net income margins, and delivered diluted earnings
Loss from discontinued
per share from continuing operations growth of 4.0 percent as
operations, net of tax $ (398) $ (395) 0.6%
reported and 6.7 percent on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The
Net income $ 16,483 $ 16,604 (0.7)%
results of continuing operations exclude net losses from discon-
Earnings per share from tinued operations of $0.4 billion in 2013 and 2012, respectively.
continuing operations:
On a consolidated basis, net income in 2013 was $16.5 billion,
Assuming dilution $ 15.30 $ 14.71 4.0% a decrease of 0.7 percent year to year, with diluted earnings per
Consolidated earnings per share— share of $14.94. The company generated $17.5 billion in cash from
assuming dilution $ 14.94 $ 14.37 4.0% operations and $15.0 billion in free cash flow driving shareholder
Weighted-average shares returns of $17.9 billion in gross common stock repurchases and
outstanding: dividends. In 2013, the company continued the transformation of its
Assuming dilution 1,103.0 1,155.4 (4.5)% portfolio to higher value expending $3.1 billion to acquire 10 compa-
Assets** $126,223 $119,213 5.9% nies to expand its capabilities in its key growth areas, in addition to
maintaining high levels of investment of $5.7 billion in total research
Liabilities** $103,294 $100,229 3.1%
and development and $3.8 billion in net capital expenditures.
Equity** $ 22,929 $ 18,984 20.8%
The company also continued to shift its investments to address
* (2.3) percent adjusted for currency. the key trends in information technology—social, mobile, big data/
** At December 31. analytics and cloud. Several years ago, the company identified
and established objectives for four key growth initiatives—Smarter
Planet, business analytics, cloud and growth markets—to address
these trends. In 2013, across the business, Smarter Planet, busi-
ness analytics and cloud had strong performance. Smarter
Planet revenue grew about 20 percent compared to 2012, with

===== PAGE 55 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
strength across all areas, including Smarter Commerce, Smarter There were several items that had an impact on total expense and
Cities, Social Business and industry solutions. Business analyt- other (income) year to year. Workforce rebalancing charges for
ics revenue of $15.7 billion increased 9 percent year to year, led 2013 were $1.0 billion compared to $0.8 billion in 2012. Bad debt
by Global Business Services and Software. In 2013, the com- expense increased $0.1 billion year to year driven by higher spe-
pany delivered $4.4 billion of cloud-based solutions revenue, an cific account reserves. In addition, in 2012, the company recorded
increase of 69 percent compared to 2012. In addition, within that a gain of approximately $0.4 billion related to the divestiture of
content, $1.7 billion was delivered as a service. Across the com- the Retail Store Solutions (RSS) business, and also recorded a
pany’s performance, there was overlap between these initiatives. charge of approximately $0.2 billion related to a court ruling in
In total, software made up about half of that combined content. the UK regarding one of IBM’s UK defined benefit pension plans.
The software content improved the company’s business mix and This charge was not included in operating (non-GAAP) expense
contributed to margin expansion. and other (income). In addition, as a result of certain parts of the
Segment revenue was led by Software which increased business not performing as expected, performance-related com-
1.9 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key pensation in 2013 across both cost and expense was down about
branded middleware which increased 4.8 percent (6 percent $0.8 billion year to year.
adjusted for currency). The key growth initiatives fueled this per- Pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased
formance. Global Business Services returned to revenue growth 10.2 percent and the pre-tax margin was 20.6 percent, a decrease
at constant currency (down 0.9 percent as reported; up 3 per- of 1.3 points versus 2012. The continuing operations effective tax
cent adjusted for currency) driven by the company’s investments rate was 16.6 percent in 2013, a decrease of 8.0 points year to
in the Digital Front Office. While revenue in Global Technology year. Income from continuing operations decreased 0.7 percent
Services declined 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency), year to year and the loss from discontinued operations, net of
revenue trajectory improved in the second half. Global Financing tax was $0.4 billion in 2013 flat compared to 2012. Net income
revenue improved 0.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) decreased 0.7 percent versus 2012. The as reported effective tax
versus 2012. The Software, Global Services and Global Financing rate for 2013 was 15.6 percent, a decrease of 8.6 points year to
businesses all grew pre-tax income and expanded their pre- year driven by an improvement in the ongoing tax rate and discrete
tax margin in 2013 compared to 2012. Systems and Technology tax items, including audit settlements. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-
impacted the company’s overall performance in 2013. Revenue tax income decreased 7.2 percent and the operating (non-GAAP)
decreased 19.0 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) year pretax margin was 22.5 percent, a decrease of 0.7 points versus
to year driven by the back end of the mainframe product cycle 2012. Operating (non-GAAP) net income increased 1.9 percent
and business model challenges specific to Power Systems, Stor- and the operating (non-GAAP) net income margin of 18.7 percent
age and System x. Pre-tax income in Systems and Technology increased 1.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-
decreased $1.7 billion compared to 2012. GAAP) effective tax rate was 17.0 percent versus 24.3 percent in
Revenue from the company’s growth markets underperformed 2012 driven by the same factors described above.
in 2013, particularly in the second half of the year. For the full year, Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
growth markets revenue decreased 4.9 percent as reported and improved 4.0 percent year to year reflecting the benefits of the
2 percent at constant currency. common stock repurchase program. In 2013, the company repur-
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.5 points chased approximately 73 million shares of its common stock.
versus 2012 to 49.5 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross Diluted earnings per share from discontinued operations was
margin of 50.5 percent increased 0.9 points compared to the prior ($0.36) in 2013 compared to ($0.34) in 2012. Total diluted earn-
year. The increase in gross margin in 2013 was driven by margin ings per share of $14.94 increased $0.57 from 2012. Operating
improvements in the Global Services segments and an improved (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $16.64 increased $1.04
mix driven by Software, partially offset by margin decreases in versus 2012 driven primarily by margin expansion and common
Systems and Technology. stock repurchases, partially offset by decreased revenue.
Total expense and other (income) increased 2.2 percent in At December 31, 2013, the company’s balance sheet and
2013 versus 2012. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other liquidity positions were strong and well positioned to support the
(income) increased 1.5 percent year to year. The year-to-year driv- business over the long term. Cash and marketable securities at
ers were approximately: year end was $11.1 billion, consistent with the year-end 2012 bal-
ance. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows are
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) highlighted below.
• Currency* (1) point (1) point Total assets increased $7.0 billion ($9.3 billion adjusted for cur-
• Acquisitions** 2 points 2 points rency) from December 31, 2012 driven by:
• Base expense 1 point 1 point • Increases in prepaid pension assets ($4.6 billion), goodwill ($1.9
billion), and total receivables ($1.2 billion), partially offset by
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. • Decreases in deferred taxes ($0.7 billion).
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total liabilities increased $3.1 billion ($4.5 billion adjusted for cur- The company generated $17.5 billion in cash flow provided by
rency) from December 31, 2012 driven by: operating activities, a decrease of $2.1 billion when compared
• Increased total debt ($6.4 billion) and increases in deferred to 2012, primarily driven by operational performance and a net
tax liabilities ($1.3 billion); partially offset by increase in the use of cash for taxes of $2.2 billion primarily driven
• Decreased retirement and nonpension postretirement ben- by an increase in cash tax payments. Net cash used in investing
efit obligations ($4.2 billion) and decreases in compensation activities of $7.3 billion was $1.7 billion lower than 2012, primarily
and benefits ($0.9 billion). due to a decrease in cash used associated with the net purchases
and sales of marketable securities and other investments ($1.2
Total equity of $22.9 billion increased $3.9 billion from Decem- billion) and decreased net capital investments ($0.5 billion). Net
ber 31, 2012 as a result of: cash used in financing activities of $9.9 billion was $2.1 billion lower
• Higher retained earnings ($12.4 billion), decreased losses in compared to 2012, primarily due to increased proceeds from net
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) of $4.2 billion debt ($4.7 billion), partially offset by increased cash used for gross
and increased common stock ($1.5 billion), partially offset by common stock repurchases ($1.9 billion).
• Increased treasury stock ($14.1 billion) driven by share
repurchases.
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2013 versus 2012 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $38,551 $ 40,236 (4.2)% (1.4)%
Gross margin 38.1% 36.6% 1.5 pts.
Global Business Services 18,396 18,566 (0.9)% 2.6%
Gross margin 30.9% 30.0% 0.9 pts.
Software 25,932 25,448 1.9% 2.9%
Gross margin 88.8% 88.7% 0.1 pts.
Systems and Technology 12,988 16,034 (19.0)% (18.2)%
Gross margin 40.8% 43.4% (2.6) pts.
Global Financing 2,022 2,013 0.4% 2.8%
Gross margin 45.6% 46.5% (0.9 ) pts.
Other 478 577 (17.1)% (16.4)%
Gross margin (195.6)% (71.6)% (124.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $98,367 $102,874 (4.4)% (2.3)%
Total consolidated gross profit $48,684 $ 50,361 (3.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 49.5% 49.0% 0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 388 375 3.5%
Acquisition-related charges 5 1 NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 629 264 138.1%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $49,706 $ 51,001 (2.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.5% 49.6% 1.0 pts.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 57 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
In 2013, the Global Services segments delivered $56,947 million areas. Total outsourcing revenue of $26,157 million decreased
of revenue, grew pre-tax income 2.5 percent and expanded pre- 5.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional
tax margin 1.0 points. GBS returned to revenue growth in 2013, at revenue of $23,678 million decreased 1.0 percent as reported, but
constant currency, leveraging the investments made in the Digital increased 2 percent adjusted for currency year to year. The esti-
Front Office practices. GTS revenue performance improved during mated Global Services backlog was $143 billion at December 31,
the second half of 2013. Global Services had good performance in 2013, an increase of 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency)
the key growth initiatives of Smarter Planet, business analytics and versus the December 31, 2012 balance.
cloud, and continued to invest to expand its capabilities in these
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $56,947 $58,802 (3.2)% (0.2)%
Global Technology Services $38,551 $40,236 (4.2)% (1.4)%
Outsourcing 22,060 23,344 (5.5) (2.7)
Integrated Technology Services 9,380 9,550 (1.8) 1.0
Maintenance 7,111 7,343 (3.1) (0.7)
Global Business Services $18,396 $18,566 (0.9)% 2.6%
Outsourcing 4,097 4,209 (2.6) 1.5
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,298 14,358 (0.4) 2.9
Global Technology Services revenue of $38,551 million in 2013 of the strategic growth initiatives of business analytics, Smarter
decreased 4.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) year to Planet and cloud. The company has been investing to build
year. From a geographic perspective, revenue declined in North capabilities in these key areas and at year-end 2013 had nearly
America and Europe, partially offset by growth in Japan, adjusted 20,000 resources in GBS focused on the growing Digital Front
for currency. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 5.5 percent Office opportunity. Application Outsourcing revenue decreased
(3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue performance 2.6 percent as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted for
was impacted by a decline in revenue from sales into existing currency. C&SI revenue decreased 0.4 percent as reported, but
base accounts and by the work done to improve the profitability increased 3 percent adjusted for currency. Both lines of business
of restructured low margin contracts. GTS Outsourcing had dou- had constant currency revenue growth year to year in the growth
ble-digit signings growth in 2013 and started to realize the benefit markets. In 2013, the GBS backlog grew for the fifth consecutive
from several of the large transformational contract signings in its year at constant currency led by the major markets.
fourth-quarter 2013 revenue. ITS revenue decreased 1.8 percent
as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 ($ in millions)
compared to 2012. The company continued to shift the ITS busi- Yr.-to-Yr.
ness toward higher value managed services such as business Percent/
Margin
continuity, security and cloud. Within the cloud offerings, SoftLayer For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
contributed 2 points of revenue growth to the ITS performance in Global Services
2013, and a half-point to total GTS revenue for the year. In January
Global Technology Services
2014, the company announced plans to invest over $1.2 billion to
External gross profit $14,691 $14,740 (0.3)%
double its SoftLayer centers, and with 40 cloud datacenters in
External gross profit margin 38.1% 36.6% 1.5 pts.
15 countries, the company will have cloud centers in every major
geography and key financial center. Pre-tax income $ 6,983 $ 6,961 0.3%
Global Business Services revenue of $18,396 million decreased Pre-tax margin 17.6% 16.8% 0.8 pts.
0.9 percent as reported, but increased 3 percent at constant cur- Global Business Services
rency in 2013 with growth in both GBS Outsourcing and C&SI,
External gross profit $ 5,676 $ 5,564 2.0%
adjusted for currency. GBS revenue increased 0.5 percent (4 per-
External gross profit margin 30.9% 30.0% 0.9 pts.
cent at constant currency) in the second half of the year. On a
geographic basis, revenue growth at constant currency was led Pre-tax income $ 3,214 $ 2,983 7.7%
by North America, Japan and the growth markets, while Europe Pre-tax margin 16.8% 15.5% 1.3 pts.
was flat year to year. GBS delivered double-digit growth in each

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit decreased 0.3 percent in 2013 and the gross profit pre-tax income increased 7.7 percent in 2013 with a pre-tax margin
margin improved 1.5 points year to year with margin expansion in of 16.8 percent, an improvement of 1.3 points year to year. GBS
each line of business, as well as in the growth markets and major benefited from reductions in performance-related compensation,
markets. Pre-tax income increased 0.3 percent year to year and the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives and the second-
the pre-tax margin expanded 0.8 points to 17.6 percent. The 2013 quarter 2013 workforce rebalancing activity, partially offset by
margin improvement was driven by reductions in performance- higher year-to-year workforce rebalancing charges. The savings
related compensation, benefits from the second-quarter 2013 from those actions fuel the investments being made in the key
workforce rebalancing activity and efficiency improvements primar- growth initiatives.
ily through the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives, partially The total Global Services business delivered profit growth and
offset by higher year-to-year workforce rebalancing charges. margin expansion throughout 2013. Pre-tax income of $10,197 mil-
The GBS gross profit margin expanded 0.9 points in 2013 with lion in 2013 increased 2.5 percent year to year and the pre-tax
improved profit performance in Application Outsourcing. GBS margin expanded 1.0 points to 17.4 percent.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,932 $25,448 1.9% 2.9%
Middleware $21,557 $20,983 2.7% 3.7%
Key Branded Middleware 17,322 16,528 4.8 5.7
WebSphere Family 8.2 9.1
Information Management 2.8 3.7
Workforce Solutions 10.8 11.9
Tivoli 3.9 4.8
Rational 4.9 6.0
Other middleware 4,235 4,455 (4.9) (3.9)
Operating systems 2,447 2,525 (3.1) (1.9)
Other 1,929 1,940 (0.6) 0.2
Software revenue of $25,932 million increased 1.9 percent as Key branded middleware revenue increased 4.8 percent (6 per-
reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency in 2013 compared cent adjusted for currency), with strong performance in the areas
to 2012. The Software business delivered revenue growth, at of analytics, cloud, mobile, social and security. The faster-growing
constant currency, in all four quarters of the year. Revenue con- and higher-value branded middleware accounted for 67 percent of
tinued to mix toward key branded middleware with growth in all total Software revenue in 2013, an increase of 2 points from 2012.
five brands. The Software value proposition remained strong for WebSphere revenue increased 8.2 percent (9 percent adjusted
enterprise clients. Customers continued to increase deployment for currency) in 2013 and gained share. Revenue performance
of the company’s middleware products and the business invested was driven by double-digit growth in the Commerce offerings,
and gained share in social, mobile, analytics, cloud and security. and growth in Business Integration and the on-premises Applica-
Across the Software brands, there was strong performance in the tion Server business. Mobile contributed strong revenue growth
growth initiatives that address the key market trends—Smarter in 2013. MobileFirst, the company’s comprehensive portfolio
Planet, business analytics and cloud. of mobile software and services, was introduced in 2013 and
In January 2014, the company announced a $1 billion invest- extends value to clients to reach new markets and gain competi-
ment in Watson, and it established a new Watson Group within the tive advantage.
Software business. This new unit is dedicated to the development Information Management revenue increased 2.8 percent
and commercialization of cloud-delivered cognitive innovations. (4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012. Perfor-
mance in 2013 included strong growth in the distributed database
offerings, including Netezza, and content management software.

===== PAGE 59 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Tivoli revenue increased 3.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for ($ in millions)
currency) in 2013 and gained share, driven by storage growth and Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
the security solutions portfolio. Tivoli storage revenue was up Margin
7 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Tivoli security For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
revenue increased 17 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency) Software
and reflected contribution from the acquisition of Trusteer in External gross profit $23,032 $22,569 2.0%
the third quarter of 2013, which extended Tivoli’s data security
External gross profit margin 88.8% 88.7% 0.1 pts.
capabilities further into cloud and mobile environments. The
Pre-tax income $11,106 $10,810 2.7%
transformation driven by mobile and cloud computing is raising
Pre-tax margin 38.1% 37.6% 0.5 pts.
the importance of security for enterprise customers. The com-
pany has been building and expanding its security capabilities
and at year-end 2013 had 6,000 security experts worldwide, 3,000 Software gross profit increased 2.0 percent in 2013, with a gross
patents in security and 25 security laboratories worldwide across profit margin of 88.8 percent. Software pre-tax income increased
software and services. 2.7 percent to $11.1 billion and the pre-tax margin improved
Workforce Solutions revenue increased 10.8 percent (12 per- 0.5 points to 38.1 percent. The Software business had another
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Performance was driven by successful year leveraging revenue growth and expense savings,
Kenexa, which provides cloud-based recruiting and talent man- primarily from the company’s enterprise productivity initiatives, to
agement solutions. drive profit growth and margin expansion. The relative strength
Operating systems revenue decreased 3.1 percent (2 per- of the Software business, fueled by growth in the key growth ini-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013 compared to 2012, driven by tiatives, improved the company’s business mix and contributed
declines in Systems z and Power Systems. to its operating (non-GAAP) consolidated gross and net margin
improvements in 2013.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue $12,988 $16,034 (19.0)% (18.2)%
System z (13.4)% (12.6)%
Power Systems (31.4) (30.7)
System x (13.5) (12.7)
Storage (10.8) (9.7)
Total Systems and Technology excluding Retail Store Solutions (17.2) (16.4)
Retail Store Solutions (Divested in 2012) (98.2) (98.2)
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 19.0 percent (18 per- in MIPS was driven by specialty engines, which increased 17 per-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. Adjusting for the cent year over year and continued to be more than 50 percent of
divested RSS business, revenue declined 17.2 percent (16 percent the total volumes. The decline in System z revenue was expected
adjusted for currency) in 2013. Two issues within the business sig- based on the product’s movement through the product cycle in
nificantly impacted the segment’s revenue and profit performance 2013. In the current mainframe cycle, the company has shipped
in 2013. First, STG was dealing with challenges in its hardware 28 percent more MIPS compared to the same period in the prior
business models specific to Power Systems, Storage and x86. In cycle. The revenue and gross profit in the current cycle are each
addition, System z revenue was impacted by the product cycle, about 99 percent of the previous cycle, net of currency. The addi-
particularly in the second half, as the company entered the back tional MIPS capacity in the current product cycle is a reflection of
end of the current mainframe cycle with difficult period-to-period the ongoing relevance of the mainframe to clients, and provides
comparisons driving revenue declines. the company with financial returns consistent with past cycles.
System z revenue decreased 13.4 percent (13 percent adjusted Power Systems revenue decreased 31.4 percent (31 percent
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The decrease was primarily adjusted for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The Power platform
driven by lower revenue in North America, while revenue increased continued to ship significant capacity into the UNIX market, how-
in the growth markets. Millions of instructions per second (MIPS) ever this was more than offset by significant price performance,
shipments increased 6 percent in 2013 versus 2012. The increase resulting in lower revenue. The company has been very successful

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in the UNIX market, and took two actions to improve its business growth. The Storwize products delivered double-digit growth,
model in Power Systems. First, it is making the platform more rel- which were more than offset by declines in legacy OEM mid-range
evant to clients. To achieve this: offerings, and declines in high-end offerings driven by significant
• In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company introduced a new pricing pressure.
Integrated Facility for Linux offering which enables clients to
run Linux workloads in their existing servers. This mirrors the ($ in millions)
successful strategy the company executed on the System z Yr.-to-Yr.
platform; Percent/
Margin
• The company will expand its Linux relevance even further For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
with POWER8 in 2014, which will provide additional big data Systems and Technology
and cloud capabilities; and
External gross profit $5,299 $6,966 (23.9)%
• Through the company’s OpenPOWER consortium it is making
External gross profit margin 40.8% 43.4% (2.6) pts.
Power technology available to an open development alliance,
Pre-tax income $ 213 $1,866 (88.6)%
building an ecosystem around the Power technologies.
Pre-tax margin 1.6% 11.2% (9.6) pts.
Secondly, even with these additional capabilities, the company
recognizes that the size of the Power platform will not return to The decrease in external gross profit in 2013 versus 2012 was due
prior revenue levels. The company will take action by right-sizing to lower revenue and a lower overall gross profit margin reflecting
the business for the demand characteristics it expects. the business model challenges. Overall gross margin decreased
System x revenue decreased 13.5 percent (13 percent adjusted 2.6 points year to year in 2013 driven by lower margins in Power
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. High-end System x revenue Systems, System x and Storage as well as a decline due to revenue
decreased 16 percent (16 percent adjusted for currency) and mix, partially offset by margin improvement in System z.
blades revenue declined 45 percent (45 percent adjusted for cur- Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased
rency) in 2013 compared to 2012. The declines in both high-end 88.6 percent to $213 million in 2013. Pre-tax margin decreased
System x and blade were partially offset by increased revenue 9.6 points in 2013 versus 2012.
driven by Pure Systems.
Storage revenue decreased 10.8 percent (10 percent adjusted Global Financing
for currency) in 2013 versus 2012. The company’s flash solu- See pages 73 through 77 for an analysis of Global Financing’s seg-
tions continued to gain momentum in 2013 with positive revenue ment results.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change Currency
Total revenue $98,367 $102,874 (4.4)% (2.3)%
Geographies $97,800 $102,268 (4.4)% (2.2)%
Americas 43,249 44,556 (2.9) (2.0)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 31,628 31,775 (0.5) (2.1)
Asia Pacific 22,923 25,937 (11.6) (2.8)
Major markets (4.2)% (2.2)%
Growth markets (4.9)% (2.4)%
BRIC countries (8.2)% (5.6)%

===== PAGE 61 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total geographic revenue of $97,800 million decreased 4.4 per- Total Expense and Other (Income)
cent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2013. Revenue in the
($ in millions)
major markets decreased 4.2 percent (2 percent adjusted for
Yr.-to-Yr.
currency). Revenue from the growth markets, which represented Percent/
Margin
approximately 23 percent of the total geographic revenue for the
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
year, decreased 4.9 percent on a year-to-year basis (2 percent
Total consolidated expense
adjusted for currency). Performance at constant currency in the and other (income) $28,440 $27,821 2.2%
growth markets was mixed, with year-to-year growth in the first half
Non-operating adjustments
offset by declines in the second half. The company had strength
Amortization of acquired
in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa region. How-
intangible assets (370) (328) 12.9
ever, declines in some of the larger growth markets, for example
Acquisition-related charges (40) (35) 14.9
China and Australia, impacted the overall performance in the
growth markets. Within the BRIC countries of Brazil, Russia, India Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income (433) (274) 58.3
and China, combined revenue declined 8.2 percent (6 percent
adjusted for currency). Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other (income) $27,597 $27,184 1.5%
Americas revenue decreased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted
for currency) year to year. The major market countries were down Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue ratio 28.9% 27.0% 1.9 pts.
3.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency), partially offset by an
increase in the Latin America growth markets of 4.4 percent (9 per- Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 28.1% 26.4% 1.7 pts.
cent adjusted for currency). Within the major market countries,
the U.S. was down 3.4 percent and Canada was down 6.3 per-
cent (3 percent adjusted for currency). Within the growth market
Selling, General and Administrative
countries, Brazil increased 3.3 percent (10 percent adjusted for
currency) and Mexico increased 7.8 percent (8 percent adjusted ($ in millions)
for currency). Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Europe/Middle East/Africa revenue decreased 0.5 percent For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
(2 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2012. The major Selling, general and
market countries were down 0.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for administrative expense
currency), while the growth market countries were down 0.6 percent Selling, general and
(up 1 percent adjusted for currency). In the major market countries, administrative—other $19,178 $19,532 (1.8)%
the UK decreased 1.4 percent (flat adjusted for currency), Germany Advertising and promotional
decreased 0.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), France expense 1,294 1,339 (3.4)
decreased 1.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), and Italy Workforce rebalancing charges 1,031 784 31.6
decreased 2.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). Within
Retirement-related costs 986 932 5.8
the EMEA growth markets, the Middle East and Africa region
Amortization of acquired
increased 5.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), but this
intangible assets 370 328 12.9
growth was offset primarily by a decrease in Russia of 22.7 percent
Stock-based compensation 435 498 (12.6)
(22 percent adjusted for currency).
Bad debt expense 156 50 209.8
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 11.6 percent (3 percent
adjusted for currency) year to year. Japan revenue decreased Total consolidated selling, general
and administrative expense $23,451 $23,463 (0.1)%
15.2 percent as reported, but increased 4 percent overall and
grew in every quarter on a constant currency basis. This growth Non-operating adjustments
reflected the benefits of shifting investment and redirection of the Amortization of acquired
company’s go-to-market focus to improve performance in Japan. intangible assets (370) (328) 12.9
The Asia Pacific growth markets decreased 9.1 percent (7 percent Acquisition-related charges (25) (22) 13.3
adjusted for currency), with China down 12.2 percent (14 percent Non-operating retirement-related
adjusted for currency) and Australia down 15.9 percent (10 per- (costs)/income (376) (294) 28.1
cent adjusted for currency). During 2013, performance in China Operating (non-GAAP)
was impacted by the process surrounding the implementation of selling, general and
a broad governmental economic reform plan. administrative expense $22,680 $22,820 (0.6)%

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total SG&A expense decreased 0.1 percent in 2013 versus 2012. There were no significant individual IP transactions in 2013 or
The decrease was primarily driven by the effects of currency 2012. Custom development income declined 36 percent com-
(1 point), offset by acquisition-related spending (2 points). Oper- pared to the prior year due to a reduction in payments from the
ating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 0.6 percent primarily company’s technology alliance partners.
driven by the effects of currency (1 point) and lower base spending
(1 point), partially offset by acquisition-related spending (1 point). Other (Income) and Expense
The decrease was driven by lower SG&A—other expense, as the
($ in millions)
company continued to shift its spending. The company continued
Yr.-to-Yr.
to drive productivity across the business, primarily through its Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
enterprise productivity initiatives, and reinvested most of those
Other (income) and expense
savings into the business to drive its growth areas. The increase in
workforce rebalancing charges was due to actions the company Foreign currency transaction
losses/(gains) $(260) $(240) 8.4%
took in the second quarter of 2013. Bad debt expense increased
$106 million in 2013 versus 2012, primarily driven by higher specific (Gains)/losses on
derivative instruments 166 72 132.5
account reserves. The accounts receivable provision cover-
age was 1.6 percent at December 31, 2013, an increase of 20 Interest income (74) (109) (32.2)
basis points from year-end 2012. Net (gains)/losses from securities
and investment assets (29) (55) (48.0)
Research, Development and Engineering Other (137) (511) (73.3)
($ in millions) Total consolidated other
Yr.-to-Yr. (income) and expense $(333) $(843) (60.5)%
Percent
Non-operating adjustment
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Acquisition-related charges (16) (13) 17.4
Total consolidated research,
development and engineering $5,743 $5,816 (1.3)% Operating (non-GAAP) other
Non-operating adjustment (income) and expense $(349) $(857) (59.3)%
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income (57) 20 NM The decrease in income of $510 million in 2013 was primarily driven
Operating (non-GAAP) research, by lower income from divestitures ($405 million) driven by the gain
development and engineering $5,686 $5,837 (2.6)% associated with the divested RSS business ($446 million) in 2012
reflected in Other in the table above, and increased losses on
NM—Not meaningful
derivative instruments ($95 million) due to foreign currency rate
Total RD&E expense decreased 1.3 percent in 2013 versus 2012, volatility year to year.
primarily driven by lower base spending (3 points), partially offset
by acquisitions (2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense Interest Expense
decreased 2.6 percent in 2013 compared to the prior year pri- ($ in millions)
marily driven by lower base spending (5 points), partially offset by Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
acquisitions (2 points).
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
Interest expense
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Total $402 $459 (12.5)%
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent The decrease in interest expense in 2013 versus 2012 was pri-
For the year ended December 31: 2013 2012 Change
marily driven by lower average interest rates, partially offset by
Sales and other transfers of higher average debt levels. Overall interest expense, including
intellectual property $352 $ 324 8.8%
interest presented in the cost of financing, and excluding capital-
Licensing/royalty-based fees 150 251 (40.1) ized interest, for 2013 was $989 million, a decrease of $15 million
Custom development income 320 500 (36.0) year to year.
Total $822 $1,074 (23.5)%

===== PAGE 63 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Income Taxes Financial Position
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2013 was 16.6 per- Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2013 were
cent, a decrease of 8.0 points versus the prior year, driven by the $11,066 million, consistent with the prior year-end balance. During
following factors: the year the company continued to manage the investment portfo-
• A benefit resulting from the completion of the U.S. 2008–2010 lio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives.
tax audit, including associated reserve redeterminations Total debt of $39,718 million increased $6,449 million from
(11.1 points); the December 31, 2012 level. The commercial paper balance at
• A benefit due to a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax December 31, 2013, was $2,458 million, an increase of $658 mil-
income in 2013 (2.2 points); lion. Within total debt, $27,504 million was in support of the Global
• Benefits from the retroactive impact of the 2012 American Financing business which was leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. The
Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points) and an increase in research company continued to have substantial flexibility in the market.
and development credits (0.5 points); During 2013, the company completed bond issuances totaling
• A benefit from a tax agreement which required a reassess- $10,956 million, with terms ranging from 2 to 12 years, and priced
ment of certain valuation allowances on deferred tax assets from 0.22 to 3.38 percent depending on maturity.
(1.4 points); and, Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea-
• Benefits from the resolution of certain non-U.S. tax audits sured the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans
(0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state tax legislation at December 31. At December 31, 2013, the overall net under-
(0.6 points); partially offset by funded position was $11,434 million, a decrease of $8,756 million
• Tax charges related to certain intercompany payments from December 31, 2012 driven by the increase in discount rates,
made by foreign subsidiaries and the intercompany licensing primarily in the U.S. At year end, the company’s qualified defined
of certain IP (8.8 points); and benefit plans were well funded and the cash requirements related
• The year-over-year impact of the 2012 benefit related to a tax to these plans remain stable going forward at less than $700 mil-
restructuring in Latin America (0.7 points). lion per year through 2015. In 2013, the return on the U.S. Personal
Pension Plan assets was 7.1 percent and the plan was 109 percent
The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 17.0 percent, a
funded. Overall, global asset returns were 7.1 percent and the quali-
decrease of 7.3 points versus 2012 principally driven by the same
fied defined benefit plans worldwide were 102 percent funded.
factors described above.
During 2013, the company generated $17,485 million in cash
from operations, a decrease of $2,102 million compared to 2012. In
Results of Discontinued Operations
addition, the company generated $15,021 million in free cash flow,
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax was $398 million in
a decrease of $3,164 million versus 2012. The company returned
2013 compared to $395 million in 2012. The discontinued opera-
$17,917 million to shareholders in 2013, with $13,859 million in gross
tions effective tax rate in 2013 was 44.8 percent compared to
share repurchases and $4,058 million in dividends. In 2013 the
38.1 percent in 2012.
company repurchased approximately 73 million shares and had
approximately $14.7 billion remaining in share repurchase autho-
rization at year end.

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from
similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 22 for the
company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $48,684 $ 394 $ 629 $49,706
Gross profit margin 49.5% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.5%
SG&A $23,451 $(394) $ (376) $22,680
RD&E 5,743 — (57) 5,686
Other (income) and expense (333) (16) — (349)
Total expense and other (income) 28,440 (410) (433) 27,597
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 20,244 804 1,062 22,110
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 20.6% 0.8 pts. 1.1 pts. 22.5%
Provision for income taxes* $ 3,363 $ 57 $ 333 $ 3,753
Effective tax rate 16.6% (0.4) pts. 0.7 pts. 17.0%
Income from continuing operations $16,881 $ 747 $ 729 $18,356
Income margin from continuing operations 17.2% 0.8 pts. 0.7 pts. 18.7%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (398 ) $ — $ — $ (398 )
Net income $16,483 $ 747 $ 729 $17,959
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 15.30 $0.68 $ 0.66 $ 16.64
Discontinued operations $ (0.36) $ — $ — $ (0.36 )
* T he tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2012: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $50,361 $ 376 $ 264 $51,001
Gross profit margin 49.0% 0.4 pts. 0.3 pts. 49.6%
SG&A $23,463 $(349) $(294) $22,820
RD&E 5,816 — 20 5,837
Other (income) and expense (843) (13) — (857)
Total expense and other (income) 27,821 (363) (274) 27,184
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 22,540 739 538 23,817
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 21.9% 0.7 pts. 0.5 pts. 23.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,541 $ 98 $ 156 $ 5,795
Effective tax rate 24.6% (0.4) pts. 0.1 pts. 24.3%
Income from continuing operations $16,999 $ 641 $ 381 $18,022
Income margin from continuing operations 16.5% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 17.5%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (395) $ — $ — $ (395)
Net income $16,604 $ 641 $ 381 $17,627
Diluted earnings per share:
Continuing operations $ 14.71 $0.56 $0.33 $ 15.60
Discontinued operations $ (0.34) $ — $ — $ (0.34 )
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 65 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company measures the success of its business model over the company expects a continued impact to its software transac-
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s tion revenue growth, as customers continue to utilize the flexibility
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective of that the company has provided to them, as they commit to the
optimizing long-term performance. A long-term perspective ensures company’s platform for the longer term. There are also cyclical
that the company is well-positioned to take advantage of major considerations. Given the geographic breadth of the business, the
shifts occurring in technology, business and the global economy. company has seen challenges in some of its markets—notably
Within the IT industry, there are major shifts occurring—driven many of the growth markets. The company continues to believe
by data, cloud and changes in the ways individuals and enterprises that these are important markets over time, and it continues to
are engaging. In 2014, the company had strong performance in invest to capture these opportunities. However, the company is
its strategic imperatives that are focused on these market shifts. not expecting a robust demand environment in many geographies
Revenue from the company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, social and in 2015. The company also expects a continued impact from cur-
security solutions together increased 16 percent compared to rency in 2015. At January 2015 spot rates, the impact to revenue
2013, including the impacts of currency and the divested indus- growth is expected to be 5–6 points, but, as with all companies
try standard server business. In total, the strategic imperatives with a similar global business profile, with the dollar strengthen-
generated $25 billion in revenue, approximately 27 percent of ing, the company also expects that currency will have a significant
total consolidated revenue, including software content that rep- translation impact on its profit growth. The company also expects
resented a higher percentage than the overall company. As a some cyclical benefits in 2015, including the new mainframe
result, the strategic imperatives deliver gross profit margins that product cycle and a full year of POWER8 availability.
are better than the consolidated gross profit margin on average. Overall, looking forward to 2015, the company expects to con-
In 2014, the company continued to take significant actions to drive tinue to grow in many areas of the business. It expects to deliver
the shift towards its strategic imperatives with targeted invest- strong growth in the strategic imperatives and margin expansion,
ments, as well as moving away from areas that do not support the while continuing a high level of investment and hiring, shifting
strategic profile. to areas that have the best opportunity. However, in the current
The company’s strategic direction is clear and compelling, and currency environment, and considering the impact from the
the company has been successful in shifting to the higher value completed divestitures, total revenue as reported is not expected
areas of enterprise IT. The strong revenue growth in the strategic to grow in 2015. The company expects to have less workforce
imperatives confirms that, as does the overall profitability of the rebalancing charges in 2015 versus 2014, and while it may have
business. The company expects the industry to continue to shift. certain gains, it does not expect to replicate the $1.8 billion of gains
The company expects revenue from its strategic imperatives to recorded in 2014, resulting in a net impact to profit growth. Overall,
continue to grow at a double-digit rate. These offerings are as high the company expects GAAP earnings per share from continuing
value as other parts of the business, which continue to manage cli- operations for 2015 to be in the range of $14.35 to $15.10, and oper-
ents’ most critical business processes. As the cloud business gets ating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to be in the range of $15.75
to scale, and with ongoing productivity improvements across the to $16.50. For the first quarter of 2015, the company expects mid
business, the company expects to have an opportunity to expand single-digit earnings per share growth from continuing operations
margin. In addition, the company expects to continue to allocate compared to the first quarter of 2014, primarily driven by the large
its capital efficiently and effectively to investments, and to return workforce rebalancing charge that was taken in the prior year.
value to its shareholders through a combination of dividends and Overall, and most importantly, the company expects to exit 2015
share repurchases. Over the longer term, in considering the oppor- with a higher-value, higher-margin business.
tunities it will continue to develop, the company expects to have Within the company’s earnings per share expectation for
the ability to generate low single-digit revenue growth, and with a 2015, the company is expecting a 2–3 point benefit from share
higher value business mix, high single-digit operating (non-GAAP) repurchases—less than the impact in 2014. The company enters
earnings per share growth, with free cash flow realization in the 2015 with approximately $6.3 billion of repurchase authorization
90’s percent range. This is a longer term growth trajectory, not an remaining, and the company is assuming it will utilize the majority
absolute end point or a multi-year objective. of the remaining authorization in 2015. The timing of repurchases
In the near term, there are a few dynamics that are incon- will determine the final impact to earnings per share in 2015.
sistent with that longer term trajectory. Specifically, in 2015, the From a segment perspective, the company expects that the
company will be managing certain transitions in the business. As launch of the new mainframe, along with the success in POWER8
an example, while it is fully participating in the shift to cloud, the that the company experienced in the fourth quarter of 2014, will
margins in that business are impacted by the level of investment generate momentum in 2015. As a result, excluding the impact
the company is making, and the fact that the business is not yet of divestitures, the company expects Systems and Technol-
at scale. The company expects an improvement in margin in 2015 ogy to deliver revenue growth in the mid-single digits in 2015.
as the business ramps, but, it will not yet be at scale. In addition, Within Global Services, the company has not assumed a revenue

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
trajectory that requires significant growth within its earnings Liquidity and Capital Resources
expectations. As indicated above, the company has established The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from
a range for its earnings expectation for 2015. The performance operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $16.9
of the Software business is key to this range—the low end of the billion and $19.8 billion per year over the past five years. The com-
expected range assumes no improvement in trajectory for the pany provides for additional liquidity through several sources:
Software business, while the high end of the range assumes a maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global funding
stabilization of the Software business relative to 2014. sources, a committed global credit facility and other committed
The company’s free cash flow performance in 2014 compared and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The following table
to the prior year was impacted by operational performance, an provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years
increase in cash tax payments and working capital impacts related ended December 31, 2010 through 2014.
to the industry standard server divestiture. Looking forward to
2015, at the level of expected profit, the company expects free Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
cash flow to be relatively flat compared to 2014. From a free
($ in billions)
cash flow to income from continuing operations perspective,
2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
free cash flow realization was 79 percent as reported in 2014
Net cash from
and is expected to improve to the mid-80’s percent level in 2015.
operating activities $16.9 $17.5 $19.6 $19.8 $19.5
In 2014, realization was impacted by higher cash tax payments
Cash and short-term
and the gain associated with the industry standard server dives-
marketable securities $ 8.5 $11.1 $11.1 $11.9 $11.7
titure. While these impacts are not expected to be as significant
Committed global
in 2015, the company expects to increase capital investments by
credit facility $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0
approximately $0.5 billion in 2015 driven by the continued buildout
of the SoftLayer cloud platform. In addition, the company expects
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securi-
impacts to realization in 2015 from the timing of payments related
ties at December 31, 2014 appear in the following table and remain
to workforce rebalancing actions taken in 2014 and working capital
unchanged from December 31, 2013. The company’s indenture
impacts related to the industry standard server divestiture. Over-
governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each
all, with a year-to-year profit decline expected, and the impacts
contain significant covenants which obligate the company to
described from capital investments, workforce rebalancing and
promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount
working capital, all this results in the expectation that free cash
of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback transactions to
flow will be essentially flat year to year.
10 percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets,
The company expects, in the normal course of business, that
and restrict the company’s ability to merge or consolidate unless
its effective tax rate and operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will be
certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a cov-
approximately 20 percent in 2015. The rate will change year to year
enant on the company’s consolidated net interest expense ratio,
based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of income
which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default
tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors
provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least
including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing
$500 million.
and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local taxes
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The
The company expects 2015 pre-tax retirement-related plan
failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event
cost to be approximately $2.5 billion, an increase of approximately
of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply.
$500 million compared to 2014. This estimate reflects current
If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2014. Within total
on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan
immediately due and payable.
cost is expected to be approximately $1.6 billion, a decrease of
The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its
approximately $100 million versus 2014. Non-operating retirement-
debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders
related plan cost is expected to be approximately $900 million, an
to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments
increase of approximately $600 million compared to 2014, driven
thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The com-
by increased recognized actuarial losses. Cash disbursements for
pany’s contractual agreements governing derivative instruments
all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $2.7
contain standard market clauses which can trigger the termination
billion in 2015, an increase of approximately $100 million compared
of the agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below
to 2014. See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131
investment grade. At December 31, 2014, the fair value of those
to 145 for additional information.
instruments that were in a liability position was $196 million, before
For a discussion of new accounting standards that the com-
any applicable netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations
pany will adopt in future periods, please see note B, “Accounting
Changes” beginning on page 96.

===== PAGE 67 =====
66 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in fair value period to period based on the level of the company’s operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by
outstanding instruments and market conditions. The company has the company as free cash flow.
no other contractual arrangements that, in the event of a change in From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in
credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect on its finan- 2014, after investing $3.8 billion in capital investments, the com-
cial position or liquidity. pany generated free cash flow of $12.4 billion, a decrease of $2.6
billion compared to 2013. The decrease was driven by higher cash
tax payments ($1.7 billion), the company’s operational performance
Moody’s
Standard Investors Fitch and changes in working capital associated with the divestiture of
& Poor’s Service Ratings
the industry standard server business.
Senior long-term debt AA- Aa3 A+ In 2014, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on
Commercial paper A-1+ Prime-1 F1 returning value to shareholders including $4.3 billion in dividends
and $13.0 billion in net stock transactions, including the common
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows stock repurchase program. In addition, $0.7 billion was utilized for
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow six acquisitions this year.
presentation on page 83 and highlights causes and events under- Over the past five years, the company generated over $78 bil-
lying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 44. For the lion in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors $15 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $79 billion
and analyzes cash flows in a different format. to shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases.
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the The company’s performance during this period demonstrates
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evalu- that there is fungibility across the elements of share repurchases,
ate strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and dividends and acquisitions. The amount of prospective returns
need to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases
under GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash will vary based upon several factors including each year’s oper-
flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The com- ating results, capital expenditure requirements, research and
pany defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities development investments and acquisitions, as well as the factors
less the change in Global Financing receivables and net capital discussed below.
expenditures, including the investment in software. A key objective The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
of the Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2014, the Board
equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a financing of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
business. Accordingly, management considers Global Financ- dividend from $0.95 to $1.10 per share.
ing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working The table below represents the way in which management
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering reviews cash flow as described above.
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 16.9 $ 17.5 $ 19.6 $ 19.8 $ 19.5
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables 0.7 (1.3) (2.9) (0.8) (0.7)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding
Global Financing receivables 16.2 18.8 22.5 20.7 20.3
Capital expenditures, net (3.8) (3.8) (4.3) (4.1) (4.0)
Free cash flow (FCF) 12.4 15.0 18.2 16.6 16.3
Acquisitions (0.7) (3.1) (3.7) (1.8) (5.9)
Divestitures 2.4 0.3 0.6 0.0 0.1
Share repurchase (13.7) (13.9) (12.0) (15.0) (15.4)
Dividends (4.3) (4.1) (3.8) (3.5) (3.2)
Non-Global Financing debt (1.3) 3.2 0.7 1.7 2.3
Other (includes Global Financing receivables
and Global Financing debt) 2.6 2.4 (0.8) 2.3 3.5
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term
marketable securities $ (2.6) $ (0.1) $ (0.8) $ 0.3 $ (2.3)
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations 79% 89% 107% 103% 108%

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow December 31, 2007. No mandatory contribution is required for
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in oper- the U.S. defined benefit plan in 2015 as of December 31, 2014.
ating results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding its current domestic operations and obligations, including invest-
requirements during periods of severe downturn in the capital mar- ing and financing activities such as dividends and debt service.
kets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such The company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows,
an adverse impact will depend on a number of variables, which and, in those circumstances where the company has additional
are more completely described in note M, “Contingencies and cash requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity
Commitments,” on pages 122 to 124. With respect to pension fund- options available. These options may include the ability to borrow
ing, in 2014, the company contributed $519 million to its non-U.S. additional funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its commit-
defined benefit plans versus $507 million in 2013. As highlighted in ted global credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and
the Contractual Obligations table, the company expects to make utilizing intercompany loans with certain foreign subsidiaries.
legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
plans of approximately $3.0 billion in the next five years. The 2015 income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely
contributions are currently expected to be approximately $600 reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and
million. Cash disbursements related to all retirement-related plans accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made
is expected to be approximately $2.7 billion in 2015, an increase on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company
of approximately $0.1 billion compared to 2014. Financial market periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent
performance could increase the legally mandated minimum con- that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantifica-
tributions in certain non-U.S. countries that require more frequent tion of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely
remeasurement of the funded status. The company is not quan- reinvested earnings is not practicable. While the company cur-
tifying any further impact from pension funding because it is not rently does not have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign
possible to predict future movements in the capital markets or subsidiaries, if these funds are needed for operations and obliga-
pension plan funding regulations. tions in the U.S., the company could elect to repatriate these funds
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in which could result in a reassessment of the company’s policy and
2006, and, among other things, increased the funding require- increased tax expense.
ments for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Payments Due In
Total Contractual
Payment Stream 2015 2016–17 2018–19 After 2019
Long-term debt obligations $39,708 $ 4,586 $10,564 $ 6,686 $17,872
Interest on long-term debt obligations 10,437 1,120 2,036 1,437 5,845
Capital (finance) lease obligations 29 13 9 4 2
Operating lease obligations 6,152 1,350 2,149 1,602 1,051
Purchase obligations 1,227 680 437 72 38
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding (mandated)* 3,000 600 1,200 1,200 —
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,730 71 149 158 1,352
Long-term termination benefits 1,823 733 209 153 728
Tax reserves** 3,642 995
Divestiture related 2,391 1,344 799 184 65
Other 1,018 134 200 111 574
Total $71,157 $11,625 $17,751 $11,607 $27,527
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2019 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $995 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the
next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the
progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months.

===== PAGE 69 =====
68 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table Critical Accounting Estimates
excluding the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal The application of GAAP requires the company to make esti-
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial mates and assumptions about certain items and future events that
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the table directly affect its reported financial condition. The accounting esti-
above as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This includes mates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that
deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and the company considers to be the most critical to its financial state-
other sundry items. Certain obligations related to the company’s ments. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the
completed divestitures and the definitive agreement to divest its nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels
Microelectronics business are included. of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet is material to the company’s financial condition. Senior manage-
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the ment has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, these estimates with the Audit Committee of the company’s Board
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments even of Directors. The company’s significant accounting policies are
if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services 86 through 96.
is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that infor-
the table above. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company mation is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and
would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the pen- provides material information to investors. The amounts used to
alty is included as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to
amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included in allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general direction
the table as they represent the portion of each contract that is a cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent
firm commitment. management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates,
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as fore-
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a casted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally Pension Assumptions
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measure-
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased ment of the company’s benefit obligation to employees and
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be pur- net periodic pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain
chase obligations. assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount rates
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the and expected return on plan assets.
effective interest rate at December 31, 2014, plus the interest rate Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the
spread associated with that debt, if any. (gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net
periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected ben-
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements efit obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount rate
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67 defined benefit plan, by 80 basis points to 3.70 percent on Decem-
(FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis ber 31, 2014. This change will increase pre-tax cost and expense
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con- recognized in 2015 by an estimated $272 million. If the discount
tractual Obligations.” rate assumption for the PPP had increased by 80 basis points on
At December 31, 2014, the company had no off-balance sheet December 31, 2014, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2015
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material would have decreased by an estimated $288 million. Changes
current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which,
condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquid- in turn, may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO
ity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table on exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the
page 67 for the company’s contractual obligations, and note M, discount rate would cause a corresponding decrease or increase,
“Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 124, for detailed infor- respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based
mation about the company’s guarantees, financial commitments upon December 31, 2014 data.
and indemnification arrangements. The company does not have
retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities
or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.

===== PAGE 70 =====
Management Discussion 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption experience and market and economic conditions when calculating
is used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each
Expected returns on plan assets are calculated based on the quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates
market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in were changed by 10 percent in 2014, net income would have been
the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period impacted by $78 million (excluding Global Financing receivables).
in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on plan Costs to Complete Service Contracts
assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are rec- The company enters into numerous service contracts through its
ognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets line Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue,
in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate
of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the service profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the
lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method
provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon of accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC
the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
accounting standards. remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its POC-based
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan services contracts in order to determine whether the latest esti-
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in mates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the company to
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption estimate the future costs to complete each contract are future
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of labor costs, future product costs and expected productivity effi-
$264 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension ciencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as a component of
(income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, other accrued expenses and liabilities were approximately $13
2014 and assuming no contributions are made in 2015). million and $41 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be
required, by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual Income Taxes
results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous
future company funding into the pension plans than is planned foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in deter-
by management. Impacts of these types of changes on the com- mining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
pany’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would vary During the ordinary course of business, there are many trans-
depending upon the status of each respective plan. actions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due.
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect expe- These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s
rience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
and other factors. review by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals
For additional information on the company’s pension plans and for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on
the development of these assumptions, see Note S, “Retirement- its assessment of many factors, including past experience and
Related Benefits,” on pages 137 and 138. interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates
and assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments
Revenue Recognition about future events. To the extent that new information becomes
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related available which causes the company to change its judgment
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, com- tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which
plex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may such determination is made.
require significant contract interpretation to determine the appro- Significant judgment is also required in determining any valua-
priate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in tion allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing
a multiple-deliverable arrangement should be treated as separate the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all
units of accounting. Other significant judgments include deter- available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating
mining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of
transaction and whether separate contracts are considered part ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that the company
of one arrangement. changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability that can be realized, the company will adjust its valuation allow-
to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. ance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the
The company considers various factors, including a review of spe- period in which such determination is made.
cific transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical

===== PAGE 71 =====
70 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period In the fourth quarter, the company performed its annual good-
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement will impairment analysis. The qualitative assessment illustrated
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring evidence of a potential impairment triggering event as a result of
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the the financial performance of the Systems and Technology report-
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local ing unit. The quantitative analysis resulted in no impairment as the
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. reporting unit’s estimated fair value exceeded the carrying amount
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ by over 100 percent.
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have Loss Contingencies
decreased/improved by $200 million in 2014. The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status
Valuation of Assets of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial
The application of business combination and impairment account- exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceed-
ing requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. ing is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably
The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations estimated, the company accrues a liability for the estimated loss.
requires the company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, Significant judgment is required in both the determination of
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is
to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these
that are depreciated and amortized from goodwill and indefinite- matters, accruals are based only on the best information available
lived intangible assets. Impairment testing for assets, other than at the time. As additional information becomes available, the com-
goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the alloca- pany reassesses the potential liability related to its pending claims
tion of cash flows to those assets or group of assets and if required, and litigation, and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the
an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. The estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact
company’s estimates are based upon assumptions believed to be on the company’s results of operations and financial position.
reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable.
These valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
that may occur. port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A
description of the methods used by management to estimate the
Valuation of Goodwill amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Signifi-
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually, in the cant Accounting Policies,” on page 95. Factors that could result in
fourth quarter, and whenever events or changes in circumstances actual receivable losses that are materially different from the estim-
indicate the carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. ated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its change in the economic health of a particular client that represents
reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events and a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units. Exam- To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage-
ples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic, industry and ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global
market conditions; as well as other individual factors such as: Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income
• A loss of key personnel; from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher
• A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of or lower by an estimated $58 million (using 2014 data), depending
the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition; upon whether the actual collectibility was better or worse, respec-
• A significant pending litigation; tively, than the estimates.
• A more likely than not expectation that a reporting
unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold Residual Value
or otherwise disposed of; and Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment
• An adverse action or assessment by a regulator. under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as oper-
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine ating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative good- leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current
will impairment test. This quantitative test is required only if the market for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-look-
company concludes that it is more likely than not that a reporting ing product information such as marketing plans and technological
unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. innovations. Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed
and “other than temporary” declines in estimated future residual
values are recognized upon identification. Anticipated increases
in future residual values are not recognized until the equipment
is remarketed.

===== PAGE 72 =====
Management Discussion 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $300 million in 2014.
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment The same mathematical exercise resulted in a decrease of approx-
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations imately $400 million in 2013. The company views these amounts as
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment. a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported financial results.
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than Considering the operational responses mentioned above, move-
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s seg- ments of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of hedging
ment pre-tax income and the company’s income from continuing instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts on
operations before income taxes for 2014 would have been lower any particular period, but the company believes it could be sub-
by an estimated $84 million. If the actual residual value recovery is stantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive
higher than management’s estimates, the increase in income will pressure in the marketplace.
be realized at the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
Currency Rate Fluctuations translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations.
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars.
At December 31, 2014, currency changes resulted in assets and The company continues to monitor the economic conditions
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into in Venezuela. In March 2013, the Venezuelan government created
fewer dollars than at year-end 2013. The company uses financial a new foreign exchange mechanism called the “Complimentary
hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to System of Foreign Currency Acquirement” (or the “SICAD 1”). This
financing transactions and other foreign currency-based trans- system operates similar to an auction system and allows entities
actions. Further discussion of currency and hedging appears in in specific sectors to bid for U.S. dollars to be used for specific
note D, “Financial Instruments-Derivative Financial Instruments,” import transactions. In December 2013, the Venezuelan gov-
on pages 105 through 109. ernment published the SICAD 1 rate implied by the transactions
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses settled in these auctions, and issued Exchange Agreement No.
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During 24 which clarified the use of the SICAD 1 mechanism. In Janu-
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and ary 2014, the government issued Exchange Agreement No. 25,
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pric- and significantly expanded the transactions that qualify for use of
ing offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of SICAD 1 and stated that a new agency called the National Center of
the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position Foreign Commerce (CENCOEX) would assume the role of CADIVI,
competitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, which historically controlled the sale and purchase of foreign cur-
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to rency in Venezuela. In February 2014, the Venezuelan government
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. signed into law a plan to open a new exchange control mechanism
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency- (“SICAD 2”), and indicated that the official rate of 6.3 BsF per USD
based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The would increasingly be reserved for the settlement of USD denomi-
company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash nated obligations related to purchases of “essential goods and
management purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the services.” In March 2014, the Venezuelan government published
volatility of currency impacts on the company’s financial results. operating rules for SICAD 2 in Exchange Agreement No. 27. SICAD
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non- 2 began operating on March 24, 2014. In March 2014, the company
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. adopted the SICAD 1 rate of 10.7 BsF per USD. In the first quarter
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax loss of $31 million as
reflect adjustments based upon a simple constant currency math- a result of the devaluation in Other (income) and expense in the
ematical translation of local currency results using the comparable Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2014, the
prior period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant company’s net asset position in Venezuela was $42 million. The
currency methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this company’s operations in Venezuela comprised less than 1 percent
information does not incorporate any operational actions that of total 2014, 2013 and 2012 revenue, respectively. In February 2015,
management may take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. the Venezuelan government created a new foreign exchange plat-
Currency movements impacted the company’s year-to-year reve- form, the Marginal Currency System, or SIMADI. The company will
nue and earnings per share growth in 2014. Based on the currency monitor transactions from this new system going forward in 2015.
rate movements in 2014, total revenue decreased 5.7 percent as
reported and 4.0 percent at constant currency versus 2013. On
an income from continuing operations before income taxes basis,
these translation impacts offset by the net impact of hedging activ-
ities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or

===== PAGE 73 =====
72 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In January 2014, the Argentinian government devalued its cur- Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces-
rency from 6 pesos to the U.S. dollar to 8 pesos to the U.S. dollar. sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company
This devaluation did not have a material impact given the size of would incur under normal market conditions because, due to prac-
the company’s operations in Argentina (less than 1 percent of total tical limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk
2014 revenue). factor are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are
constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded
Market Risk from the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the com- financing or hedging of those items are included by definition.
pany is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the Excluded items include short-term and long-term receivables
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements from sales-type and direct financing leases, forecasted foreign
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and currency cash flows and the company’s net investment in foreign
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts operations. As a consequence, reported changes in the values
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets. of some of the financial instruments impacting the results of the
The company regularly assesses these risks and has estab- sensitivity analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes
lished policies and business practices to protect against the in the values of the items that those instruments are designed to
adverse effects of these and other potential exposures. As a finance or hedge.
result, the company does not anticipate any material losses from The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2014 and
these risks. 2013, are as follows:
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing busi-
ness and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, Interest Rate Risk
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and At December 31, 2014, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of inter-
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through est rates with all other variables held constant would result in a
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments
described in note D, “Financial Instruments—Derivative Financial of $123 million as compared with a decrease of $322 million at
Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109. December 31, 2013. A 10 percent increase in the levels of inter-
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a est rates with all other variables held constant would result in an
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk expo- increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of
sures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other $119 million as compared to an increase of $300 million at Decem-
financial instruments. ber 31, 2013. Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity the company’s financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash equiva- changes in the level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes
lents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, in the company’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
commercial financing and installment payment receivables,
investments, long-term and short-term debt and derivative finan- Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
cial instruments. The company’s derivative financial instruments At December 31, 2014, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against
generally include interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would
forward contracts. result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the instruments of $872 million as compared with an increase of $1,340
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes million at December 31, 2013. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger
in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market- U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other variables
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair value of the
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value company’s financial instruments of $872 million compared with a
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are decrease of $1,340 million at December 31, 2013. The change in
attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount impact from 2013 to 2014 was comprised of: a decrease in assets
rates used for the present value computations were selected ($123 million), an increase in debt ($362 million) and an increase in
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates derivatives ($230 million).
in effect at December 31, 2014 and 2013. The differences in this
comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with Financing Risks
each type of risk. See the “Description of Business” on page 31 for a discussion of
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.

===== PAGE 74 =====
Management Discussion 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cybersecurity
The company’s approach on cybersecurity leverages its ability From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi-
to adapt to a changing environment, as well as the depth and faceted risk-management approach to identify and address
breadth of its global capabilities, both in terms of its offerings cybersecurity risks. The company has established policies and
to clients and its internal approaches to risk management. The procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s infrastruc-
company has commercial solutions that deliver identity and ture and data are managed. IBM performs ongoing assessments
access management, data security, application security, network regarding its technical controls and its methods for identifying
security and endpoint security. IBM’s solutions include a security emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The company uses a
intelligence dashboard that can collect information on customer layered approach with overlapping controls to defend against
IT security events and provide detailed information to custom- cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, datacen-
ers about potential threats and security posture. The company’s ters and applications. The company also has a global incident
services businesses offer professional solutions for security from response process to respond to cybersecurity threats. In addition,
assessment to deployment. In addition, the company offers man- the company utilizes a combination of online training, educational
aged and outsourced security solutions from multiple security tools, and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security
operations centers around the world. Finally, security is embed- awareness and responsibility among its workforce.
ded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineering
processes and by critical functions (encryption, access control,
etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014–13 2013–12
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 379,592* 431,212 434,246 (12.0)% (0.7)%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 8,862 9,018 8,009 (1.7) 12.6
Complementary 24,321 23,555 24,740 3.3 (4.8)
* Reflects reduction of approximately 35,000 resources due to divestitures in 2014.
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both
more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business to financing revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Origi-
the higher value segments of enterprise IT. The decrease in total nations, which determine the asset base of Global Financing’s
resources from 2013 to 2014 was primarily due to divestitures in annuity-like business, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing
2014, which drove a reduction of approximately 35,000 resources. sales and services volumes and Global Financing’s participation
The company continues to remix its skills and resource needs to rates. Participation rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to
match the best opportunities in the marketplace. finance their transactions through Global Financing in lieu of paying
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equiv- IBM up-front cash or financing through a third party.
alent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and
limited- term employment arrangements to meet specific business Results of Operations
needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012
GLOBAL FINANCING External revenue $2,034 $2,022 $2,013
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a
Internal revenue 2,488 2,282 2,060
stand-alone entity.
Total revenue 4,522 4,304 4,073
In 2014, the Global Financing business remained focused on
Cost 1,428 1,417 1,400
its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing deliv- Gross profit $3,094 $2,888 $2,673
ered external revenue of $2,034 million and total revenue of $4,522 Gross profit margin 68.4% 67.1% 65.6%
million, and expanded gross margin. Total pre-tax income of $2,189 Pre-tax income $2,189 $2,171 $2,034
million increased 0.8 percent compared to 2013 and return on
After-tax income* $1,462 $1,456 $1,362
equity was 36.8 percent.
Return on equity* 36.8% 40.6% 41.0%
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results * See page 77 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation.
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact

===== PAGE 75 =====
74 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2014 increased $218 million versus 2013 as a Global Financing pre-tax income increased 0.8 percent in
result of: 2014 versus 2013, following an increase of 6.8 percent in 2013
• An increase in internal revenue of 9.0 percent driven by an versus 2012. The increase in 2014 was driven by the increase in
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 11.1 percent to gross profit ($207 million), partially offset by increases in financ-
$2,080 million); partially offset by a decrease in financing ing receivables provisions ($155 million) and SG&A expenses ($32
revenue (down 0.7 percent to $408 million); and million). The increase in 2013 was driven by the increase in gross
• An increase in external revenue of 0.6 percent (up 3 percent profit ($215 million), partially offset by increases in financing receiv-
adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing ables provisions ($60 million) and SG&A expenses ($20 million).
revenue (up 3.4 percent to $1,543 million), partially offset by a The increase in financing receivable provisions in 2014 was due to
decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down 7.2 percent higher specific reserve requirements, primarily in China and Latin
to $491 million). America. At December 31, 2014, the overall allowance for credit
losses coverage rate was 1.9 percent, an increase of 70 basis
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to points year over year.
lower asset yields, partially offset by an increase in the average The decreases in return on equity from 2013 to 2014 and 2012
asset balance. The increase in external financing revenue was to 2013 were driven by higher average equity balances.
due to a higher average asset balance, partially offset by lower
asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global Financial Condition
Financing gross profit increased 7.2 percent compared to 2013 due
Balance Sheet
to an increase in used equipment sales gross profit, partially offset
($ in millions)
by a decrease in financing gross profit. The gross profit margin
At December 31: 2014 2013
increased 1.3 points due to an increase in the equipment sales
margin, partially offset by a decrease in the financing margin. Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,538 $ 1,446
Total revenue in 2013 increased $232 million versus 2012 as a Net investment in sales-type
result of: and direct financing leases 8,263 9,739
• An increase in internal revenue of 10.8 percent driven by an Equipment under operating leases:
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 20.0 percent External clients (a) 774 947
to $1,871 million), partially offset by a decrease in financing
Client loans 14,290 14,297
revenue (down 17.9 percent to $411 million); and
Total client financing assets 23,327 24,982
• An increase in external revenue of 0.4 percent (3 percent
adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing Commercial financing receivables 8,424 8,541
revenue (up 1.4 percent to $1,493 million), partially offset by a Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c) 4,611 4,216
decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down 2.3 per- Other receivables 368 352
cent to $528 million).
Other assets 577 601
Total assets $38,845 $40,138
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to
lower asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Intercompany payables (b) $ 3,631 $ 5,766
The increase in external financing revenue was due to a higher Debt (d) 29,103 27,504
average asset balance, partially offset by lower asset yields and Other liabilities 2,094 3,043
a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global Financing gross
Total liabilities 34,828 36,314
profit in 2013 increased 8.0 percent compared to 2012 due to
Total equity 4,017 3,825
an increase in used equipment sales gross profit, partially offset
by a decrease in financing gross profit. The gross profit margin Total liabilities and equity $38,845 $40,138
increased 1.5 points due to an increase in equipment sales mar- (a) Includes intercompany markup, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products pur-
gins, partially offset by a shift in mix toward lower margin used chased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s
consolidated results.
equipment sales.
(b) E ntire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore
does not appear on page 82.
(c) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the
value in the table using Global Financing debt.
(d) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. A por-
tion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, or
related to intercompany markup embedded in the Global Financing assets.

===== PAGE 76 =====
Management Discussion 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Sources and Uses of Funds Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client The following table presents external financing receivables exclud-
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end ing residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
users consist of IBM systems, software and services, and OEM
equipment, software and services to meet IBM clients’ total solu- ($ in millions)
tions requirements. Client financing assets are primarily sales-type, At December 31: 2014 2013
direct financing and operating leases for systems products, as well
Gross financing receivables $31,007 $32,319
as loans for systems, software and services with terms up to seven
Specific allowance for credit losses 484 279
years. Global Financing’s client loans are primarily for software and
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 96 113
services, and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit
analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, when deemed nec- Total allowance for credit losses 580 392
essary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements Net financing receivables $30,427 $31,928
which include covenants to protect against credit deterioration Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.9% 1.2%
during the life of the obligation.
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables
IBM and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory financing Allowance for Credit Losses
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and ($ in millions)
are also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate Allowance Additions/ December 31,
January 1, 2014 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2014
the associated risk.
$392 $(26 ) $240 $(25 ) $580
In addition to the actions previously described, in certain cir-
cumstances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were written off during
credit risk to third parties. the period.
** Primarily represents translation adjustments.
At December 31, 2014, substantially all financing assets were IT
related assets, and approximately 59 percent of the total external
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was
portfolio was with investment grade clients with no direct exposure
1.9 percent at December 31, 2014, and 1.2 percent at Decem-
to consumers.
ber 31, 2013. Specific reserves increased 74 percent from $279
million at December 31, 2013, to $484 million at December 31,
Originations
2014. Unallocated reserves decreased 15 percent from $113 mil-
The following are total financing originations:
lion at December 31, 2013, to $96 million at December 31, 2014,
primarily due to the decrease in gross financing receivables and
($ in millions) a shift in gross financing receivables reserves from general to
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 specific coverage.
Client financing $15,099 $15,792 $16,277 Global Financing’s bad debt expense was an increase of $240
Commercial financing 43,664 41,027 36,944 million for 2014, compared to an increase of $85 million for 2013.
The year-to-year increase in bad debt expense was due to higher
Total $58,762 $56,819 $53,222
specific reserve requirements, primarily in China and Latin Amer-
ica, in the current year.
In 2014, cash collection of commercial financing and client financ-
ing assets exceeded new financing originations. This resulted in
Residual Value
a net decline in total financing assets from December 2013. The
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and
increase in originations in 2014 versus 2013, and in 2013 versus
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accu-
2012, was due to improving volumes in commercial financing. Inter-
rately project future equipment values at lease inception. Global
nal loan financing with Global Services is executed under a loan
Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM
facility and is not considered originations.
products under lease. Based upon this product information, Global
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2014 was deployed
Financing continually monitors projections of future equipment
to pay intercompany payables and dividends to IBM as well as
values and compares them with the residual values reflected in
business partners and OEM suppliers. Intercompany payables
the portfolio.
declined in 2014 due to lower IBM volumes and shorter settle-
ment terms, which are in line with external suppliers.

===== PAGE 77 =====
76 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by for the covered equipment and provide protection against risk of
selling assets sourced from lease returns, leasing used equip- loss arising from declines in equipment values for these assets.
ment to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease
clients. Sales of equipment include equipment returned off of a payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a
lease, surplus internal equipment, or used equipment purchased lease as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating
externally. These sales represented 56.9 percent and 55.8 per- lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the guaran-
cent of Global Financing’s revenue in 2014 and 2013, respectively. tees of sales-type leases were $503 million and $479 million for
The gross profit margins on these sales were 64.9 percent and the financing transactions originated during the years ended
58.3 percent in 2014 and 2013, respectively. The increase in the December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In 2014, the residual
gross profit margin was driven by a margin increase in internal value guarantee program resulted in the company recognizing
equipment sales and a shift in mix toward higher margin internal approximately $378 million of revenue that would otherwise have
equipment sales. recognized in future periods as operating lease revenue. If the
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed company had chosen to not participate in a residual value guar-
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases antee program in 2014 and prior years, the 2014 impact would be
at December 31, 2014 and 2013. In addition, the table presents substantially mitigated by the effect of prior year asset values being
the residual value as a percentage of the related original amount recognized as operating lease revenue in the current year. The
financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of direct
assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, 2014 is expected financing leases were $204 million and $218 million for the financ-
to be returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed ing transactions originated during the years ended December 31,
residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guar- 2014 and 2013, respectively. The associated aggregate guaranteed
antees of the future value of the equipment to be returned at end future values at the scheduled end of lease were $25 million and
of lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are $29 million for the financing transactions originated during the
also obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guar- years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The cost
antees are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by of guarantees was $2 million and $3 million for the years ended
accounting standards in the determination of lease classifications December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2014 Balance
2018 and
At December 31: 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 736 $ 671 $122 $187 $224 $138
Operating leases 200 166 56 55 40 15
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 936 $ 837 $178 $242 $264 $153
Related original amount financed $17,642 $15,636
Percentage 5.3% 5.4%
Debt
expense relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external
At December 31: 2014 2013 client and internal business is included in the “Global Financing
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.2x 7.2x Results of Operations” on page 73 and in note T, “Segment Infor-
mation,” on pages 145 to 150.
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to external debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financ-
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans ing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by financing to interest expense.
the company to substantially match the term and currency underly- The following table provides additional information on total
ing the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes inter-
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com- nal loans and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The com-
by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures pany believes these assets should be appropriately leveraged in
Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest line with the overall Global Financing business model.

===== PAGE 78 =====
Management Discussion 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
December 31, 2014 December 31, 2013
Global Financing Segment $29,103 $27,504
Debt to support external clients $25,531 $24,471
Debt to support internal clients 3,572 3,033
Non-Global Financing Segments 11,701 12,214
Debt supporting operations 15,274 15,247
Intercompany activity (3,572) (3,033)
Total company debt $40,804 $39,718
Liquidity and Capital Resources IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access period where IBM could not access the capital markets would
to capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was likely lead to a slowdown in originations.
deployed to pay dividends to the company in order to maintain an Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The
company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, com-
Return on Equity bined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate
gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.
($ in millions)
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
At December 31: 2014 2013
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provi-
Numerator
sion for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply
Global Financing after-tax income (a)* $1,462 $1,456
rigorous credit policies in both the origination of new business
Denominator and the evaluation of the existing portfolio. Global Financing has
Average Global Financing equity (b)** $3,973 $3,585 historically been able to manage residual value risk both through
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b) 36.8% 40.6% insight into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its
remarketing business.
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a
consolidated basis. key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters. product and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent man-
agement of the business going forward, even during periods of
Looking Forward
uncertainty with respect to the global economy.
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and fund-
ing capacity which enables the company to be well positioned
in the current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new
financing volumes are IBM and OEM products and services
financed to the company’s clients and business partners, and sub-
stantially all financing assets are IT related assets which provide
a stable base of business for future growth. Global Financing’s
offerings are competitive and available to clients as a result of the
company’s borrowing cost and access to the capital markets.
Overall, Global Financing’s originations will be dependent upon
the demand for IT products and services as well as client partici-
pation rates.

===== PAGE 79 =====
78 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM man- adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
agement. The accompanying financial statements have been Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain esti- reporting and the preparation of financial statements for exter-
mates and judgments as required. nal purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, accepted in the United States of America.
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the con- of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
trol environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
to correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate commu- company are being made only in accordance with authorizations
nication channels and foster an environment conducive to the of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance with of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into numerous Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
languages, are distributed to employees throughout the world, reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
and reemphasized through internal programs to assure that they jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
are understood and followed. subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon- policies or procedures may deteriorate.
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria estab-
to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically lished in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued
and privately with the independent registered public accounting by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM man- Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management con-
agement, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure cluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting
and financial reporting matters. was effective as of December 31, 2014.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered
public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated
Financial Statements and the effectiveness of the internal con-
trol over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on
audits conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 24, 2015
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 24, 2015

===== PAGE 80 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of
Directors of International Business
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State- A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a pro-
ments appearing on pages 80 through 150 present fairly, in all cess designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
material respects, the financial position of International Busi- reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
ness Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
2014 and 2013 and the results of their operations and their cash accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
flows for each of the three years in the period ended Decem- financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)
ber 31, 2014 in conformity with accounting principles generally pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of
Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2014, based transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organ izations of the accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
Treadway Commission (COSO). The Company’s management is company are being made only in accordance with authorizations
responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effec- of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
tive internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Inter- assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
nal Control over Financial Reporting appearing on page 78. Our Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
and on the Company’s internal control over financial report- jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
ing based on our integrated audits. We conducted our audits in subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that we policies or procedures may deteriorate.
plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about
whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement
and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was
maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial state- PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
ments included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting New York, New York
the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing February 24, 2015
the accounting principles used and significant estimates made
by management, and evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. Our audit of internal control over financial report-
ing included obtaining an understanding of internal control over
financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness
exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effec-
tiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits
also included performing such other procedures as we considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide
a reasonable basis for our opinions.

===== PAGE 81 =====
80 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2014 2013* 2012*
Revenue
Services $55,673 $57,655 $ 59,453
Sales 35,063 38,666 41,381
Financing 2,057 2,047 2,040
Total revenue T 92,793 98,367 102,874
Cost
Services 36,034 37,564 39,166
Sales 9,312 11,009 12,260
Financing 1,040 1,110 1,087
Total cost 46,386 49,683 52,513
Gross profit 46,407 48,684 50,361
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 23,180 23,451 23,463
Research, development and engineering O 5,437 5,743 5,816
Intellectual property and custom development income (742) (822) (1,074)
Other (income) and expense (1,938) (333) (843)
Interest expense D&J 484 402 459
Total expense and other (income) 26,421 28,440 27,821
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 19,986 20,244 22,540
Provision for income taxes N 4,234 3,363 5,541
Income from continuing operations 15,751 16,881 16,999
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax C (3,729) (398) (395)
Net income $12,022 $16,483 $ 16,604
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations P $ 15.59 $ 15.30 $ 14.71
Discontinued operations P (3.69) (0.36) (0.34)
Total P $ 11.90 $ 14.94 $ 14.37
Basic
Continuing operations P $ 15.68 $ 15.42 $ 14.88
Discontinued operations P (3.71) (0.36) (0.35)
Total P $ 11.97 $ 15.06 $ 14.53
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 1,010,000,480 1,103,042,156 1,155,449,317
Basic 1,004,272,584 1,094,486,604 1,142,508,521
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2014 2013 2012
Net income $12,022 $16,483 $16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (1,636) (1,335) (44)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (29) (4) 8
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 5 (8) (42)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 0 4 20
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (24) (8) (14)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 958 43 32
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (97) (166) (253)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges 861 (123) (220)
Retirement-related benefit plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) 1 16 —
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (9,799) 5,369 (7,489)
Curtailments and settlements 24 (3) (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (114) (114) (148)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,531 3,499 2,457
Total retirement-related benefit plans (7,357) 8,767 (5,182)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L (8,156) 7,301 (5,460)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income L 1,883 (3,144) 1,587
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L (6,274) 4,157 (3,874)
Total comprehensive income $ 5,748 $20,641 $12,731
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 83 =====
82 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2014 2013
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 8,476 $ 10,716
Marketable securities D 0 350
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $336 in 2014 and $291 in 2013) 9,090 10,465
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $452 in 2014 and $308 in 2013) F 19,835 19,787
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $40 in 2014 and $36 in 2013) 2,906 1,584
Inventories E 2,103 2,310
Deferred taxes N 2,044 1,651
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 4,967 4,488
Total current assets 49,422 51,350
Property, plant and equipment G 39,034 40,475
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 28,263 26,654
Property, plant and equipment—net G 10,771 13,821
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $126 in 2014 and $80 in 2013) F 11,109 12,755
Prepaid pension assets S 2,160 5,551
Deferred taxes N 4,808 3,051
Goodwill I 30,556 31,184
Intangible assets—net I 3,104 3,871
Investments and sundry assets H 5,603 4,639
Total assets $ 117,532 $ 126,223
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 5,084 $ 4,633
Short-term debt D&J 5,731 6,862
Accounts payable 6,864 7,461
Compensation and benefits 4,031 3,893
Deferred income 11,877 12,557
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 6,013 4,748
Total current liabilities 39,600 40,154
Long-term debt D&J 35,073 32,856
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations S 18,261 16,242
Deferred income 3,691 4,108
Other liabilities K 8,892 9,934
Total liabilities 105,518 103,294
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 52,666 51,594
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2014—2,215,209,574; 2013—2,207,522,548)
Retained earnings 137,793 130,042
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2014—1,224,685,815; 2013—1,153,131,611) (150,715) (137,242)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (27,875) (21,602)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 11,868 22,792
Noncontrolling interests A 146 137
Total equity 12,014 22,929
Total liabilities and equity $ 117,532 $ 126,223
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 12,022 $ 16,483 $ 16,604
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 3,145 3,327 3,392
Amortization of intangibles 1,347 1,351 1,284
Stock-based compensation 512 614 688
Deferred taxes (237) (1,610) 797
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (1,535) (236) (729)
Loss on microelectronics business disposal 3,381 — —
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) 1,270 (1,407) (2,230)
Retirement related (655) 294 (1,008)
Inventories (39) (57) 280
Other assets/other liabilities (1,886) (747) 733
Accounts payable (456) (529) (224)
Net cash provided by operating activities 16,868 17,485 19,586
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (3,740) (3,623) (4,082)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 404 372 410
Investment in software (443) (517) (635)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (2,338) (4,608) (4,109)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 2,493 4,873 3,142
Non-operating finance receivables—net (1,078) (1,063) (608)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (656) (3,056) (3,722)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 2,357 297 599
Net cash used in investing activities (3,001) (7,326) (9,004)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 8,180 16,353 12,242
Payments to settle debt (4,644) (10,013) (9,549)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net (1,753) 621 (441)
Common stock repurchases (13,679) (13,859) (11,995)
Common stock transactions—other 709 1,074 1,540
Cash dividends paid (4,265) (4,058) (3,773)
Net cash used in financing activities (15,452) (9,883) (11,976)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (655) 28 (116)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents (2,240) 304 (1,511)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 10,716 10,412 11,922
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 8,476 $ 10,716 $ 10,412
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 5,748 $ 4,024 $ 3,169
Interest paid on debt $ 1,061 $ 982 $ 1,009
Capital lease obligations $ 2 $ 14 $ 10
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 85 =====
84 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2012
Equity, January 1, 2012 $48,129 $104,857 $(110,963) $(21,885) $ 20,138 $ 97 $ 20,236
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 16,604 16,604 16,604
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (3,874) (3,874) (3,874)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 12,731 $ 12,731
Cash dividends paid—common stock (3,773) (3,773) (3,773)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (15,091,320 shares) 1,532 1,532 1,532
Purchases (2,406,007 shares) and
sales (2,746,169 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (48) (160) (208) (208)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (61,246,371 shares) (12,008) (12,008) (12,008)
Changes in other equity 448 448 448
Changes in noncontrolling interests 27 27
Equity, December 31, 2012 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2013
Equity, January 1, 2013 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 16,483 16,483 16,483
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 4,157 4,157 4,157
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 20,641 $ 20,641
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,058) (4,058) (4,058)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (9,961,389 shares) 1,216 1,216 1,216
Purchases (1,666,069 shares) and
sales (1,849,883 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (25) (117) (142) (142)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (73,121,942 shares) (13,993) (13,993) (13,993)
Changes in other equity 268 268 268
Changes in noncontrolling interests 13 13
Equity, December 31, 2013 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $ 22,792 $137 $ 22,929
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 86 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2014
Equity, January 1, 2014 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $ 22,792 $137 $ 22,929
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 12,022 12,022 12,022
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (6,274) (6,274) (6,274)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 5,748 $ 5,748
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,265) (4,265) (4,265)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (7,687,026 shares) 977 977 977
Purchases (1,313,569 shares) and
sales (1,264,232 shares) of treasury
stock under employee plans—net (6) (79) (85) (85)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (71,504,867 shares) (13,395) (13,395) (13,395)
Changes in other equity 95 95 95
Changes in noncontrolling interests 8 8
Equity, December 31, 2014 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $ 11,868 $146 $ 12,014
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 86 through 150 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 87 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. Use of Estimates
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
Basis of Presentation affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with disclosures. These estimates are based on management’s best
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that
America (GAAP). the company may undertake in the future and on various other
Within the financial statements and tables presented, cer- assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circum-
tain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded stances. As a result, actual results may be different from these
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are cal- estimates. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 68 to 71
culated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior for a discussion of the company’s critical accounting estimates.
year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year
presentation. This is annotated where applicable. Revenue
On October 20, 2014, the company announced a definitive The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and manufactur- and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable
ing operations to GLOBALFOUNDRIES. The assets and liabilities and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement,
of the Microelectronics business are reported as held for sale at delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and
December 31, 2014. The operating results of the Microelectronics collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until
business have been reported as discontinued operations. Prior products have been shipped or services have been provided to
periods have been reclassified to conform to this presentation to the client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client
allow for a meaningful comparison of continuing operations. Refer acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have
to note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” for additional information on lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
the transaction. specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied.
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $6 million, $7 million and $11 The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until
million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
2012, respectively, are included in the Consolidated Statement of The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution pro-
Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. viders, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”)
when the reseller has: economic substance apart from the com-
Principles of Consolidation pany, credit risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of the company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority user, the company has no further obligations related to bringing
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary about resale or delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial have been met.
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrol- The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns,
ling interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated stock rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allow-
Statement of Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities ances. (See Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and
(VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if Reserves” included in the company’s Annual Report on Form
required. Investments in business entities in which the company 10-K). Revenue is recognized only if these estimates can be rea-
does not have control, but has the ability to exercise significant sonably and reliably determined. The company bases its estimates
influence over operating and financial policies, are accounted for on historical results taking into consideration the type of client,
using the equity method and the company’s proportionate share the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement.
of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The Payments made under cooperative marketing programs are rec-
accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is on ognized as an expense only if the company receives from the client
page 95 within “Marketable Securities.” Equity investments in non- an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale
publicly traded entities are primarily accounted for using the cost whose fair value can be reasonably and reliably estimated. If the
method. All intercompany transactions and accounts have been company does not receive an identifiable benefit sufficiently sepa-
eliminated in consolidation. rable from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably
estimated, such payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue.
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as
to determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being rec-
notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or ognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the
has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the com- earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered
pany adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element
was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, and there is a relative selling price for all units of accounting in an
has latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk. arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative selling
taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on price. The following revenue policies are then applied to each unit
and concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In of accounting, as applicable.
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are Revenue from the company’s business analytics, mobile,
the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable security, social and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue
arrangements and for each major category of revenue. recognition policies for multiple deliverable arrangements and for
each major category of revenue depending on the type of offering
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements which can be comprised of services, hardware and/or software.
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may con-
sist of multiple deliverables of its products and services based Services
on the needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any The company’s primary services offerings include information
combination of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourc-
example, a client may purchase a server that includes operating ing, application management services, consulting and systems
system software. In addition, the arrangement may include post- integration, technology infrastructure and system maintenance,
contract support for the software and a contract for post-warranty hosting and the design and development of complex IT systems
maintenance service for the hardware. These types of arrange- to a client’s specifications (design and build). These services are
ments can also include financing provided by the company. These provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or
arrangements consist of multiple deliverables, with the hardware as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the contract
and software delivered in one reporting period and the software terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.
support and hardware maintenance services delivered across Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
multiple reporting periods. In another example, a client may out- contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided
source the running of its datacenter operations to the company on using either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line
a long-term, multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers basis over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the
and/or software products from the company to upgrade or expand amount of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered
its facility. The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous in the period.
basis across multiple reporting periods and the hardware and soft- Revenue from application management services, technology
ware products are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent infrastructure and system maintenance and hosting contracts is
that a deliverable in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
to specific accounting guidance that deliverable is accounted for Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
in accordance with such specific guidance. Examples of such hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
arrangements may include leased hardware which is subject to related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
specific leasing guidance or software which is subject to specific is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
software revenue recognition guidance on whether and/or how to Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
separate multiple-deliverable arrangements into separate units of nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under
accounting (separability) and how to allocate the arrangement con- the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs
sideration among those separate units of accounting (allocation). incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs
For all other deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original
the guidance below is applied for separability and allocation. A estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward comple-
multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into more than one tion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may
unit of accounting if the following criteria are met: result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs,
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which
basis; and the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative by the company.
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially
in the control of the company.

===== PAGE 89 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its In multiple-deliverable arrangements that include software
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order that is more than incidental to the products or services as a
to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and whole (software multiple-deliverable arrangements), software
profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that and software-related elements are accounted for in accordance
the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the with software revenue recognition guidance. Software-related
remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC elements include software products and services for which a soft-
method services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred. ware deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tangible products
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to containing software components and non-software components
recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income that function together to deliver the tangible product’s essential
of $6,352 million and $7,153 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, functionality are not within the scope of software revenue recogni-
respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial tion guidance and are accounted for based on other applicable
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the revenue recognition guidance.
services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated
$1,833 million and $2,053 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, into more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria
respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in are met:
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. • The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs on the undelivered element(s);
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. • There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months. value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based
on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately
Hardware by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the mul-
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of tiple-deliverable arrangement; and
system servers, storage solutions and the sale of semiconductors. • Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination
The company also offers installation services for its more complex of the earnings process for that element(s).
hardware products.
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is rec- If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted
ognized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being
are no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties the earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undeliv-
and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunc- ered element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element
tory are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an
Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the
straight-line basis over the term of the rental or lease. separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE
of fair value. There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE
Software of fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is the delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue rec- to allocate the arrangement consideration. Under the residual
ognition criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring method, the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered
license charge) license software is recognized on a straight-line item(s) equals the total arrangement consideration less the aggre-
basis over the period that the client is entitled to use the license. gate VSOE of fair value of the undelivered elements.
Revenue from post-contract support, which may include unspeci- The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have
fied upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
straight-line basis over the period such items are delivered. Reve- software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
nue from software hosting or software-as-a-service arrangements multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software
is recognized as the service is delivered, generally on a straight- deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the rela-
line basis, over the longer of the term of the arrangement or the tive selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using
expected period of the customer relationship. In software hosting the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of
arrangements, the rights provided to the customer (e.g., ownership selling price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the com-
of a license, contract termination provisions and the feasibility of pany cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of
the customer to operate the software) are considered in determin- the deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliver-
ing whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements able, BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
which include a software license, the associated revenue is rec-
ognized according to whether the license is perpetual or term,
subject to the guidance above.

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financ- value of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements are
ing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized revenue over the expected period of benefit not to exceed the
on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. term of the contract. The company performs periodic reviews to
assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup
Best Estimate of Selling Price costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated minimum
In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to the unamor-
VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When tized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted cash flows
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an impairment
the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is deter- loss is recognized.
mined based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,230
sold separately. million and $2,402 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respec-
When the company is unable to establish selling price using tively. Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs
VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange- was estimated at December 31, 2014 to be $738 million in 2015,
ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the $525 million in 2016, $388 million in 2017, $250 million in 2018 and
price at which the company would transact a sale if the product or $329 million thereafter.
service were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value
company sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $64
and therefore has established VSOE for its products and services million and $89 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respec-
offerings, the company uses BESP to determine the relative selling tively. Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess
price for a product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement of the fair value of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of rev-
on an infrequent basis. An example of when BESP would be used enue and was estimated at December 31, 2014 to be $27 million
is when the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE in 2015, $15 million in 2016, $7 million in 2017, $6 million in 2018 and
does not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to $8 million thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing con-
selling the new product on a stand-alone basis. tract is terminated, the terms of the contract may require the client
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including receivable, unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, specific assets utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing additional costs incurred by the company to transition the services.
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that
includes review and approval by the company’s management. Software Costs
In addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of
products and services, in addition to BESP. licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research,
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to
Services Costs produce the finished product after technological feasibility has
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capital-
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. ized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external ranging up to three years and are recorded in software cost within
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method cost of sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure
are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future
to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are
the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the charged to software cost within cost of sales as incurred.
initial phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subse- The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
quently amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs,
costs related to the installation of systems and processes and including software coding, installation, testing and certain data
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
of benefit, not to exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, line basis over periods ranging up to two years and are recorded
fixed assets associated with outsourcing contracts are capital- in selling, general and administrative expense.
ized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the expected
useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, then the
depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the asset

===== PAGE 91 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Product Warranties Shipping and Handling
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred
generally range up to three years, with the majority being either and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
one or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard
to the deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for Expense and Other Income
the related deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs Selling, General and Administrative
standard to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged
experience and estimates of future spending, and applies this esti- to income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling prod-
mate to the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated ucts and services are classified as selling expense and include
future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the such items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and
current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is travel. General and administrative expense includes such items
reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining as compensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes,
obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the bal- insurance and office rental. In addition, general and administrative
ance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when actual expense includes other operating items such as an allowance for
warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs from credit losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obli-
fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended gated payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course
warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred. of business, acquisition costs related to business combinations,
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental reme-
is initially recorded as deferred income and subsequently recog- diation costs.
nized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes
in deferred income for extended warranty contracts, and in the Advertising and Promotional Expense
warranty liability for standard warranties, which are included in The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as
other accrued expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from ven-
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the dors are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense
following tables: in the period in which the related advertising and promotional
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, which
Standard Warranty Liability includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,307
($ in millions) million, $1,294 million and $1,339 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012,
2014 2013 respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
Balance at January 1 $ 376 $ 394
Current period accruals 240 346
Research, Development and Engineering
Accrual adjustments to reflect experience* (120) 22
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are
Charges incurred (298) (387) expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to pro-
Balance at December 31 $ 197 $ 376 duce the finished product after technological feasibility has been
established are capitalized as an intangible asset.
* I ncludes an adjustment of ($125 million) in 2014 related to the industry standard server
divestiture.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income) The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intel-
lectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade
($ in millions)
secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to
2014 2013
third parties are licensing/royalty-based and others are transac-
Balance at January 1 $ 579 $ 606
tion-based sales and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based
Revenue deferred for new extended
fees involve transfers in which the company earns the income
warranty contracts 298 305
over time, or the amount of income is not fixed or determinable
Amortization of deferred revenue* (316) (324)
until the licensee sells future related products (i.e., variable roy-
Other** (24) (8) alty, based upon licensee’s revenue). Sales and other transfers
Balance at December 31 $ 536 $ 579 typically include transfers of IP whereby the company has fulfilled
Current portion $ 254 $ 284 its obligations and the fee received is fixed or determinable at
the transfer date. The company also enters into cross-licensing
Noncurrent portion 282 295
arrangements of patents, and income from these arrangements
Balance at December 31 $ 536 $ 579
is recorded when earned. In addition, the company earns income
* Includes an adjustment of $(21 million) in 2014 related to the industry standard server from certain custom development projects for strategic technology
divestiture.
** Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
partners and specific clients. The company records the income Depreciation and Amortization
from these projects when the fee is realized and earned, is not Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated
refundable and is not dependent upon the success of the project. over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method.
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are
Other (Income) and Expense as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than 20 years; land improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office
from Global Financing external transactions), gains and losses on equipment, 2 to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years.
certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from securities Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their
and other investments, gains and losses from certain real estate estimated useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding
transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, gains 25 years.
and losses from the sale of businesses, other than reported as Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno-
discontinued operations, and amounts related to accretion of asset logical feasibility has been established are amortized over periods
retirement obligations. ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up
Business Combinations and to 2 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill between 1 and 7 years.
The company accounts for business combinations using the
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets Environmental
acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are
in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will
fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifi- incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
able intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental
are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and the liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental
company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of which liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for
qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. Goodwill environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting
units based on expected revenues. Identifiable intangible assets Asset Retirement Obligations
with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. Amortization Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associ-
of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and amortization of ated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are
all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisi- initially recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs
tion-related costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related
and other costs, are expensed in the periods in which the costs assets by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs
are incurred. The results of operations of acquired businesses are subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related
are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records
acquisition date. period-to-period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the
passage of time in interest expense and revisions to either the
Impairment timing or the amount of the original expected cash flows to the
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangi- related assets.
ble assets, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes
in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be Defined Benefit Pension and
recoverable. The impairment test is based on undiscounted cash Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
flows and, if impaired, the asset is written down to fair value based The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans
on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill and and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually, in the fourth benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
quarter, for impairment and whenever changes in circumstances Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference
indicate an impairment may exist. Goodwill is tested at the report- between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at
ing unit level which is the operating segment, or a business, which December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pen-
is one level below that operating segment (the “component” level) if sion plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation
discrete financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by (PBO), which represents the actuarial present value of benefits
management at the segment level. Components are aggregated as expected to be paid upon retirement based on employee services
a single reporting unit if they have similar economic characteristics. already rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For
the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obliga-
tion is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO),
which represents the actuarial present value of postretirement

===== PAGE 93 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The Defined Contribution Plans
fair value of plan assets represents the current market value of The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is
assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit recorded when the employee renders service to the company.
of participants, which are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consoli-
plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit obli- dated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ respective
gation, are aggregated and recorded as a prepaid pension asset functions.
equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit obliga-
tion exceeding the fair value of plan assets, are aggregated and Stock-Based Compensation
recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
obligation equal to this excess. based awards granted to employees. The company measures
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postre- stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the
tirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a
of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee
of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated State- stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The com-
ment of Financial Position. pany also grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs),
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement ben- including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Perfor-
efit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of mance Share Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to
Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return employees that entitle the holder to shares of common stock as
on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and the award vests, typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair
(gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of OCI and value of the awards is determined and fixed on the grant date
amortization of the net transition asset remaining in accumulated based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of
other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost repre- dividend equivalents. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded
sents the actuarial present value of participant benefits earned in in Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
the current year. Interest cost represents the time value of money ings based on the employees’ respective functions.
cost associated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as The company records deferred tax assets for awards that
changes in the employee base, plan amendments and changes in result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based
actuarial assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation on the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory
and the corresponding change in OCI. The result of these events tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Dif-
is amortized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) over ferences between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are income tax return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the
based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets. Net tax deduction exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consoli-
periodic cost/(income) is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in dated Statement of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ tax deduction and no additional paid-in capital exists from previ-
respective functions. ous awards).
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated Income Taxes
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a com- Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
ponent of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are differences between asset and liability amounts that are recog-
subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/ nized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are
(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are
of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allow-
of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as ances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount
a result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/ that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a
(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence
service granted in plan amendments. for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/ future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the strategies. When the company changes its determination as to the
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation
plans and use participant-specific information such as compen- allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax
sation, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, expense in the period in which such determination is made.
including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates
and mortality rates.

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully sus- recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm
tained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or for-
are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than eign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of
50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. The current a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid
portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the noncurrent por- related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge
tion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in the Consolidated attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge
Statement of Financial Position. To the extent that new informa- of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign oper-
tion becomes available which causes the company to change its ation. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts
judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge
changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply
period in which such determination is made. Interest and penalties, hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging
if any, related to accrued liabilities for potential tax assessments relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative,
are included in income tax expense. which are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic
offset to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s).
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each
at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments
in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-aver- are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of
age rates of exchange prevailing during the year. financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or lia-
non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and bilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in other
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approxi- (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
mate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI, in
in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. When net
exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in income is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the
other (income) and expense. Income and expense items are trans- applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the derivative
lated at the weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during that is deferred in AOCI is released to net income and reported
the year. These translation gains and losses are included in net in interest expense, Cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and
income for the period in which exchange rates change. expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net
Derivative Financial Instruments investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement basis. The effective portion of changes in the fair value of net
of Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial
expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded
assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Changes in
Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative
upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded in inter-
than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, the company est expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge
requires that the instruments be effective in reducing the risk ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are
exposure that they are designated to hedge. For instruments that included in net income each period until the instrument matures.
hedge cash flows, hedge designation criteria also require that it When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or
be probable that the underlying transaction will occur. Instruments liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as
that meet established accounting criteria are formally designated required under other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives
as hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the derivative is that are not designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair
expected to be highly effective at offsetting changes in fair value value of derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair
or cash flows of the underlying exposure both at inception of the value of the underlying hedged item throughout the designated
hedging relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of hedge period (collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net
assessing hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffective- income for each period and are primarily reported in other (income)
ness is formally documented at hedge inception. The company
assesses hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffective-
ness at least quarterly throughout the designated hedge period.

===== PAGE 95 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and expense. When a cash flow hedging relationship is discon- current market-based or independently sourced market param-
tinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must generally remain in AOCI eters such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using
until the item that was hedged affects earnings. However, when internally generated models are classified according to the lowest
it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not occur by the level input or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
end of the originally specified time period or within an additional The determination of fair value considers various factors includ-
two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI must be ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial
reclassified into earnings immediately. The company reports cash instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses
flows arising from derivative financial instruments designated as a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensu-
fair value or cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of rate with the duration of the instrument.
cash flows from the underlying hedged items that these deriva- In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com-
tives are hedging. Accordingly, the cash flows associated with pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base
derivatives designated as fair value or cash flow hedges are clas- valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below
sified in cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated for several parameters that market participants would consider in
Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated determining fair value:
as net investment hedges and derivatives that do not qualify as • Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial
hedges are reported in cash flows from investing activities in the instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For currency swaps des- counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market
ignated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
in the company’s debt risk management program as addressed in • Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109), cash own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair
flows directly associated with the settlement of the principal ele- value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in
ment of these swaps are reported in payments to settle debt in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incor-
cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement porates the company’s own credit risk as observed in the
of Cash Flows. credit default swap market.
Financial Instruments As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the com- discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs
pany uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs
date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 104 to 105 relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which
for further information. All methods of assessing fair value result are available for the full term of the derivative.
in a general approximation of value, and such value may never Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a non-
actually be realized. recurring basis. These assets include equity method investments
that are recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the
Fair Value Measurement extent that they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired.
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be Certain assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly can be subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. assets include available-for-sale equity investments that are
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy: other-than-temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair
• Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets value is measured using a model described above.
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible
measurement date; financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair
• Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either permitted to be accounted for at fair value under other account-
directly or indirectly; and ing standards. This election is irrevocable. The company has not
• Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability. applied the fair value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such Cash Equivalents
data is available without undue cost and effort. All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies
such items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not avail-
able, fair value is based upon internally developed models that use

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Marketable Securities company determines its allowances for credit losses on financing
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance and loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are When calculating the allowances, the company considers its
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equip-
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported ment and by considering the current fair market value of any other
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable collateral. The value of the equipment is the net realizable value.
taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale The allowance for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales
securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Con- and customer loans includes an assessment of the entire balance
solidated Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are of the capital lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The
calculated based on the specific identification method. methodologies that the company uses to calculate its receivables
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in reserves, which are applied consistently to its different portfolios,
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration are as follows:
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the
ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s
consists of an analysis based upon current information available
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an antici-
about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
pated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair
lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well
value from amortized cost for available-for-sale equity and debt
as the current economic environment, collateral net of reposses-
securities that the company intends to sell or would more likely
sion cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral
than not be required to sell before the expected recovery of the
dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the col-
amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and expense
lateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the
in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities that the
company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable
company has no intent to sell and believes that it more likely than
and calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probabil-
not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only the credit loss
ity of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the
component of the impairment is recognized in other (income) and
company records a specific reserve.
expense, while the remaining loss is recognized in OCI. The credit
loss component recognized in other (income) and expense is iden-
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated
tified as the amount of the principal cash flows not expected to be
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its differ-
received over the remaining term of the debt security as projected
ent portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically
using the company’s cash flow projections.
reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probabil-
ity of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Inventories
Factors that could result in actual receivable losses that are materi-
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at
ally different from the estimated reserve include sharp changes in
the lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale
the economy, or a significant change in the economic health of a
of inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating activi-
particular client that represents a concentration in the company’s
ties in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
receivables portfolio.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Other Credit-Related Policies
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has
a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receiv-
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired
ables is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other
accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
collect all amounts due according to original terms of the lease
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated
or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued on these
based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and
receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a reduction to
any specific, known troubled accounts.
principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal
payments outstanding is recognized as interest income. Receiv-
Financing Receivables
ables may be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate,
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing
based upon changes in client circumstances.
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The

===== PAGE 97 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive
when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable potential common shares outstanding during the period using the
is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include
allowance. outstanding stock options, stock awards and convertible notes.
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when
NOTE B.
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the
ACCOUNTING CHANGES
original billing date.
New Standards to be Implemented
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all
financing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
impairment on a quarterly basis. The company considers any issued guidance on the recognition of revenue from contracts with
loan with an individually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. customers. Revenue recognition will depict the transfer of prom-
Depending on the level of impairment, loans will also be placed ised goods or services to customers in an amount that reflects
on non-accrual status as appropriate. Client loans are primarily the consideration to which the entity expects to be entitled in
for software and services and are unsecured. These loans are exchange for those goods or services. The guidance also requires
subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts with customers.
loan agreements which include covenants to protect against credit The guidance permits two methods of adoption: retrospectively to
deterioration during the life of the obligation. each prior reporting period presented, or retrospectively with the
cumulative effect of initially applying the guidance recognized at
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets the date of initial application. The guidance is effective January 1,
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at 2017 and early adoption is not permitted. The company is cur-
the inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the rently evaluating the impact of the new guidance and the method
assets at the end of the lease term. The company periodically of adoption.
reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any In April 2014, the FASB issued guidance that changed the cri-
anticipated increases in specific future residual values are not rec- teria for reporting a discontinued operation. Only disposals of a
ognized before realization through remarketing efforts. Anticipated component that represents a strategic shift that has (or will have)
decreases in specific future residual values that are considered to a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results is a
be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon iden- discontinued operation. The guidance also requires expanded
tification and are recorded as an adjustment to the residual value disclosures about discontinued operations and disposals of a
estimate. For sales-type and direct-financing leases, this reduction significant part of an entity that does not qualify for discontin-
lowers the recorded net investment and is recognized as a loss ued operations reporting. The guidance is effective January 1,
charged to financing income in the period in which the estimate is 2015 with early adoption permitted, but only for disposals (or
changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned income to reduce classifications as held for sale) that have not been reported in
future-period financing income. previously-issued financial statements. The company will adopt
the new guidance on January 1, 2015. The impact to the company
Common Stock will be dependent on any potential transaction that is within the
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock scope of the new guidance.
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea-
Standards Implemented
sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury
stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a In July 2013, the FASB issued guidance regarding the presentation
weighted-average basis. of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss carryfor-
ward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists. Under
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock certain circumstances, unrecognized tax benefits should be pre-
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. sented in the financial statements as a reduction to a deferred tax
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common asset for a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss, or
stock and participating securities according to dividends and a tax credit carryforward. The guidance was effective January 1,
dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights 2014. The guidance was a change in financial statement presen-
in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is com- tation only and did not have a material impact in the consolidated
puted by dividing net income by the weighted-average number financial results.
of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of
common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-average

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In March 2013, the FASB issued guidance on when foreign cur- NOTE C.
rency translation adjustments should be released to net income. ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES
When a parent entity ceases to have a controlling financial interest
in a subsidiary or group of assets that is a business within a for- Acquisitions
eign entity, the parent is required to release any related cumulative Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in
translation adjustment into net income. Accordingly, the cumula- the tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
tive translation adjustment should be released into net income are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of
only if the sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially acquired cash and cash equivalents.
complete liquidation of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary
or group of assets had resided. The guidance was effective Janu- 2014
ary 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact in the consolidated In 2014, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate
financial results. cost of $608 million.
In February 2013, the FASB issued guidance for the recognition, The Software segment completed acquisitions of five privately
measurement and disclosure of obligations resulting from joint held companies: in the first quarter, Aspera, Inc. (Aspera) and Clou-
and several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the dant, Inc. (Cloudant); in the second quarter, Silverpop Systems, Inc.
obligation within the scope of the guidance is fixed at the report- (Silverpop) and Cognea Group Pty LTD (Cognea); and in the third
ing date. Examples include debt arrangements, other contractual quarter, CrossIdeas Srl (CrossIdeas). Global Technology Services
obligations and settled litigation matters. The guidance requires (GTS) completed one acquisition: in the third quarter, Lighthouse
an entity to measure such obligations as the sum of the amount Security Group, LLC (Lighthouse), a privately held company.
that the reporting entity agreed to pay on the basis of its arrange- The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
ment among its co-obligors plus additional amounts the reporting acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
entity expects to pay on behalf of its co-obligors. The guidance December 31, 2014:
was effective January 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact
in the consolidated financial results. 2014 Acquisitions
In February 2013, the FASB issued additional guidance regard-
($ in millions)
ing reclassifications out of AOCI. The guidance requires entities
Amortization Total
to report the effect of significant reclassifications out of AOCI on Life (in Years) Acquisitions
the respective line items in net income unless the amounts are Current assets $ 56
not reclassified in their entirety to net income. For amounts that
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 39
are not required to be reclassified in their entirety to net income
Intangible assets
in the same reporting period, entities are required to cross-refer-
Goodwill N/A 442
ence other disclosures that provide additional detail about those
amounts. For the company, the new guidance was effective on a Completed technology 5–7 68
prospective basis for all interim and annual periods beginning Jan- Client relationships 7 77
uary 1, 2013 with early adoption permitted. The company adopted Patents/trademarks 1–7 18
the guidance in its December 31, 2012 financial statements. There
Total assets acquired 701
was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the guidance
Current liabilities (26)
related only to additional disclosures.
In July 2012, the FASB issued amended guidance that simpli- Noncurrent liabilities (67)
fies how entities test indefinite-lived intangible assets other than Total liabilities assumed (93)
goodwill for impairment. After an assessment of certain qualita- Total purchase price $608
tive factors, if it is determined to be more likely than not that an
N/A—Not applicable
indefinite-lived intangible asset is impaired, entities must perform
the quantitative impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the
is optional. The amended guidance was effective for annual and
company’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Aspera’s
interim impairment tests performed for fiscal years beginning after
technology helps make cloud computing faster, more predict-
September 15, 2012, with early adoption permitted. The company
able and more cost effective for big data transfers such as
adopted this guidance for its 2012 impairment testing of indefinite-
lived intangible assets performed in the fourth quarter. There was
no impact in the consolidated financial results.

===== PAGE 99 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
enterprise storage, sharing virtual images or accessing the cloud SoftLayer Technologies, Inc. (SoftLayer)—On July 3, 2013, the
for increased computing capacity. Cloudant will extend the com- company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of the pri-
pany’s mobile and cloud platform by enabling developers to easily vately held company, SoftLayer, a cloud computing infrastructure
and quickly create next generation mobile and Web-based appli- provider based in Dallas, Texas, for cash consideration of $1,977
cations. Silverpop is a provider of cloud-based capabilities that million. SoftLayer joined the company’s new cloud services unit,
deliver personalized customer engagements in highly scalable which combined SoftLayer with IBM SmartCloud into a global plat-
environments. Cognea offers personalized artificial intelligence form. Goodwill of $1,285 million has been assigned to the Global
capabilities designed to serve as an intuitive interface between Technology Services ($1,246 million) and Software ($39 million)
human users and data-driven information. CrossIdeas delivers segments. At the acquisition date, it was expected that none of
next-generation identity and access governance capabilities to the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
help mitigate access risks and segregation of duty violations. weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
Lighthouse is a provider of cloud-enabled managed identity and acquired is 7.0 years.
access management solutions.
The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable Other Acquisitions—The Software segment completed acqui-
intangible assets acquired is 6.8 years. These identified intan- sitions of eight privately held companies: in the first quarter,
gible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their StoredIQ Inc. (StoredIQ) and Star Analytics, Inc. (Star Analytics);
useful lives. Goodwill of $442 million has been assigned to the in the second quarter, UrbanCode Inc. (UrbanCode); and in the
Software ($430 million) and Global Technology Services ($11 mil- third quarter, Trusteer, Ltd. (Trusteer) and Daeja Image Systems,
lion) segments. It is expected that approximately 1 percent of the Ltd. (Daeja); and in the fourth quarter, Xtify, Inc. (Xtify), The Now
goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. All acquisitions were Factory and Fiberlink Communications (Fiberlink). Systems and
for 100 percent of the acquired companies. Technology (STG) completed one acquisition: in the third quarter,
CSL International (CSL), a privately held company. All acquisitions
2013 in 2013 were for 100 percent of the acquired companies.
In 2013, the company completed 10 acquisitions at an aggregate The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
cost of $3,219 million. acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
December 31, 2013.
2013 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) SoftLayer Acquisitions
Current assets $ 80 $ 97
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 300 41
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,285 961
Completed technology 5–7 290 181
Client relationships 6–7 245 97
In-process R&D N/A 2 —
Patents/trademarks 2–7 75 32
Total assets acquired 2,277 1,408
Current liabilities (56) (61)
Noncurrent liabilities (244) (105)
Total liabilities assumed (300) (166)
Total purchase price $1,977 $1,242
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In addition to SoftLayer, each acquisition further complemented 2012
and enhanced the company’s portfolio of product and services In 2012, the company completed 11 acquisitions at an aggregate
offerings. The acquisition of StoredIQ advances the company’s cost of $3,964 million.
efforts to help clients derive value from big data. The combination
of the company’s and Star Analytics’ software advances the com- Kenexa Corporation (Kenexa)—On December 3, 2012, the com-
pany’s business analytics initiatives. UrbanCode automates the pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Kenexa, a
delivery of software, helping businesses quickly release and update publicly held company, for cash consideration of $1,351 million.
mobile, social, big data and cloud applications. CSL deepens the Kenexa, a leading provider of recruiting and talent management
consolidation cloud capabilities by offering simplified management solutions, brings a unique combination of cloud-based technology
of the virtualization environment. Trusteer extends the company’s and consulting services that integrates both people and pro-
data security capabilities further into the cloud, mobile and end- cesses, providing solutions to engage a smarter, more effective
point security space. Daeja delivers software that helps employees workforce across their most critical business functions. Goodwill
across all industries, especially data intensive ones such as bank- of $1,014 million was assigned to the Software ($771 million) and
ing, insurance and healthcare, get faster access to critical business Global Technology Services (GTS) ($243 million) segments. As of
information, and complements the company’s big data capabilities. the acquisition date, it was expected that approximately 10 percent
Xtify is a leading provider of cloud-based mobile messaging tools of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The over-
that help organizations improve mobile sales, drive in-store traffic all weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
and engage customers with personalized offers. The Now Fac- acquired was 6.5 years.
tory is a provider of analytics software that helps communications
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed eight
service providers (CSPs) deliver better customer experiences and
other acquisitions: in the first quarter, Green Hat Software Limited
drive new revenue opportunities. Fiberlink is a mobile management
(Green Hat), Emptoris Inc. (Emptoris) and Worklight, Inc. (Worklight),
and security company, that supports the company’s expanding
all privately held companies, and DemandTec, Inc. (DemandTec),
vision for enterprise mobility management, which encompasses
a publicly held company; in the second quarter, Varicent Software
secure transactions between businesses, partners, and customers.
Inc. (Varicent), Vivisimo Inc. (Vivisimo) and Tealeaf Technology Inc.
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average
(Tealeaf), all privately held companies; and in the third quarter,
life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is
Butterfly Software, Ltd. (Butterfly), a privately held company. STG
6.6 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized on
completed two acquisitions: in the first quarter, Platform Comput-
a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $961 million
ing Corporation (Platform Computing), a privately held company;
has been assigned to the Software ($948 million) and Systems and
and in the third quarter, Texas Memory Systems (TMS), a privately
Technology ($13 million) segments. At the acquisition dates, it was
held company. All acquisitions in 2012 were for 100 percent of the
expected that approximately 2 percent of the goodwill would be
acquired companies.
deductible for tax purposes.
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of Decem-
ber 31, 2012.
2012 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Kenexa Acquisitions
Current assets $ 133 $ 278
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 98 217
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,014 1,880
Completed technology 3–7 169 403
Client relationships 4–7 179 194
In-process R&D N/A — 11
Patents/trademarks 1–7 39 37
Total assets acquired 1,632 3,020
Current liabilities (93) (143)
Noncurrent liabilities (188) (264)
Total liabilities assumed (281) (407)
Total purchase price $1,351 $2,613
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 101 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the com- The companies have also agreed to a 10-year exclusive manu-
pany’s portfolio of product and services offerings. Green Hat helps facturing sourcing agreement in which GLOBALFOUNDRIES will
customers improve the quality of software applications by enabling provide server processor semiconductor technology for use in
developers to use cloud computing technologies to conduct test- IBM Systems. The agreement provides the company with capac-
ing of a software application prior to its delivery. Emptoris expands ity and market-based pricing for current semiconductor nodes
the company’s cloud-based analytics offerings that provide supply in production and progression to nodes in the future for both
chain intelligence leading to better inventory management and development and production needs. As part of the transaction
cost efficiencies. Worklight delivers mobile application manage- agreement, the company will provide GLOBALFOUNDRIES with
ment capabilities to clients across a wide range of industries. The certain transition services, including IT, supply chain, packaging
acquisition enhanced the company’s comprehensive mobile port- and test services and lab services. The initial term for these tran-
folio, which is designed to help global corporations leverage the sition services is one to three years, with GLOBALFOUNDRIES
proliferation of all mobile devices—from laptops and smartphones having the ability to renew.
to tablets. DemandTec delivers cloud-based analytics software to The transaction will be completed as soon as is practical,
help organizations improve their price, promotion and product mix subject to the satisfaction of regulatory requirements, customary
within the broad context of enterprise commerce. Varicent’s soft- closing conditions and any other required approvals. The transac-
ware automates and analyzes data across sales, finance, human tion is expected to close in 2015.
resources and IT departments to uncover trends and optimize In the third quarter of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax
sales performance and operations. Vivisimo software automates charge of $4.7 billion related to the expected sale of the Micro-
the discovery of big data, regardless of its format or where it electronics disposal group, which was part of the Systems and
resides, providing decision makers with a view of key business Technology reportable segment. The pre-tax charge reflected
information necessary to drive new initiatives. Tealeaf provides a the fair value less the estimated cost of selling the disposal group
full suite of customer experience management software, which including an impairment to the semiconductor long-lived assets
analyzes interactions on websites and mobile devices. Butterfly of $2.4 billion, $1.5 billion representing the cash consideration
offers storage planning software and storage migration tools, help- expected to be transferred to GLOBALFOUNDRIES and $0.8 bil-
ing companies save storage space, operational time, IT budget lion of other related costs. The asset impairment was reflected
and power consumption. Platform Computing’s focused technical in property, plant and equipment, net and the other estimated
and distributed computing management software helps clients costs of disposal were reflected in other accrued expenses and
create, integrate and manage shared computing environments liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of
that are used in compute-and-data intensive applications such as Financial Position at September 30, 2014. These estimates may
simulations, computer modeling and analytics. TMS designs and be adjusted, and the company may incur additional charges prior
sells high-performance solid state storage solutions. to the closing of the transaction. All assets and liabilities of the
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average business are reported as held for sale at December 31, 2014. The
life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is cash consideration is expected to be transferred over three years
6.6 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized on with $750 million transferred at the closing date. The actual net
a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,880 mil- cash related to the transaction will be adjusted by the amount of
lion was assigned to the Software ($1,412 million), Global Business the working capital due from GLOBALFOUNDRIES, estimated to
Services (GBS) ($5 million), GTS ($21 million) and STG ($443 mil- be $200 million.
lion) segments. As of the acquisition dates, it was expected that Reporting the related assets and liabilities initially as held for
approximately 15 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for sale at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all of the criteria
tax purposes. for such reporting in the applicable accounting guidance. While
the company met certain criteria for held for sale reporting in prior
Divestitures periods, it did not meet all of the criteria until September 30, 2014.
2014 In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company concluded that
Microelectronics—On October 20, 2014, IBM and GLOBAL- the Microelectronics business met the criteria for discontinued
FOUNDRIES announced a definitive agreement in which operations reporting. The disposal group constitutes a compo-
GLOBALFOUNDRIES will acquire the company’s Microelectronics nent under accounting guidance. The continuing cash inflows
business, including existing semiconductor manufacturing assets and outflows with the discontinued component are related to the
and operations in East Fishkill, New York and Essex Junction, manufacturing sourcing arrangement and the transition, packag-
Vermont. The commercial OEM business to be acquired by GLO- ing and test services. These cash flows are not direct cash flows
BALFOUNDRIES includes custom logic and specialty foundry, as they are not significant and the company will have no significant
manufacturing and related operations. continuing involvement.

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Summarized financial information for discontinued operations solutions. Effective with the initial closing of the transaction, Lenovo
is shown below. has assumed related customer service and maintenance opera-
tions. IBM will continue to provide maintenance delivery and
($ in millions) warranty services on Lenovo’s behalf for an extended period of
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 time. In addition, as part of the transaction agreement, the com-
pany will provide Lenovo with certain transition services, including
Total revenue $ 1,335 $1,384 $1,633
IT and supply chain services. The initial term for these transition
Loss from discontinued operations,
services ranges from less than one year to three years. Lenovo
before tax (619) (720) (638)
can renew certain services for an additional year.
Loss on disposal, before tax (4,726) — —
The transaction will be completed in phases. The initial closing
Total loss from discontinued
occurred on October 1, 2014. A subsequent closing occurred in
operations, before income taxes (5,346) (720) (638)
most other countries in which there was a large business footprint
Provision (benefit) for income taxes (1,617) (322) (243)
on December 31, 2014. The remaining countries are expected to
Loss from discontinued close in early 2015.
operations, net of tax $(3,729) $ (398 ) $ (395 )
The company expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain on the
sale of approximately $1.5 billion, which does not include associ-
The assets and liabilities at December 31, 2014 presented below ated costs related to transition and performance-based costs. Net
are classified as held for sale. of these charges, the pre-tax gain is approximately $1.2 billion, of
which $1.1 billion was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2014. The
($ in millions) balance of the gain is expected to be recognized in 2019 upon
At December 31: 2014 2013 conclusion of the maintenance delivery agreement.
Assets: The company’s industry standard server business is reported
in the Systems and Technology segment, and the associated main-
Accounts receivable $245 $ 166
tenance operations are part of the Global Technology Services
Inventory 380 481
segment. In 2013, this combined business delivered approximately
Property, plant & equipment, net — 2,322 $4.6 billion of revenue and was essentially breakeven on a pre-tax
Other assets 92 90 income basis.
Total assets $717 $3,059 The classification of the industry standard server business as
held for sale at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all
Liabilities:
of the criteria for such classification in the applicable account-
Accounts payable $177 $ 172
ing guidance. While the company met certain criteria for held for
Deferred income 87 84
sale classification in prior periods, it did not meet the criteria that
Other liabilities 163 20 the disposal group was available for immediate sale in its present
Total liabilities $427 $ 276 condition until September 30, 2014. Prior to that date, the company
was engaged in the regulatory review process and in the activi-
ties necessary to separate the tangible assets and prepare such
Industry Standard Server—On January 23, 2014, IBM and Lenovo
assets for sale. At December 31, 2014, the assets and liabilities
Group Limited (Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement in which
remaining as held for sale were immaterial.
Lenovo would acquire the company’s industry standard server
In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company concluded
portfolio for an adjusted purchase price of $2.1 billion, consisting
that the industry standard server systems business did not meet
of approximately $1.8 billion in cash, with the balance in Lenovo
the criteria for discontinued operations reporting. The disposal
common stock. The stock represented less than 5 percent
group consists of the industry standard server systems business
equity ownership in Lenovo. The company would sell to Lenovo
and associated maintenance operations. The industry standard
its System x, BladeCenter and Flex System blade servers and
server systems business constitutes a component under account-
switches, x86-based Flex integrated systems, NeXtScale and
ing guidance, while the maintenance operations do not meet the
iDataPlex servers and associated software, blade networking and
definition of a component. Due to the significance of the continuing
maintenance operations.
cash flows with the disposal group after the transaction closes, the
IBM and Lenovo have entered into a strategic relationship
company did not meet the criteria to report the industry standard
which will include a global OEM and reseller agreement for sales of
server systems business as a discontinued operation.
IBM’s industry-leading entry and midrange Storwize disk storage
systems, tape storage systems, General Parallel File System soft-
ware, SmartCloud Entry offering, and elements of IBM’s system
software, including Systems Director and Platform Computing

===== PAGE 103 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Others—On June 30, 2014, the company completed the dives- Others—In the first quarter of 2013, the company completed the
titures of its solidDB suite of products to UNICOM Systems, Inc. divestiture of its Showcase Reporting product set to Help/Sys-
and its Human Capital Management business line in France to tems. Showcase Reporting, which was acquired by the company
Sopra Group. through the SPSS acquisition in 2009, is an enterprise-class busi-
On August 31, 2014, the company completed the divestiture of ness intelligence platform that enables customers to build and
its Cognos Finance product to UNICOM Systems, Inc. manage analytical reporting environments.
On September 30, 2014, the company completed the divesti- In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company completed two
tures of its IMS Tools Suite of products to Rocket Software, Inc., divestitures, the Applicazioni Contabili Gestionali (ACG) business
its Sterling Transportation Management System to Kewill Inc., and and the Cognos Application Development Tools (ADT) business.
its ILOG JViews and Elixir Visualization products to Rogue Wave The ACG business was purchased by TeamSystem. The ACG
Software, Inc. product is an Italian Enterprise Resource Planning solution for
On December 31, 2014, the company completed the dives- small- and medium-sized companies. The Cognos ADT busi-
titure of its Focal Point and PurifyPlus product suite to UNICOM ness was purchased by UNICOM Systems, Inc. The Cognos ADT
Systems, Inc. product suite represents a legacy family of products that pro-
All of the above transactions closed in 2014 and the financial vide application development environments that would enable
terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the programmers to develop COBOL applications at a higher pro-
company recorded a pre-tax gain of $132 million related to these ductivity level.
transactions in 2014. Financial terms of each transaction did not have a material
impact in the consolidated financial results.
2013
Customer Care—On September 10, 2013, IBM and SYNNEX 2012
announced a definitive agreement in which SYNNEX would Retail Stores—On April 17, 2012, the company announced that it
acquire the company’s worldwide customer care business had signed a definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for the sale of
process outsourcing services business for $501 million, consist- its Retail Store Solutions business. As part of the transaction, the
ing of approximately $430 million in cash, net of balance sheet company agreed to transfer the maintenance business to Toshiba
adjustments, and $71 million in SYNNEX common stock, which TEC within three years of the original closing of the transaction.
represented less than 5 percent equity ownership in SYNNEX. As In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company completed the fourth
part of the transaction, SYNNEX entered into a multi-year agree- phase of the transfer of the maintenance workforce to Toshiba.
ment with the company, and Concentrix, SYNNEX’s outsourcing A subsequent wave closing is scheduled to be completed in the
business, has become an IBM strategic business partner for global first quarter of 2015. The parts and inventory transfer to Toshiba
customer care business process outsourcing services. will commence in the first quarter of 2015 and is expected to be
The initial closing of the transaction was completed on Janu- completed by the third quarter of 2015. The workforce transfer
ary 31, 2014, with subsequent closings occurring in 2014. In the and an assessment of the ongoing contractual terms of the overall
fourth quarter of 2014, the company continued to work toward res- transaction resulted in the recognition of an additional pre-tax gain
olution of the required final balance sheet adjustments. A charge of $6 million in the fourth quarter of 2014.
in the amount of $10 million was recorded to reflect the expected The company expects to close the final phase of the divestiture
resolution. For the full year of 2014, the company recorded a pre- in the third quarter of 2015. Overall, the company expects to rec-
tax gain of $202 million related to this transaction. ognize a cumulative total pre-tax gain on the sale of approximately
$517 million, of which $511 million has been recognized through
December 31, 2014.

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis
at December 31, 2014 and 2013.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $3,517 $— $3,517
Commercial paper — 764 — 764
Money market funds 662 — — 662
U.S. government securities — 410 — 410
Other securities — 6 — 6
Total 662 4,697 — 5,359 (5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2) 1 8 — 9
Trading security investments (2) 74 — — 74
Available-for-sale equity investments (2) 243 — — 243
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts — 633 — 633
Foreign exchange contracts — 775 — 775
Equity contracts — 24 — 24
Total — 1,432 — 1,432 (6)
Total assets $980 $6,138 $— $7,118 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts — 177 — 177
Equity contracts — 19 — 19
Total liabilities $ — $ 196 $— $ 196 (6)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) I ncluded within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of
Financial Position at December 31, 2014 were $751 million and $681 million, respectively.
(4) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at
December 31, 2014 were $165 million and $31 million, respectively.
(5) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(6) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $97 million each.

===== PAGE 105 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2013: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $4,754 $— $4,754
Commercial paper — 1,507 — 1,507
Money market funds 1,728 — — 1,728
Other securities — 8 — 8
Total 1,728 6,269 — 7,997(6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 350 — 350(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 7 — 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 18 — — 18
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 308 — 308
Foreign exchange contracts — 375 — 375
Equity contracts — 36 — 36
Total — 719 — 719 (7)
Total assets $1,747 $7,345 $— $9,092 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Interest rate contracts $ — $ 13 $— $ 13
Foreign exchange contracts — 484 — 484
Equity contracts — 4 — 4
Total liabilities $ — $ 501 $— $ 501 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) C ommercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of
Financial Position at December 31, 2013 were $318 million and $401 million, respectively.
(5) T he gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at
December 31, 2013 were $375 million and $126 million, respectively.
(6) A vailable-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and liability
positions would have been reduced by $251 million each.
During the year ended December 31, 2014, the company trans- Loans and Long-Term Receivables
ferred trading security investments valued at $74 million from Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur-
Level 2 to Level 1 due to the expiration of certain regulatory restric- rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar
tions. There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the year credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31,
ended December 31, 2013. 2014 and 2013, the difference between the carrying amount and
estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements,
Short-Term Receivables and Payables these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are fair value hierarchy.
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value.
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt Long-Term Debt
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial liabili- Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
ties with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy. market price is not available, an expected present value technique
that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with
similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair
value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is $35,073 million

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and $32,856 million and the estimated fair value is $37,524 million During the first quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity
and $34,555 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. securities in conjunction with the sale of the customer care busi-
If measured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt ness which are classified as trading securities. At December 31,
(including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the 2014, unrealized gains related to trading securities of $21 million
fair value hierarchy. were recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered
considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is available-for-sale and recorded at fair value in the Consolidated
not materially different from carrying value, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2014: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 7 $3 $ — $ 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $272 $2 $31 $243
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2013: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 7 $1 $— $ 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $20 $2 $ 4 $18
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity ($ in millions)
securities in conjunction with the sale of the industry standard For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013
server business which are classified as available-for-sale securi- Net unrealized gains/(losses)
ties. Gross unrealized losses related to available-for-sale securities arising during the period $(18) $ 0
of $31 million were recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Net unrealized (gains)/losses
Financial Position. reclassified to net income 3 (5)
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of Decem-
ber 31, 2014, the company believes that unrealized losses on debt The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale
and available-for-sale equity securities are temporary and do not debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2014.
represent an other-than-temporary impairment.
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during Derivative Financial Instruments
the period were as follows: The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the
($ in millions) normal course of business, the company is exposed to the impact
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to
Proceeds $21 $41 $112 a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and client
credit risk. The company limits these risks by following estab-
Gross realized gains (before taxes) 0 13 45
lished risk management policies and procedures, including the
Gross realized losses (before taxes) 5 5 1
use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt
in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale
rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate move-
debt and equity securities that have been included in other com-
ments between the interest rates associated with the company’s
prehensive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses
lease and other financial assets and the interest rates associated
reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the
to net income were as follows:

===== PAGE 107 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives totaled $487 million and $29 million at December 31, 2014 and
are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising from 2013, respectively. The company restricts the use of cash collateral
foreign exchange rate fluctuations. received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it in prepaid
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Statement
is exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated at Decem-
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the coun- ber 31, 2014 and 2013. At December 31, 2014 the company held
terparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering $31 million in non-cash collateral in U.S. Treasury securities, and
into contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions at December 31, 2013, no non-cash collateral was held.
based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s established The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the
policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency
transactions include reviewing and establishing limits for credit exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company
exposure and continually assessing the creditworthiness of coun- with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as
terparties. The right of set-off that exists under certain of these net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as
arrangements enables the legal entities of the company subject the derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon matu-
to the arrangement to net amounts due to and from the counter- rity which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the
party reducing the maximum loss from credit risk in the event of underlying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss
counterparty default. potential on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements hedging relationships by de-designating or terminating the deriva-
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These arrange- tive instrument in order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not
ments require the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. designated as accounting hedges, the company may utilize deriva-
Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values exceed con- tives to offset the changes in the fair value of the de-designated
tractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed instruments from the date of de-designation until maturity.
or can vary based on credit default swap pricing or credit ratings In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
received from the major credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps,
all derivative instruments under these collateralized arrangements depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a
that were in a liability position at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was party to leveraged derivative instruments.
$21 million and $216 million, respectively, for which no collateral A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
was posted at either date. Full collateralization of these agreements by underlying risk, follows.
would be required in the event that the company’s credit rating
falls below investment grade or if its credit default swap spread Interest Rate Risk
exceeds 250 basis points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
the collateral security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally
derivative instruments in net asset positions as of December 31, to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-
2014 and 2013 was $1,432 million and $719 million, respectively. effective financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the
This amount represents the maximum exposure to loss at the underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
reporting date as a result of the counterparties failing to perform overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to
as contracted. This exposure was reduced by $97 million and $251 convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt
million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, of liabilities (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt
included in master netting arrangements with those counterpar- issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At Decem-
ties. Additionally, at December 31, 2014 and 2013, this exposure ber 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of the company’s
was reduced by $487 million and $29 million of cash collateral, interest rate swaps was $5.8 billion and $3.1 billion, respectively.
respectively, received by the company. At December 31, 2014 and The weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments
2013, the net exposure related to derivative assets recorded in the at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was approximately 8.7 years and
Statement of Financial Position was $817 million and $439 mil- 10.6 years, respectively.
lion, respectively. At December 31, 2014 and 2013, the net amount
related to derivative liabilities recorded in the Statement of Finan- Forecasted Debt Issuance
cial Position was $99 million and $250 million, respectively. The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the com- issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
pany does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest
netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps
recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have
fair values of the related derivative instruments. No amount was any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at
recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2014 and 2013 December 31, 2014 and 2013.
for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized
in accounts payable for the obligation to return cash collateral

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2014 and 2013, net gains of approximately currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in
$1 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded in AOCI in the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are
connection with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings. accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time
Within these amounts, less than $1 million of gains, respectively, over which the company hedges its exposure to the variability in
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next future cash flows is approximately seven years. At December 31,
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the 2014, no instruments relating to this program were outstanding.
underlying transactions. At December 31, 2013, the total notional amount of cross cur-
rency swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency
Foreign Exchange Risk denominated debt was $1.2 billion.
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries At December 31, 2014 and 2013, in connection with cash flow
(Net Investment) hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the com-
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated pany recorded net losses of $2 million and net losses of $9 million
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign (before taxes) in AOCI, respectively. Within these amounts, less than
subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused $1 million and $3 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be
by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional reclassified to net income within the next 12 months, providing an
currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. offsetting economic impact against the underlying exposure.
dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign
exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of deriva- Asset/Liability Management
tive instruments designated as net investment hedges was $2.2 The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the
billion and $3.0 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remain- cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency
ing maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2014 and 2013 swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addi-
was approximately 0.2 and 0.4 years, respectively. tion, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to
economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap contracts are gen-
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany pay- erally less than one year. The changes in the fair values of these
ments for royalties and goods and services among the company’s contracts and of the underlying hedged exposures are generally
non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the
of these foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2014 and
the currency markets, the company selectively employs foreign 2013, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in eco-
exchange forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These nomic hedges of foreign currency exposure was $13.1 billion and
forward contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The $14.7 billion, respectively.
maximum length of time over which the company is hedging its
Equity Risk Management
exposure to the variability in future cash flows is four years. At
December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of forward The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
contracts designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
and cost transactions was $9.3 billion and $10.2 billion, respec- certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
tively, with a weighted-average remaining maturity of 0.7 years for these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
both periods. expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not
At December 31, 2014 and 2013, in connection with cash flow designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes deriva-
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the com- tives, including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge
pany recorded net gains of $602 million and net losses of $252 the exposures related to its employee compensation obligations.
million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. Within these amounts The derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad
$572 million of gains and $166 million of losses, respectively, market indices or the total return on the company’s common
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next stock. They are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the reported in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
underlying anticipated transactions. ings. At December 31, 2014 and 2013, the total notional amount of
derivative instruments in economic hedges of these compensation
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings obligations was $1.3 billion for both periods.
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign

===== PAGE 109 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common The company is exposed to market volatility on certain invest-
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed ment securities. The company may utilize options or forwards
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settle- to economically hedge its market exposure. The derivatives are
ment provisions. The company records the changes in the fair recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other
value of these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Con- (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earn-
solidated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any ings. At December 31, 2014, the total notional amount of derivative
warrants qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, instruments in economic hedges of investment securities was
2014 and 2013. $0.1 billion. No amounts were outstanding under this program at
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay December 31, 2013.
amounts due under contractual terms. The company may utilize The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the
credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. derivative and non-derivative instrument- related risk management
These derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are activity as of December 31, 2014 and 2013, as well as for the years
recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
The company did not have any derivative instruments relating to
this program outstanding at December 31, 2014 and 2013.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Sheet Balance Sheet
At December 31: Classification 2014 2013 Classification 2014 2013
Designated as hedging instruments:
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Interest rate contracts other current assets $ 5 $ — expenses and liabilities $ 0 $ 0
Investments and
sundry assets 628 308 Other liabilities — 13
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Foreign exchange contracts other current assets 632 187 expenses and liabilities 50 331
Investments and
sundry assets 17 26 Other liabilities 21 112
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $1,281 $522 derivative labilities $ 72 $ 456
Not designated as hedging instruments:
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Foreign exchange contracts other current assets $ 90 $ 94 expenses and liabilities $ 101 $ 40
Investments and
sundry assets 37 67 Other liabilities 4 1
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Equity contracts other current assets 24 36 expenses and liabilities 14 4
Investments and
sundry assets 0 — Other liabilities 5 —
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $ 151 $197 derivative liabilities $ 125 $ 45
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ 0 $ 190
Long-term debt N/A N/A $7,766 $6,111
Total $1,432 $719 $7,963 $6,802
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated
Statement of
Earnings Line Item Recognized on Derivatives (1) Attributable to Risk Being Hedged (2)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (5)
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $ 231 $(109) $ 65 $(127) $202 $ 59
Interest expense 206 (74) 55 (114) 138 50
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments (1)
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (776) (328) (311) N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Interest rate contracts and expense 34 — — N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 51 164 110 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
and expense (9) — — N/A N/A N/A
Total $(263) $(347) $ (81) $(241) $340 $108
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated Ineffectiveness and
Effective Portion Statement of Effective Portion Amounts Excluded from
Recognized in OCI Earnings Line Item Reclassified from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Interest expense $ (1) $ — $ (6) $— $— $ —
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts 958 43 32 and expense 98 162 237 (1) 0 3
Cost of sales (15) (34) 7 — — —
SG&A expense 15 39 16 — — —
Instruments in net investment hedges (4)
Foreign exchange contracts 1,136 173 (26) Interest expense — — — 0 3 11
Total $2,095 $216 $ 6 $ 97 $167 $253 $(1) $ 3 $14
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under
these derivative contracts.
(2) T he amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated
hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
(5) F or the year ended December 31, 2014, fair value hedges resulted in a gain of $4 million in ineffectiveness. There were no amounts recorded as ineffectiveness on fair value hedges
for the year ended December 31, 2013.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, there an underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings repre- (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal
senting hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment course of business.
of hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with

===== PAGE 111 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE E. Client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), net
INVENTORIES of allowance for credit losses of $396 million and $242 million
at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, are loans that are
($ in millions) provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware,
At December 31: 2014 2013 software and services. Payment terms on these financing arrange-
ments are generally for terms up to seven years.
Finished goods $ 430 $ 444
Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables
Work in process and raw materials 1,674 1,866
financing contracts are priced independently at competitive
Total $2,103 $2,310
market rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms
of these separate financing agreements.
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
NOTE F. lateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged
FINANCING RECEIVABLES as collateral for borrowings were $642 million and $769 million at
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. These borrowings are
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allow- included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 115 to 117.
ances for credit losses, including residual values. The company did not have any financing receivables held for
sale as of December 31, 2014 and 2013.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2014 2013 Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Current The following tables present financing receivables on a gross
Net investment in sales-type basis, excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual
and direct financing leases $ 3,781 $ 4,004 value, by portfolio segment and by class, excluding current com-
Commercial financing receivables 8,423 8,541 mercial financing receivables and other miscellaneous current
financing receivables at December 31, 2014 and 2013. The com-
Client loan and installment
payment receivables (loans) 7,631 7,243 pany determines its allowance for credit losses based on two
portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables, and
Total $19,835 $19,787
further segments the portfolio into two classes: major markets
Noncurrent
and growth markets.
Net investment in sales-type
and direct financing leases $ 4,449 $ 5,700
($ in millions)
Client loan and installment
Major Growth
payment receivables (loans) 6,660 7,055 At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets Total
Total $11,109 $12,755 Financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 5,702 $1,943 $ 7,645
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates Loan receivables 10,049 4,639 14,687
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms
Ending balance $15,751 $6,581 $22,332
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-
Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,665 $6,156 $21,821
type and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual
values of $671 million and $737 million at December 31, 2014 and Individually evaluated for impairment $ 86 $ 425 $ 511
2013, respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of Allowance for credit losses:
$517 million and $672 million, and net of the allowance for credit Beginning balance at
losses of $165 million and $123 million at those dates, respectively. January 1, 2014
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at Lease receivables $ 42 $ 80 $ 123
December 31, 2014, expressed as a percentage of the total, are
Loan receivables 95 147 242
approximately: 2015, 49 percent; 2016, 28 percent; 2017, 16 per-
Total $ 137 $ 228 $ 365
cent; 2018, 6 percent; and 2019 and beyond, 2 percent.
Write-offs (18) (6) (24)
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit
losses of $17 million and $23 million at December 31, 2014 and Provision 3 240 243
2013, respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts Other (12) (11) (23)
receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM Ending balance at
products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable December 31, 2014 $ 111 $ 450 $ 561
financing generally range from 30 to 90 days. Lease receivables $ 32 $ 133 $ 165
Loan receivables $ 79 $ 317 $ 396
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 42 $ 39 $ 81
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 69 $ 411 $ 480

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Impaired Loans
Major Growth The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated
At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets Total
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment,
Financing receivables
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following
Lease receivables $ 6,796 $2,200 $ 8,996 tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31,
Loan receivables 10,529 4,012 14,542 2014 and 2013.
Ending balance $17,325 $6,212 $23,537
Collectively evaluated for impairment $17,206 $6,013 $23,219 ($ in millions)
Recorded Related
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 119 $ 199 $ 318 At December 31, 2014: Investment Allowance
Allowance for credit losses: Major markets $ 54 $ 47
Beginning balance at Growth markets 299 293
January 1, 2013
Total $353 $340
Lease receivables $ 59 $ 55 $ 114
Loan receivables 121 84 204
Total $ 180 $ 138 $ 318 ($ in millions)
Recorded Related
Write-offs (23) (10) (33)
At December 31, 2013: Investment Allowance
Provision (21) 105 84 Major markets $ 79 $ 67
Other 1 (6) (5) Growth markets 122 116
Ending balance at Total $201 $183
December 31, 2013 $ 137 $ 228 $ 365
Lease receivables $ 42 $ 80 $ 123
Loan receivables $ 95 $ 147 $ 242 ($ in millions)
Interest
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 45 $ 48 $ 93
Income
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 93 $ 179 $ 272 Average Interest Recognized
Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2014: Investment Recognized Basis
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are eval- Major markets $ 68 $0 $—
uated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually Growth markets 208 0 —
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected
Total $276 $0 $—
cash flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the
potential loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts
in which the loss is probable, the company records a specific ($ in millions)
reserve. In addition, the company records an unallocated reserve Interest
that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different portfo- Income
Average Interest Recognized
lios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. This Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2013: Investment Recognized Basis
reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term,
characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. Major markets $ 76 $0 $0
Growth markets 97 0 0
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
Total $173 $0 $0
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31,
2014 and 2013.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2014 2013
Major markets $ 13 $ 25
Growth markets 40 34
Total lease receivables $ 53 $ 59
Major markets $ 27 $ 40
Growth markets 151 92
Total loan receivables $178 $132
Total receivables $231 $191

===== PAGE 113 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Credit Quality Indicators At December 31, 2014, the industries which made up Global
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (40 per-
rating agency data, publicly available information and information cent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Government (13 percent),
provided by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the Services (9 percent), Retail (8 percent), Communications (6 per-
relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating cent), Healthcare (5 percent) and Other (5 percent).
system that maps to Standard & Poor’s Ratings Services credit
ratings as shown below. The company uses information provided Lease Receivables
by Standard & Poor’s, where available, as one of many inputs in ($ in millions)
its determination of customer credit rating. Major Growth
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets
class of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, Credit rating
2014 and 2013. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging AAA – AA- $ 743 $ 68
from AAA to BBB- are considered investment grade. All others are
A+ – A- 1,513 168
considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do
BBB+ – BBB- 2,111 957
not reflect mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer
BB+ – BB 1,393 350
credit risk to third parties.
BB- – B+ 595 368
Lease Receivables B – B- 365 214
($ in millions) CCC+ – D 76 74
Major Growth Total $6,796 $2,200
At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets
Credit rating
AAA – AA- $ 563 $ 46 Loan Receivables
A+ – A- 1,384 178 ($ in millions)
BBB+ – BBB- 1,704 900 Major Growth
At December 31, 2013: Markets Markets
BB+ – BB 1,154 272
Credit rating
BB- – B+ 470 286
AAA – AA- $ 1,151 $ 125
B – B- 372 176
A+ – A- 2,344 307
CCC+ – D 55 85
BBB+ – BBB- 3,271 1,745
Total $5,702 $1,943
BB+ – BB 2,158 638
BB- – B+ 922 672
Loan Receivables B – B- 565 391
($ in millions) CCC+ – D 118 134
Major Growth Total $10,529 $4,012
At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets
Credit rating
At December 31, 2013, the industries which made up Global
AAA – AA- $ 993 $ 110
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (39 per-
A+ – A- 2,438 425 cent), Government (14 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail
BBB+ – BBB- 3,003 2,148 (8 percent), Services (8 percent), Healthcare (6 percent), Com-
BB+ – BB 2,034 649 munications (6 percent) and Other (4 percent).
BB- – B+ 827 683
B – B- 655 420
CCC+ – D 98 203
Total $10,049 $4,639

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2014: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 6 $ 5,696 $ 5,702 $ 6
Growth markets 32 1,911 1,943 14
Total lease receivables $38 $ 7,607 $ 7,645 $20
Major markets $ 9 $10,040 $10,049 $ 9
Growth markets 35 4,603 4,639 18
Total loan receivables $44 $14,643 $14,687 $27
Total $82 $22,250 $22,332 $47
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
($ in millions)
Recorded
Total Total Investment
Past Due Financing > 90 Days
At December 31, 2013: > 90 Days* Current Receivables and Accruing
Major markets $ 6 $ 6,789 $ 6,796 $ 5
Growth markets 19 2,181 2,200 11
Total lease receivables $25 $ 8,970 $ 8,996 $16
Major markets $ 9 $10,520 $10,529 $ 6
Growth markets 34 3,979 4,012 18
Total loan receivables $43 $14,499 $14,542 $25
Total $68 $23,469 $23,537 $41
* Does not include accounts that are fully reserved.
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE H.
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS
after January 1, 2013 and determined that there were no significant
troubled debt restructurings for the years ended December 31, ($ in millions)
2013 and 2014. At December 31: 2014 2013
Deferred transition and setup costs
NOTE G. and other deferred arrangements* $1,527 $1,652
PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT Derivatives—noncurrent 681 401
Alliance investments
($ in millions) Equity method 98 110
At December 31: 2014 2013 Non-equity method 496 200
Land and land improvements $ 667 $ 706
Prepaid software 332 352
Buildings and building improvements 9,524 9,680
Long-term deposits 300 316
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 27,388 28,169
Other receivables 509 174
Plant and other property—gross 37,578 38,555
Employee benefit-related 356 392
Less: Accumulated depreciation 27,500 25,576
Prepaid income taxes 518 305
Plant and other property—net 10,078 12,979
Other assets 788 738
Rental machines 1,456 1,920
Total $5,603 $4,639
Less: Accumulated depreciation 763 1,078
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to
Rental machines—net 693 842 Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,”
on page 89 for additional information.
Total—net $10,771 $13,821

===== PAGE 115 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE I. The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $768 mil-
INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL lion during the year ended December 31, 2014, primarily due to
amortization, partially offset by intangible asset additions resulting
Intangible Assets from acquisitions. There was no impairment of intangible assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset bal- recorded in 2014 and 2013. The aggregate intangible amortization
ances by major asset class. expense was $1,347 million and $1,351 million for the years ended
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In addition, in 2014 and
($ in millions) 2013, respectively, the company retired $724 million and $1,177 mil-
Gross Net lion of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross
Carrying Accumulated Carrying carrying amount and accumulated amortization by this amount.
At December 31, 2014: Amount Amortization Amount
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
Intangible asset class
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated
Capitalized software $1,375 $ (679) $ 696 Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at
Client relationships 2,208 (1,271) 937 December 31, 2014:
Completed technology 2,831 (1,533) 1,298
In-process R&D — — — ($ in millions)
Capitalized Acquired
Patents/trademarks 374 (214) 161 Software Intangibles Total
Other* 18 (6) 12 2015 $420 $648 $1,068
Total $6,806 $(3,702) $3,104 2016 211 605 816
2017 65 494 559
2018 — 349 349
($ in millions)
Gross Net 2019 — 210 210
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2013: Amount Amortization Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $1,494 $ (699) $ 794
Client relationships 2,148 (977) 1,171
Completed technology 2,910 (1,224) 1,687
In-process R&D 13 — 13
Patents/trademarks 358 (154) 204
Other* 7 (5) 2
Total $6,930 $(3,059) $3,871
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2014 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2014
Global Business Services $ 4,334 $ — $ 0 $ 0 $(248) $ 4,086
Global Technology Services 4,129 11 20 (54) (109) 3,998
Software 21,121 430 (17) (19) (516) 21,000
Systems and Technology 1,601 — — (110) (19) 1,472
Total $31,184 $442 $ 4 $(183) $(891) $30,556
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2013 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments 2013
Global Business Services $ 4,357 $ — $ 0 $(3) $ (21) $ 4,334
Global Technology Services 2,916 1,246 17 — (50) 4,129
Software 20,405 987 11 (4) (279) 21,121
Systems and Technology 1,568 13 33 — (14) 1,601
Total $29,247 $2,246 $61 $(7) $(363 ) $31,184
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2014 and 2013 were NOTE J.
related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to Decem- BORROWINGS
ber 31, 2013 or December 31, 2012, respectively, and were still
subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of Short-Term Debt
12 months from the acquisition date or when information becomes
($ in millions)
available. There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded in
At December 31: 2014 2013
2014 or 2013 and the company has no accumulated goodwill
Commercial paper $ 650 $2,458
impairment losses.
Short-term loans 480 551
Long-term debt—current maturities 4,601 3,854
Total $5,731 $6,862
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at both
December 31, 2014 and 2013 was 0.1 percent. The weighted-
average interest rates for short-term loans was 4.0 percent and
5.1 percent at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.

===== PAGE 117 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2014 2013
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2014):
0.97% 2015 – 2016 $ 9,254 $ 6,456**
4.73% 2017 – 2018 6,835 8,465
2.19% 2019 –2021 6,555 6,206
1.88% 2022 1,000 1,000
3.38% 2023 1,500 1,500
3.63% 2024 2,000 —
7.00% 2025 600 600
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.88% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 83 83
5.60% 2039 745 745
4.00% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.00% 2045 27 27
7.13% 2096 316 316
31,404 27,887
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2014, in parentheses):
Euros (1.85%) 2015 – 2025 5,463 5,894
Pound sterling (2.75%) 2017 – 2020 1,176 1,254
Japanese yen (0.5%) 2017 – 2019 733 1,057
Swiss francs (3.8%) 2015 – 2020 162 181
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 432 471
Other (10.1%) 2015 – 2017 367 291
39,737 37,036
Less: net unamortized discount 853 872
Add: fair value adjustment* 792 546
39,675 36,710
Less: current maturities 4,601 3,854
Total $35,073 $32,856
* T he portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the
debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
** Includes $17 million of debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital, LLC, an indirect 100-percent owned finance subsidiary of the company, which matured in the
first half of 2014. Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital, LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which indebtedness of at least $500 million.
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The
leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s consoli- failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event
dated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply.
merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. The credit If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest
facilities also include a covenant on the company’s consolidated on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, immediately due and payable.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2014 2013
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $27,255 3.09% $30,123 3.07%
Floating-rate debt* 12,420 0.82% 6,587 0.87%
Total $39,675 $36,710
* Includes $5,839 million in 2014 and $3,106 million in 2013 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D,
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through 109).
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt out- Lines of Credit
standing at December 31, 2014, are as follows: In 2014, the company extended the term of its five-year, $10 billion
Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by one year to Novem-
($ in millions) ber 10, 2019. The total expense recorded by the company related
Total to this global credit facility was $5.4 million in 2014, $5.4 million in
2015 $ 4,600 2013 and $5.3 million in 2012. The Credit Agreement permits the
company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion
2016 5,331
on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be
2017 5,242
unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also,
2018 2,621
upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional
2019 4,069 banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, increase the
2020 and beyond 17,874 commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an additional $2.0
Total $39,737 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agreement, the com-
pany and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay and reborrow
amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time during the Credit
Interest on Debt Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agree-
ment will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further
($ in millions)
described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement contains
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012
customary representations and warranties, covenants, events of
Cost of financing $ 542 $ 587 $ 545
default, and indemnification provisions. The company believes that
Interest expense 484 405 470 circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants
Net investment derivative activity 0 (3) (11) or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement, are
Interest capitalized 4 22 18 remote. As of December 31, 2014, there were no borrowings by the
company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
Total interest paid and accrued $1,030 $1,011 $1,022
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Inter-
Refer to the related discussion on page 148 in note T, “Segment
est rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing seg-
vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
ment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 105 through
109 for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps
in the company’s debt risk management program.

===== PAGE 119 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE K.
OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions) classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
At December 31: 2014 2013 Position, that do not reflect actual or anticipated insurance recov-
Income tax reserves $3,146 $3,189 eries, were $254 million and $245 million at December 31, 2014
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,658 1,673 and 2013, respectively. Estimated environmental costs are not
expected to materially affect the consolidated financial position or
Disability benefits 675 699
consolidated results of the company’s operations in future periods.
Derivative liabilities 31 126
However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due to
Special restructuring actions 431 440
protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental remedia-
Workforce reductions 469 500 tion regulations.
Deferred taxes 288 1,741 As of December 31, 2014, the company was unable to esti-
Other taxes payable 17 186 mate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are
Environmental accruals 240 231
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is
Warranty accruals 91 171
not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and
Asset retirement obligations 136 129 non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate
Acquisition related 50 205 only if it performed major renovations of certain existing buildings.
Divestiture related* 1,124 40 Because these conditional obligations have indeterminate settle-
ment dates, the company could not develop a reasonable estimate
Other 536 604
of their fair values. The company will continue to assess its ability
Total $8,892 $9,934
to estimate fair values at each future reporting date. The related
* P rimarily includes accruals in 2014 related to the expected divestiture of the Micro- liability will be recognized once sufficient additional information
electronics business.
becomes available. The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities,
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated State-
In response to changing business needs, the company periodi-
ment of Financial Position were $180 million and $160 million at
cally takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity,
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent
contractually obligated future payments associated with these
activities are reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the NOTE L.
previous table. EQUITY ACTIVITY
In addition, the company executed certain special restruc-
turing-related actions prior to 2006. The previous table provides The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000
the noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
Current liabilities are included in other accrued expenses and 990,523,759 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2014 and
liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and 150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par
were immaterial at December 31, 2014. value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2014.
The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals related to ter-
Stock Repurchases
minated employees who are no longer working for the company
who were granted annual payments to supplement their incomes The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM
in certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal common stock. The company repurchased 71,504,867 common
requirements, these required payments will continue until the shares at a cost of $13,395 million, 73,121,942 common shares
former employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes away. at a cost of $13,993 million and 61,246,371 common shares at a
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec- cost of $12,008 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. These
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may
a number of locations, including operating facilities, previously differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At
owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum December 31, 2014, $6,264 million of Board common stock repur-
exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and chase authorization was available. The company plans to purchase
no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO environmental shares on the open market or in private transactions from time to
liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The total amounts time, depending on market conditions.
accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities, including amounts

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part company’s stock-based compensation plans, 1,313,569 common
of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur- shares at a cost of $236 million, 1,666,069 common shares at a
chase plan: 7,687,026 shares in 2014, 9,961,389 shares in 2013, and cost of $336 million and 2,406,007 common shares at a cost of
15,091,320 shares in 2012. The company issued 1,264,232 treasury $468 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively, were remitted by
shares in 2014, 1,849,883 treasury shares in 2013 and 2,746,169 employees in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding
treasury shares in 2012, as a result of restricted stock unit releases requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock
and exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and
businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2014: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,636) $ (438) $(2,074)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (29) $ 11 $ (18)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 5 (2) 3
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 0 0 0
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (24) $ 9 $ (15)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 958 $ (341) $ 618
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 15 (7) 9
SG&A expense (15) 6 (9)
Other (income) and expense (98) 38 (60)
Interest expense 1 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 861 $ (304) $ 557
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 1 $ 0 $ 1
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (9,799) 3,433 (6,366)
Curtailments and settlements 24 (7) 17
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (114) 41 (73)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,531 (852) 1,678
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(7,357) $2,615 $(4,742)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(8,156) $1,883 $(6,274)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 121 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2013: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,335) $ (66) $(1,401)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (4) $ 2 $ (3)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (8) 2 (5)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (8) $ 3 $ (5)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 43 $ (15) $ 28
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 34 (14) 21
SG&A expense (39) 14 (25)
Other (income) and expense (162) 62 (99)
Interest expense 0 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (123) $ 47 $ (76)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 16 $ 0 $ 16
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 5,369 (1,974) 3,395
Curtailments and settlements (3) 1 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (114) 40 (75)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,499 (1,195) 2,304
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 8,767 $(3,128) $ 5,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 7,301 $(3,144) $ 4,157
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2012: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (44) $ 10 $ (34)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 8 $ (4) $ 4
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (42) 17 (25)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 20 (8) 12
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (14) $ 5 $ (9)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 32 $ (27) $ 5
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (7) (6) (13)
SG&A expense (16) 4 (12)
Other (income) and expense (237) 91 (146)
Interest expense 6 (3) 3
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (220) $ 59 $ (161)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period $(7,489) $2,327 $(5,162)
Curtailments and settlements (2) 0 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost (148) 59 (89)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,457 (874) 1,583
Total retirement-related benefit plans $(5,182) $1,513 $(3,669)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(5,460) $1,587 $(3,874)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 131 to 145 for additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2011 $ 71 $ 1,767 $(23,737) $ 13 $(21,885)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 5 (34) (5,164) 16 (5,177)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (167) 0 1,495 (25) 1,303
Total change for the period (161) (34) (3,669) (9) (3,874)
December 31, 2012 (90) 1,733 (27,406) 4 (25,759)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 28 (1,401) 3,409 0 2,036
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (103) 0 2,229 (5) 2,121
Total change for the period (76) (1,401) 5,639 (5) 4,157
December 31, 2013 (165) 332 (21,767) (1) (21,602)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 618 (2,074) (6,348) (18) (7,822)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income (60) 0 1,605 3 1,548
Total change for the period 557 (2,074) (4,742) (15) (6,274)
December 31, 2014 $ 392 $(1,742) $(26,509) $(15 ) $(27,875)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.

===== PAGE 123 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M.
CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits,
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as plain- investigations and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it
tiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters.
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time It is the company’s experience that damage amounts claimed
to time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to possible
leader in the information technology industry and, as such, has outcomes, and as such are not meaningful indicators of the com-
been and will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP pany’s potential liability. Further, the company is unable to provide
rights and associated products and offerings, including claims of such an estimate due to a number of other factors with respect
copyright and patent infringement and violations of trade secrets to these claims, suits, investigations and proceedings, including
and other IP rights. In addition, the company enforces its own IP considerations of the procedural status of the matter in ques-
against infringement, through license negotiations, lawsuits or oth- tion, the presence of complex or novel legal theories, and/or the
erwise. Also, as is typical for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, ongoing discovery and development of information important to
the company is party to actions and proceedings in various juris- the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, investigations
dictions involving a wide range of labor and employment issues and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made with
(including matters related to contested employment decisions, respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing rea-
country-specific labor and employment laws, and the company’s sonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the
pension, retirement and other benefit plans), as well as actions with aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discus-
respect to contracts, product liability, securities, foreign opera- sions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews by
tions, competition law and environmental matters. These actions counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter.
may be commenced by a number of different parties, including Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined
competitors, clients, current or former employees, government and in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably
regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives of the loca- have a material effect on the company’s business, financial condi-
tions in which the company does business. Some of the actions to tion, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number
which the company is party may involve particularly complex tech- of variables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or
nical issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under damages; the structure and type of any such remedies; the sig-
the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. nificance of the impact any such losses, damages or remedies
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the
suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter that may
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably give rise to additional factors. While the company will continue to
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the company’s business,
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 financial condition, results of operations or cash flows could be
were not material to the company’s results of continuing opera- affected in any particular period by the resolution of one or more
tions and financial position. of these matters.
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com- The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of involving the company.
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com- The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003
pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v.
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other IBM). The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah.
companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee Plaintiff is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX
relations considerations. IP rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition,
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for exam- code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On
ple, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and all
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remain- proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another suit, the
ing claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this
Note, the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably
possible losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury Court held that for IBM to make changes to accruals under the
found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; plan would require a new consultation of the participants, but to
the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to recognize make other changes (including to early retirement policy) would
Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent for not require such consultation. IBM intends to appeal both the
breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the Tenth breach and remedies judgments. In addition, IBM UK is a defen-
Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling and dant in approximately 290 individual actions brought since early
denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June 2013, the Federal Court 2010 by participants of the defined benefits plans who left IBM
in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen the SCO v. IBM case, and UK. These actions, which allege constructive dismissal and age
proceedings have resumed in that case. discrimination, are pending before the Employment Tribunal in
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf Southampton UK.
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one In a separate but related proceeding, in October 2012, the
another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the modern- High Court held that the 1983 Trust Deeds and Rules should be
ization of social service program processing in Indiana. The State modified to allow certain categories of current IBM UK employ-
terminated the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and ees who are members of the C Plan to retire from the age of 60
the State is seeking damages. IBM believes the State’s claims (rather than from the age of 63) without actuarial reduction of their
against it are without merit and is seeking payment of termina- defined benefit pension. In a supplementary ruling in December
tion amounts specified in the contract. After six weeks of trial, on 2012, the Court declined to similarly modify the Trust Deeds and
July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior Court in Marion County rejected Rules for former employees who were C Plan members and who
the State’s claims in their entirety and awarded IBM $52 million left the company prior to retirement. Neither party appealed these
plus interest and costs. On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court judgments. As a result of the October 2012 ruling, IBM recorded
of Appeals reversed portions of the trial judge’s findings, found a pre-tax retirement-related obligation of $162 million in the third
IBM in material breach, and ordered the case remanded to the quarter of 2012.
trial judge to determine the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana On March 24, 2014, in a suit brought by local Works Councils,
Court of Appeals also affirmed approximately $50 million of the the Supreme Court of Spain held that IBM Spain’s Defined Contri-
trial court’s award of damages to IBM. This matter remains pend- bution (DC) Plan implemented in 1993 was null and void, and held
ing in the Indiana courts. that current employees could reinstate their rights to a Defined
On April 16, 2014, Iusacell SA de C.V. (Iusacell) sued IBM, claim- Benefit (DB) Plan, although with an offset for DC contributions paid
ing that IBM made fraudulent misrepresentations that induced to date. The Court held that IBM Spain did not consult with the
Iusacell to enter into an agreement with IBM Mexico. Iusacell claims Works Councils in seeking the voluntary participation of employ-
damages for lost profits. Iusacell’s complaint relates to a contrac- ees in changing the pension scheme, and recommended that IBM
tual dispute in Mexico, which is the subject of a pending arbitration Spain and the Works Councils engage in discussions over how to
proceeding in Mexico initiated by IBM Mexico against Iusacell for carry out the offset. The ruling is declaratory only. IBM Spain has
breach of the underlying agreement. On November 14, 2014, the requested leave to appeal the decision to the Constitutional Court.
District Court in the Southern District of New York granted IBM’s The matter remains pending in the Spanish courts.
motion to stay Iusacell’s action against the company pending the In March 2011, the company announced that it had agreed to
arbitration in Mexico between Iusacell and IBM Mexico. settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceed- Commission (SEC) relating to alleged violations of the Foreign Cor-
ings in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the rupt Practices Act of 1977. On July 25, 2013, the court approved
IBM UK Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative that 2011 settlement and required that for a two-year period IBM
beneficiaries of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a make reports to the SEC and the court on certain matters, includ-
declaration that it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the ing those relating to compliance with the FCPA. In early 2012, IBM
UK Trust that it was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future notified the SEC of an investigation by the Polish Central Anti-Cor-
accruals for most participants and in implementing the company’s ruption Bureau involving allegations of illegal activity by a former
new retirement policy. In April 2014, the High Court acknowledged IBM Poland employee in connection with sales to the Polish gov-
that the changes made to its UK defined benefit plans were within ernment. IBM is cooperating with the SEC and Polish authorities in
IBM’s discretion, but ruled that IBM breached its implied duty of this matter. In April 2013, IBM learned that the U.S. Department of
good faith both in implementing these changes and in the manner Justice (DOJ) is also investigating allegations related to the Poland
in which it consulted with employees. Proceedings to determine matter, as well as allegations relating to transactions in Argentina,
remedies were held in July 2014 and in February 2015 the High Bangladesh and Ukraine. The DOJ is also seeking information
regarding the company’s global FCPA compliance program and
its public sector business. The company is cooperating with the
DOJ in this matter.

===== PAGE 125 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after the company customarily agrees to hold the other party harm-
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York, less against losses arising from a breach of representations and
county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com- covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP
plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including rights, specified environmental matters, third-party performance
for negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain income taxes.
Plaintiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim dam- In each of these circumstances, payment by the company is
ages in unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries conditioned on the other party making a claim pursuant to the
and property damages allegedly arising out of the presence of procedures specified in the particular contract, the procedures of
groundwater contamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater which typically allow the company to challenge the other party’s
contaminants into certain structures in which plaintiffs reside claims. While typically indemnification provisions do not include a
or resided, or conducted business, allegedly resulting from the contractual maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s
release of chemicals into the environment by the company at its obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time
former manufacturing and development facility in Endicott. These and/or nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may
complaints also seek punitive damages in an unspecified amount. have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceed- the company.
ings brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique
CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership Historically, payments made by the company under these agree-
of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investiga- ments have not had a material effect on the company’s business,
tions, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several financial condition or results of operations.
current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits, In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these
environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims financial guarantees was $46 million and $44 million at Decem-
concerning certain current or former operating sites. ber 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with was immaterial.
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the com-
pany is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities
NOTE N.
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litiga-
TAXES
tion matters. The total potential amount related to these matters for
all applicable years is approximately $630 million. The company
($ in millions)
believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is not
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012*
a meaningful indicator of liability.
Income from continuing operations
before income taxes
Commitments
U.S. operations $ 7,509 $ 7,577 $10,306
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
include unused amounts of $5,365 million and $5,028 million at Non-U.S. operations 12,477 12,667 12,234
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. A portion of these Total income from continuing
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to operations before income taxes $19,986 $20,244 $22,540
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company has * Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection
with client purchase agreements for approximately $1,816 million The income from continuing operations provision for income taxes
and $1,769 million at December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. by geographic operations is as follows:
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of ($ in millions)
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012*
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
U.S. operations $2,093 $1,315 $2,825
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant
Non-U.S. operations 2,141 2,048 2,716
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with
Total continuing operations
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the
provision for income taxes $4,234 $3,363 $5,541
context of contracts entered into by the company, under which
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The components of the income from continuing operations provi- redeterminations (11.1 points), the retroactive impact of the 2012
sion for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: American Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points), a tax agreement requir-
ing a reassessment of certain valuation allowances on deferred
($ in millions) tax assets (1.4 points), the resolution of certain non-U.S. tax audits
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012* (0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state tax legislation (0.6 points),
as well as a tax charge related to the divestiture of the industry
U.S. federal
standard server business (0.9 points).
Current $ 1,134 $1,694 $1,556
These increases were partially offset by benefits due to the
Deferred 105 (708) 415
following: the year-to-year reduction in tax charges related to cer-
1,239 986 1,971 tain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries and the
U.S. state and local licensing of certain intellectual property (3.7 points), the increased
Current 541 277 168 utilization of foreign tax credits (4.7 points), and a more favorable
geographic mix of pre-tax income in 2014 (2.5 points).
Deferred (105) (330) 291
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and lia-
436 (53) 459
bilities did not have a material impact on the company’s effective
Non-U.S. tax rate.
Current 2,825 3,067 3,006 The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabili-
Deferred (266) (637) 105 ties that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position were as follows:
2,559 2,430 3,111
Total continuing operations provision
Deferred Tax Assets
for income taxes 4,234 3,363 5,541
Discontinued operations provision ($ in millions)
for income taxes (1,617) (322) (243) At December 31: 2014 2013*
Provision for social security, Retirement benefits $ 4,795 $ 3,704
real estate, personal property
Share-based and other compensation 1,328 1,262
and other taxes 4,068 4,198 4,331
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 858 982
Total taxes included in net income $ 6,685 $7,238 $9,629
Deferred income 957 964
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 686 651
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the com- Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 529 592
pany’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is as follows: Depreciation 329 382
Accruals 1,176 322
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012*
Other 1,306 1,452
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
Gross deferred tax assets 11,964 10,311
Foreign tax differential (14) (13) (10)
Less: valuation allowance 646 734
State and local 1 0 1
Net deferred tax assets $11,318 $ 9,577
Domestic incentives (2) (3) (1)
* Reclassified to conform with 2014 presentation.
Other 1 (2) 0
Effective rate 21% 17% 25% Deferred Tax Liabilities
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes. ($ in millions)
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation. At December 31: 2014 2013
Depreciation $ 487 $1,346
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili-
ation above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects Retirement benefits 205 1,219
of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. Goodwill and intangible assets 1,263 1,173
statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of Leases 912 1,119
non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercom-
Software development costs 421 558
pany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or
Deferred transition costs 374 424
changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated
with each of these items. Other 1,111 841
The 2014 continuing operations tax rate increased 4.6 points Gross deferred tax liabilities $4,773 $6,680
from 2013 due to the lack of the following 2013 benefits: the com-
pletion of the 2008–2010 U.S. tax audit and associated reserve

===== PAGE 127 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $579 mil- included in income tax expense. During the year ended Decem-
lion, as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $965 ber 31, 2014, the company recognized $216 million in interest
million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at expense and penalties; in 2013, the company recognized a benefit
least two years or are available for 10 years or more. of $93 million in interest expense and penalties, and in 2012, the
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2014 principally company recognized $134 million in interest expense and penal-
applies to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, ties. The company has $593 million for the payment of interest
in the opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire and penalties accrued at December 31, 2014, and had $417 million
unutilized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these accrued at December 31, 2013.
carry forwards are realized in the future, the reduction in the valu- Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reason-
ation allowance will reduce income tax expense. ably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2014 associated with certain positions may be significantly reduced.
increased by $646 million in 2014 to $5,104 million. A reconciliation The potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits
of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is primarily associated with the anticipated resolution of the com-
is as follows: pany’s U.S. income tax audit for 2011 and 2012, as well as various
non-U.S. audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax
($ in millions) benefits at December 31, 2014 could be reduced by approximately
2014 2013 2012 $1 billion.
The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various
Balance at January 1 $4,458 $ 5,672 $5,575
state and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state
Additions based on tax positions
and foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer
related to the current year 697 829 401
subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2009. The company is
Additions for tax positions
no longer subject to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax
of prior years 586 417 215
return for years prior to 2011. The open years contain matters that
Reductions for tax positions
could be subject to differing interpretations of applicable tax laws
of prior years (including impacts
due to a lapse in statute) (579) (2,201) (425) and regulations related to the amount and/or timing of income,
deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome of tax audits is
Settlements (58) (259) (94)
always uncertain, the company believes that adequate amounts of
Balance at December 31 $5,104 $ 4,458 $5,672
tax and interest have been provided for any significant adjustments
that are expected to result for these years.
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain
assessment notice for approximately $866 million (approximately
tax incentives and credits, divestitures, acquisition-related matters
$850 million at 2014 year-end currency rates) from the Indian Tax
and state issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized
Authorities for 2009. The company believes it will prevail on these
tax benefits for tax positions of prior years are primarily attribut-
matters and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liabil-
able to currency, non-U.S. audits and impacts due to lapses in
ity. At December 31, 2014, the company has recorded $471 million
statutes of limitation.
as prepaid income taxes in India. A significant portion of this bal-
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of the
ance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to protect the
Japan Tax Authorities with respect to certain foreign tax losses.
company’s right to appeal various income tax assessments made
The tax benefit of these losses totals $1,000 million as of Decem-
by the Indian Tax Authorities.
ber 31, 2014. The 2014 decrease of $141 million was driven by
In the first quarter of 2014, the IRS commenced its audit of
currency and has been included in the 2014 reductions for tax
the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2011 and 2012. The company
positions of prior years. In April 2011, the company received notifi-
anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end of 2015.
cation that the appeal was denied, and in June 2011, the company
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $61.4 billion
filed a lawsuit challenging this decision. In May 2014, the Tokyo
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31,
District Court ruled in favor of the company. The Japanese gov-
2014, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these
ernment has appealed the ruling to the Tokyo High Court. No final
earnings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodi-
determination has been reached on this matter.
cally repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it
The liability at December 31, 2014 of $5,104 million can be
does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the
reduced by $875 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested
the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, U.S.
earnings is not practicable.
tax credits, state income taxes and timing adjustments. The net
amount of $4,229 million, if recognized, would favorably affect the
company’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31,
2013 and 2012 were $3,902 million and $5,099 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE O.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
RD&E expense was $5,437 million in 2014, $5,743 million in 2013 the development of new and improved products and their uses,
and $5,816 million in 2012. In addition, RD&E expense included in as well as services and their application. Within these amounts,
discontinued operations was $368 million in 2014, $483 million in software-related expense was $3,064 million, $3,077 million and
2013 and $486 million in 2012. $3,078 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
The company incurred total expense of $5,595 million, $5,959 Expense for product-related engineering was $211 million, $267
million and $6,034 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively, for million and $268 million in 2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively.
scientific research and the application of scientific advances to
NOTE P.
EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic 1,004,272,584 1,094,486,604 1,142,508,521
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 4,332,155 6,751,240 10,868,426
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 1,395,741 1,804,313 2,072,370
Assuming dilution 1,010,000,480 1,103,042,156 1,155,449,317
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $16,881 $16,999
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (3,729) (398) (395)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $12,022 $16,483 $16,604
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $16,881 $16,999
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares (3) (1) (1)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $15,749 $16,880 $16,998
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic and diluted earnings
per share is calculated (3,729) (398 ) (395)
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $12,020 $16,483 $16,603
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 15.59 $ 15.30 $ 14.71
Discontinued operations (3.69) (0.36) (0.34)
Total $ 11.90 $ 14.94 $ 14.37
Basic
Continuing operations $ 15.68 $ 15.42 $ 14.88
Discontinued operations (3.71) (0.36) (0.35)
Total $ 11.97 $ 15.06 $ 14.53
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 17,420 common shares in 2014 and 8,797 common shares in 2013 were outstanding, but
were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise price of the options was greater than the average
market price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would have been antidilutive. There were no stock options
outstanding in 2012 that were considered antidilutive and not included in the diluted earnings per share calculation.

===== PAGE 129 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE Q.
RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent rentals are
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was included in the determination of rental expense as accruable.
$1,592 million in 2014, $1,759 million in 2013 and $1,767 million in The table below depicts gross minimum rental commitments
2012. Within these amounts, rental expense reflected in discon- under noncancelable leases, amounts related to vacant space
tinued operations was $95 million, $115 million and $110 million, in associated with infrastructure reductions, sublease income com-
2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Rental expense in agreements mitments and capital lease commitments. These amounts reflect
with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is recorded on activities primarily related to office space, as well as datacenters.
($ in millions)
2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Beyond 2019
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,350 $1,161 $988 $848 $754 $1,051
Vacant space $ 24 $ 9 $ 6 $ 2 $ 0 $ —
Sublease income commitments $ 12 $ 10 $ 8 $ 6 $ 5 $ 6
Capital lease commitments $ 13 $ 7 $ 2 $ 2 $ 2 $ 2
NOTE R. Incentive Awards
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
The following table presents total stock-based compensation cost “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen-
included in income from continuing operations: sation and Management Resources Committee of the Board of
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans
($ in millions) principally include restricted stock units, performance share units,
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 stock options or any combination thereof.
Cost $ 121 $ 122 $ 132 The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under
Selling, general and administrative 350 435 498 the company’s existing Plans was 274 million at December 31,
2014. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previ-
Research, development
and engineering 54 57 59 ous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could be
reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million
Other (income) and expense* (13) — (1)
additional awards were considered authorized to be issued under
Pre-tax stock-based
the company’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2014. There were
compensation cost 512 614 688
115.5 million unused shares available to be granted under the Plans
Income tax benefits (174) (213) (240)
as of December 31, 2014.
Net stock-based Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
compensation cost $ 338 $ 402 $ 448
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
* Reflects the one-time effects related to the divestitures of the customer care and approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the
industry standard server businesses in 2014. number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or
formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant.
The amount of stock-based compensation cost included in dis-
All awards for senior management are approved by the Commit-
continued operations, net of tax, was immaterial in all periods.
tee. All awards for employees other than senior management are
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested
approved by senior management pursuant to a series of delega-
awards at December 31, 2014 and 2013 was $874 million and $995
tions that were approved by the Committee, and the grants made
million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2014 is expected
pursuant to these delegations are reviewed periodically with the
to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately
Committee. Awards that are given as part of annual total compen-
2.5 years.
sation for senior management and other employees are made on
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensa-
tion cost at December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
specific cycle dates scheduled in advance. With respect to awards Stock Awards
given in connection with promotions or new hires, the company’s Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units
policy requires approval of such awards prior to the grant date, (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or
which is typically the date of the promotion or the date of hire. Performance Share Units (PSUs).
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
RSUs
2014 2013 2012
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $166 8,635,317 $148 9,841,461 $129 12,218,601
RSUs granted 172 2,525,947 189 2,541,081 184 2,635,772
RSUs released 157 (2,401,761) 131 (2,952,363) 117 (4,338,787)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 167 (1,025,226) 154 (794,862) 139 (674,125)
Balance at December 31 $171 7,734,277 $166 8,635,317 $148 9,841,461
PSUs
2014 2013 2012
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $178 2,824,294 $151 3,172,201 $122 3,686,991
PSUs granted at target 180 1,430,098 195 869,875 185 1,004,003
Additional shares earned above target* 157 29,960 118 152,069 102 550,399
PSUs released 157 (1,027,181) 118 (1,321,784) 102 (1,998,746)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 187 (116,464) 170 (48,067) 131 (70,446)
Balance at December 31** $185 3,140,707 $178 2,824,294 $151 3,172,201
* Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued will depend on final
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the of RSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31,
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $378 million, $386 million and $509 mil-
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents lion, respectively. As of December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, there
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed was $754 million, $871 million and $938 million, respectively, of
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. company received no cash from employees as a result of employee
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31,
December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 is the same as the period over 2014, 2013 and 2012. In the second quarter of 2011, the company
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which granted equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during to about 400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $434 mil- made under the Plans and vest in December 2015.
lion, $481 million and $486 million, respectively. The total fair value

===== PAGE 131 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ulti- Stock Options
mately received by the employee depends on the company’s Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase
performance against specified targets and typically vest over a shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are
three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high
The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, based and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards, which
on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of divi- generally vest 25 percent per year, are fully vested four years from
dend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets will be the date of grant and have a contractual term of 10 years.
achieved. Over the performance period, the number of shares of The company estimates the fair value of stock options at
stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward based the date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key
upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. The inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock
ultimate number of shares issued and the related compensation options include the grant price of the award, the expected option
cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the term, volatility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the
final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value company’s dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended
of PSUs granted at target during the years ended December 31, to predict actual future events or the value ultimately realized by
2014, 2013 and 2012 was $257 million, $170 million and $186 million, employees who receive equity awards, and subsequent events
respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original estimates
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $161 mil- of fair value made by the company.
lion, $156 million and $203 million, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012, the
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the company did not grant stock options.
tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended Decem- The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans
ber 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 were $222 million, $312 million and during the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012.
$454 million, respectively.
2014 2013 2012
Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721 $90 20,662,322
Options exercised 97 (3,740,252) 90 (5,585,127) 86 (9,080,170)
Options canceled/expired 95 (131,750) 86 (181,643) 75 (192,431)
Balance at December 31 $97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721
Exercisable at December 31 $97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721
The shares under option at December 31, 2014 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted-Average
Weighted- Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$85 and under $ 83 351,690 $ 27,409,244 1.2
$86 and over 100 1,399,259 84,243,181 0.7
$ 97 1,750,949 $111,652,425 0.8
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years the company for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and
ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was $323 million, $614 2012 were $107 million, $199 million and $341 million, respectively.
million and $1,005 million, respectively. The total cash received The company settles employee stock option exercises pri-
from employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for marily with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with
the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 and 2012 was approxi- treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31,
mately $364 million, $505 million and $785 million, respectively. 2014 and 2013 were approximately 1,225 million and 1,153 million
In connection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by shares, respectively.

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisitions U.S. Plans
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was Defined Benefit Pension Plans
an additional 0.5 million shares of stock-based awards, consist- IBM Personal Pension Plan
ing of stock options and restricted stock units, outstanding at IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired
December 31, 2014, as a result of the company’s assumption of prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen-
stock-based awards previously granted by the acquired entities. sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the
The weighted-average exercise price of these awards was $56 IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified)
per share. plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January
1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of
5-percent discount off the average market price on the day of participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded,
purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.
compensation. Eligible compensation includes any compensation Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
received by the employee during the year. The ESPP provides benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first
for offering periods during which shares may be purchased and method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits
continues as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, based on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-
unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Direc- specific factors. The second method is a cash balance formula
tors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted from purchasing that calculates benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual
more than $25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000 salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
shares in an offering period. Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
Employees purchased 1.3 million, 1.5 million and 1.6 million December 31, 2007 for all participants.
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31,
2014, 2013 and 2012, respectively. Cash dividends declared and U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
paid by the company on its common stock also include cash The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be rein- which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
vested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is based on average earnings, years of service and age at termina-
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average tion of employment.
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December
earnings per share. 31, 2007 for all participants.
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were Defined Contribution Plans
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides for IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and continuing as U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to par-
long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated ticipate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined
earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue
Approximately 24.4 million, 2.3 million and 3.8 million shares Code. Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan,
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2014, eligible employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their con-
2013 and 2012, respectively. tributions up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired
prior to January 1, 2005, and, generally up to 5 percent of eligible
compensation for those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addi-
NOTE S.
tion, eligible employees receive automatic contributions from the
RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of eligible compensation based
Description of Plans on their eligibility to participate in the PPP as of December 31,
2007. Employees generally receive automatic contributions and
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined con-
matching contributions after the completion of one year of service.
tribution plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a
Further, through June 30, 2009, IBM contributed transition credits
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives
to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus Plan accounts. The amount of
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily consist-
the transition credits was based on a participant’s age and service
ing of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible retirees
as of June 30, 1999.
and dependents.

===== PAGE 133 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to
There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in com- eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insur-
pany stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts ance for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company
out of company stock to another investment choice, other than established a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who
excessive trading rules applicable to such investments. Effective were more than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees
January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contributions are made who were within five years of retirement eligibility are covered
once annually at the end of the year. In order to receive such con- under the company’s prior retiree health benefits arrangements.
tributions each year, a participant must be employed on December Under either the FHA or the prior retiree health benefit arrange-
15 of the plan year. However, if a participant separates from service ments, there is a maximum cost to the company for retiree health
prior to December 15, and has completed certain service and/or benefits. Effective January 1, 2014, the company amended the plan
age requirements, then the participant will be eligible to receive to establish a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) for each
such matching and automatic contributions following separation Medicare-eligible plan retiree, surviving spouse and long-term
from service. disability plan participant who is eligible for company-subsidized
coverage and who enrolls in an individual plan under the Medi-
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan care Exchange. The company also amended its life insurance plan.
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Execu- Employees retiring on or after January 1, 2015 are not eligible for
tive Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, life insurance.
defined contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are
(Excess 401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension postretirement
plan. Employees whose eligible compensation is expected to benefits.
exceed the IRS compensation limit for qualified plans are eligible
to participate in the Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess Non-U.S. Plans
401(k) is to provide benefits that would be provided under the quali- Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States spon-
fied IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation limits did not apply. sor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annui-
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts ties under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans.
in investments which mirror the primary investment options avail- Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based either
able under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) on years of service and the employee’s compensation (generally
are also eligible to receive company match and automatic contribu- during a fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or
tions on eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on annual credits. The range of assumptions that are used for
on compensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the different economic
pay limit once they have completed one year of service. Through environments within the various countries.
June 30, 2009, eligible participants also received transition cred- In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries
its. Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide
contributions are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated State- medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible
ment of Financial Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S.
automatic contributions are recorded once annually at the end of retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local
the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, a partici- government-sponsored and -administered programs.
pant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year. However,
if a participant separates from service prior to December 15, and
has completed certain service and/or age requirements, then the
participant will be eligible to receive such matching and automatic
contributions following separation from service.

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Defined benefit pension plans $(833) $(223) $(526) $1,267 $1,396 $1,040 $ 434 $1,173 $ 515
Retention Plan 15 21 18 — — — 15 21 18
Total defined benefit pension plans
(income)/cost $(818) $(202) $(507) $1,267 $1,396 $1,040 $ 449 $1,195 $ 533
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and non-U.S. plans $ 713 $ 785 $ 857 $ 526 $ 575 $ 621 $1,239 $1,361 $1,478
Excess 401(k) 14 24 29 — — — 14 24 29
Total defined contribution plans cost $ 727 $ 809 $ 885 $ 526 $ 575 $ 621 $1,253 $1,384 $1,506
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans cost $ 206 $ 218 $ 268 $ 66 $ 79 $ 82 $ 272 $ 298 $ 350
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $ 115 $ 826 $ 646 $1,859 $2,051 $1,743 $1,974 $2,876 $2,389
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $54,708 $49,315 $55,772 $53,954 $ 1,065 $ 4,639
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,602 $ 1,425 $ — $ — $ (1,602) $ (1,425)
Retention Plan 334 294 — — (334) (294)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 5,053 4,633 16 177 (5,037) (4,456)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 6,989 $ 6,352 $ 16 $ 177 $ (6,973) $ (6,175)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $16,794 $ 9,336 $17,888 $10,240 $ 1,094 $ 904
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 11 10 11 11 0 1
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $16,804 $ 9,346 $17,898 $10,251 $ 1,094 $ 905
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $26,278 $32,697 $21,655 $29,223 $ (4,623) $ (3,474)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 6,762 6,587 — — (6,762) (6,587)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 806 822 73 81 (733) (741)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $33,846 $40,106 $21,729 $29,304 $(12,118) $(10,802)
Total overfunded plans $71,512 $58,661 $73,671 $64,205 $ 2,159 $ 5,544
Total underfunded plans $40,836 $46,458 $21,745 $29,481 $(19,091) $(16,977)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2014, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 97 percent funded compared to the benefit
obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 102 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s defined benefit pension
plans worldwide were 90 percent funded.

===== PAGE 135 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement
Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 136 represent financial informa- nonpension postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists
tion for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans The tables below present the components of net periodic
under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized
and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined con-
nonpension postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans tribution plans.
consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 449 $ 501 $ 443
Interest cost 2,211 1,980 2,196 1,533 1,524 1,779
Expected return on plan assets (4,096) (3,981) (4,043) (2,247) (2,195) (2,303)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 10 10 10 (111) (119) (154)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,056 1,790 1,331 1,400 1,600 1,027
Curtailments and settlements — — — 26 0 0
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — 217 85 247
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (818) $ (202) $ (507) $ 1,267 $ 1,396 $ 1,040
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Service cost $ 26 $ 35 $ 36 $ 7 $10 $14
Interest cost 187 164 200 63 60 64
Expected return on plan assets 0 (1) — (9) (9) (9)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (7) — — (5) (5) (4)
Recognized actuarial losses 0 21 32 11 23 17
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 0 0
Total net periodic cost $206 $218 $268 $66 $79 $82
* The 2014 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $148 million related to the IBM Spain pension litigation and the 2012 Non-U.S. plans amount includes $162 million related to the IBM UK
pension litigation. See page 136 for additional information.

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, exclud-
ing defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $51,034 $56,810 $ 48,620 $49,319 $ 4,633 $ 5,282 $ 832 $1,019
Service cost — — 449 501 26 35 7 10
Interest cost 2,211 1,980 1,533 1,524 187 164 63 60
Plan participants’ contributions — — 37 42 61 191 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (90) 89 0 (2) 0 0
Actuarial losses/(gains) 6,968 (4,344) 6,662 (362) 548 (481) 38 (89)
Benefits paid from trust (3,455) (3,303) (1,985) (1,920) (388) (557) (5) (6)
Direct benefit payments (114) (108) (465) (464) (37) (43) (26) (28)
Foreign exchange impact — — (5,073) (115) — — (91) (89)
Medicare/Government subsidies — — — — 23 30 — —
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 146 6 0 15 (1) (44)
Benefit obligation at December 31 $56,643 $51,034 $ 49,834 $48,620 $ 5,053 $ 4,633 $ 817 $ 832
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $53,954 $53,630 $ 39,464 $38,058 $ 177 $ 433 $ 92 $ 119
Actual return on plan assets 5,274 3,626 5,579 2,515 0 0 9 5
Employer contributions — — 465 449 166 110 0 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (59) 35 0 — 0 0
Plan participants’ contributions — — 37 42 61 191 — —
Benefits paid from trust (3,455) (3,303) (1,985) (1,920) (388) (557) (5) (6)
Foreign exchange impact — — (4,049) 121 — — (11) (14)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 93* 164* — — 0 (12)
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 $55,772 $53,954 $ 39,543 $39,464 $ 16 $ 177 $ 84 $ 92
Funded status at December 31 $ (871) $ 2,920 $(10,291) $ (9,157) $(5,037) $(4,456) $(733) $ (740)
Accumulated benefit obligation** $56,643 $51,034 $ 47,516 $47,806 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* I ncludes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. The
assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three-year period, starting June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with approximately $122 million returned during 2014. The
remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2014 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013
Prepaid pension assets $ 1,065 $ 4,639 $ 1,095 $ 912 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 1
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits (111) (107) (326) (364) (381) (256) (13) (16)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefit obligations (1,825) (1,612) (11,060) (9,705) (4,656) (4,200) (720) (725)
Funded status—net $ (871) $ 2,920 $(10,291) $(9,157) $(5,037) $(4,456) $(733) $(740)

===== PAGE 137 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and
the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-
related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013 2014 2013
Net loss at January 1 $13,709 $19,488 $19,777 $22,188 $304 $806 $161 $269
Current period loss/(gain) 5,789 (3,989) 3,324 (814) 548 (480) 38 (85)
Curtailments and settlements — — (25) 3 — — 1 0
Amortization of net loss included
in net periodic (income)/cost (1,056) (1,790) (1,400) (1,600) 0 (21) (11) (23)
Net loss at December 31 $18,442 $13,709 $21,676 $19,777 $852 $304 $189 $161
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 120 $ 130 $ (496) $ (614) $ 15 $ — $ (32) $ (6)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — (1) 0 — 15 0 (31)
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 111 119 7 — 5 5
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 110 $ 120 $ (386) $ (496) $ 23 $ 15 $ (26) $ (32)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — 0 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $18,552 $13,829 $21,290 $19,281 $875 $319 $163 $129
* S ee note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 118 through 121 for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic
(income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2015.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,659 $1,693 $43 $11
Prior service costs/(credits) 10 (98) (7) (5)
Transition (assets)/liabilities — — — —
During the year ended December 31, 2013, the company amended Consolidated Statement of Earnings. This obligation is reflected in
the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan. A plan amend- “Non-U.S. Plans—Multi-employer plans/other costs” in the table
ment effective January 1, 2014, which established an HRA for on page 134. To date, the rulings in this case are declaratory only.
Medicare eligible participants increased the benefit obligation $91 In 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling against IBM
million. A plan amendment which ended life insurance eligibility United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom Holdings Lim-
for employees who retire on or after January 1, 2015 reduced the ited, both wholly owned subsidiaries of the company, in litigation
benefit obligation $76 million. involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit plans. As a result of the
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling ruling, the company recorded an additional pre-tax retirement-
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and related obligation of $162 million in 2012 in selling, general and
defined contribution plans. As a result of the ruling, the company administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
recorded a pre-tax retirement-related obligation of $148 mil- See note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 123 for
lion in 2014 in selling, general and administrative expense in the additional information regarding pension plan litigation matters.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years The table below presents the assumptions used to measure
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan for retirement-related benefit plans.
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 4.50% 3.60% 4.20% 3.32% 3.23% 4.28%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets 8.00% 8.00% 8.00% 6.08% 6.21% 6.26%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.52% 2.51% 2.43%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.70% 4.50% 3.60% 2.34% 3.32% 3.23%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.49% 2.52% 2.51%
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2014 2013 2012 2014 2013 2012
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 4.10% 3.30% 3.90% 7.78% 6.43% 7.37%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A 0.35% N/A 10.22% 9.01% 9.01%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.40% 4.10% 3.30% 7.51% 7.78% 6.43%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit million, a decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $162 million
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed- and a decrease in 2012 net periodic income of $258 million. The
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase
and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate in the PBO of $4,437 million and a decrease of $4,785 million at
bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
the company’s expected benefit obligation payments are then For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the
matched to the yield curve to derive the discount rates. In other changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material
non-U.S. countries, where the markets for high-quality long-term impact on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31,
bonds are not generally as well developed, a portfolio of long-term 2014, 2013 and 2012 and resulted in an increase in the APBO of
government bonds is used as a base, to which a credit spread is $256 million and a decrease of $298 million at December 31, 2014
added to simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities in and 2013, respectively.
the jurisdiction of each plan, as the benchmark for developing the For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, the
respective discount rates. changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the in the benefit obligations of approximately $11.0 billion at Decem-
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/ ber 31, 2014.
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assump-
tions resulted in an increase in 2014 net periodic income of $275

===== PAGE 139 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets Interest Crediting Rate
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting
account long-term expectations for future returns and the invest- the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the ben-
ment policies and strategies as described on page 139. These efits that they are expected to receive in the following year and is
rates of return are developed by the company and are tested for based on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S.
reasonableness against historical returns. The use of expected Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
long-term returns on plan assets may result in recognized pen- For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.1 per-
sion income that is greater or less than the actual returns of those cent for the year ended December 31, 2014, from 1.2 percent for the
plan assets in any given year. Over time, however, the expected year ended December 31, 2013, resulted in an increase in 2014 net
long-term returns are designed to approximate the actual long- periodic income of $8 million. The change in the interest crediting
term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income and cost rate to 1.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2013, from
recognition that more closely matches the pattern of the services 1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2012, resulted in a
provided by the employees. Differences between actual and decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $6 million. The change in
expected returns are recognized as a component of net loss or the interest crediting rate to 1.1 percent for the year ended Decem-
gain in AOCI, which is amortized as a component of net periodic ber 31, 2012, from 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2011,
(income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy of the plan resulted in an increase in 2012 net periodic income of $10 million.
participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts
exceed certain thresholds provided by accounting standards. The Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the
value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the company reviews external data and its own historical trends for
expected return on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost. healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates.
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2014, 2013 which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The com-
and 2012 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net pany assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2015 will be
periodic (income)/cost. For 2015, the projected long-term rate of 7 percent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend
return on plan assets is approximately 7.5 percent. rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next four years. A one
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company percentage point increase or decrease in the assumed health-
maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely pay- care cost trend rate would not have had a material effect on 2014,
ments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2013 and 2012 net periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of
2014, 2013 and 2012, the expected long-term return on plan assets December 31, 2014 and 2013.
and the actual return on those assets were not material.
Plan Assets
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and mea-
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com- sured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations,
pany, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate these fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the
of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined amounts the company could realize in current market transactions.
benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31,
2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on
life expectancy and death rates for different types of participants.
Mortality rates are periodically updated based on actual experi-
ence. In the U.S., the Society of Actuaries released new mortality
tables in 2014 which the company utilized in its plan remeasure-
ments at December 31, 2014. For the U.S. retirement-related
benefit plans, the change in mortality assumptions resulted in an
increase to the benefit obligations of approximately $2.6 billion.

===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $6,229 million
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private market assets
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these obli- consisting of private equities and private real estate investments,
gations will be settled depends on future events, including the which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As of Decem-
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. ber 31, 2014, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,629 million in
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based commitments for future investments in private markets to be made
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors over a number of years. These commitments are expected to be
described on pages 137 through 138. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s funded from plan assets.
investment strategy balances the requirement to generate returns, Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve
using potentially higher yielding assets such as equity securi- investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk
ties, with the need to control risk in the portfolio with less volatile management strategy. The primary reasons for the use of deriva-
assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among tives are fixed income management, including duration, interest
others, inflation, volatility in equity values and changes in interest rate management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
rates that could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby manage currency and commodity strategies.
increasing its dependence on contributions from the company. To Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful consideration is described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-aver-
given to balancing the portfolio among industry sectors, compa- age target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 32 percent equity
nies and geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity, securities, 56 percent fixed-income securities, 2 percent real
dependence on economic growth, currency and other factors estate and 10 percent other investments, which is consistent with
that affect investment returns. In 2014, the company changed its the allocation decisions made by the company’s management.
investment strategy, modifying the target asset allocation, primarily The table on page 140 details the actual equity, fixed income,
by reducing equity securities and increasing debt securities. This real estate and other types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In
change was designed to reduce the potential negative impact that some countries, a higher percentage allocation to fixed income
equity markets might have on the funded status of the plan. As a is required to manage solvency and funding risks. In others, the
result, the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 33 percent responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a
equity securities, 57 percent fixed-income securities, 5 percent board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected
real estate and 5 percent other investments. by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences
The assets are managed by professional investment firms compared with the strategies previously described. Generally,
and investment professionals who are employees of the com- these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their use
pany. They are bound by investment mandates determined by of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan and mainly for cur-
the company’s management and are measured against specific rency hedging, interest rate risk management, credit exposure
benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given, but and alternative investment strategies.
not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer concentra- The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
tion, investment style and reliance on particular active and passive underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company main-
investment strategies. tains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely
benefit payments.

===== PAGE 141 =====
140 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2014. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $11,527 $ 1 $ — $11,528 $5,652 $ — $ — $ 5,652
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 85 2,277 — 2,362 126 7,415 — 7,540
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 7,883 — 7,883 — 8,159 32 8,191
Corporate bonds (e) — 18,828 4 18,832 — 2,063 1 2,063
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 567 20 587 — 238 — 238
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 312 3,118 295 3,725 87 9,715 — 9,802
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,053 — 1,053
Cash and short-term investments (g) 345 2,304 — 2,650 158 393 — 551
Hedge funds — 1,474 889 2,362 — 745 — 745
Private equity (h) — — 3,287 3,287 — — 513 513
Private real estate (h) — — 2,942 2,942 — — 664 664
Derivatives (i) (55) 3 — (53) 2 846 — 848
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 33 1,513 220 1,766
Subtotal 12,214 36,455 7,437 56,106 6,056 32,139 1,429 39,625
Other (k) — — — (333) — — — (82)
Fair value of plan assets $12,214 $36,455 $7,437 $55,772 $6,056 $32,139 $1,429 $39,543
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $55 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $21 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) T he U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $10 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million
representing 0.01 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Primarily includes limited partnerships.
(i) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $16 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $84 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico
and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2
in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 142 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2013. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (a) $15,929 $ — $ — $15,929 $6,489 $ — $ — $ 6,489
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c) 216 2,593 — 2,809 132 8,325 — 8,457
Fixed income
Government and related (d) — 7,093 1 7,094 — 8,682 42 8,724
Corporate bonds (e) — 14,639 5 14,644 — 1,881 4 1,885
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 691 19 709 — 8 — 8
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f) 221 716 274 1,211 75 8,596 — 8,670
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,196 — 1,196
Cash and short-term investments (g) 427 1,915 — 2,343 154 451 — 605
Hedge funds — 1,368 860 2,228 — 740 — 740
Private equity (h) — — 3,771 3,771 — — 410 410
Private real estate (h) — — 3,038 3,038 — — 655 655
Derivatives (i) 1 6 — 7 1 150 — 151
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j) — — — — 36 1,518 — 1,554
Subtotal 16,795 29,021 7,968 53,784 6,886 31,547 1,110 39,544
Other (k) — — — 170 — — — (80)
Fair value of plan assets $16,795 $29,021 $7,968 $53,954 $6,886 $31,547 $1,110 $39,464
(a) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $83 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $31 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e) T he U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $9 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $1 million
representing 0.001 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(f) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(g) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h) Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i) Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(j) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(k) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $177 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value
hierarchy. The Non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $92 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico
and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2
in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 143 =====
142 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2014 and 2013 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2014 $ 1 $ 5 $19 $274 $860 $3,771 $3,038 $ 7,968
Return on assets held at end of year — 0 0 21 28 (10) 197 238
Return on assets sold during the year — 0 0 — — 332 199 531
Purchases, sales and settlements, net — 0 (3) — — (807) (492) (1,302)
Transfers, net (1) (1) 4 — — — — 2
Balance at December 31, 2014 $ — $ 4 $20 $295 $889 $3,287 $2,942 $ 7,437
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2013 $ 6 $11 $ 45 $267 $756 $4,085 $2,861 $ 8,032
Return on assets held at end of year 0 0 (1) 7 104 1,104 889 2,103
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 0 — 0 (528) (412) (939)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (5) 3 0 — 0 (891) (301) (1,194)
Transfers, net 0 (8) (26) — — — — (33)
Balance at December 31, 2013 $ 1 $ 5 $ 19 $274 $860 $3,771 $3,038 $ 7,968
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2014 and 2013 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Other
Government Corporate Private Private Commingled/
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Mutual Funds Total
Balance at January 1, 2014 $42 $ 4 $410 $655 $ — $1,110
Return on assets held at end of year 3 0 26 83 26 138
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 46 (12) — 34
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (8) (3) 75 (13) 104 155
Transfers, net — — 0 — 102 102
Foreign exchange impact (5) 0 (45) (49) (12) (110)
Balance at December 31, 2014 $32 $ 1 $513 $664 $220 $1,429
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Private
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2013 $ 76 $ 5 $353 $609 $1,042
Return on assets held at end of year (12) 0 1 33 22
Return on assets sold during the year 1 0 18 (3) 16
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (24) (1) 26 1 1
Foreign exchange impact 2 0 12 15 29
Balance at December 31, 2013 $ 42 $ 4 $410 $655 $1,110

===== PAGE 144 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Valuation Techniques Expected Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to Defined Benefit Pension Plans
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valu- It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions
ation techniques during 2014 and 2013. sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the
the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
IBM common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the The company contributed $465 million and $449 million in
New York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are cash to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $54 million
typically valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the and $57 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during
administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. The
is based on the value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, cash contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual
minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units out- cost included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Con-
standing. These assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 solidated Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for
depending on availability of quoted market prices. participants in multi-employer plans other than its own employees.
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated As a result, the company’s participation in multi-employer plans
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char- has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as In 2015, the company is not legally required to make any con-
Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded. depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. during the year.
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market U.S. defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pen-
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of sion plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes
such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are and raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-
reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to related benefit plans. The additional funding requirements by the
determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. Act apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act
These investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation meth- was updated by the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of
odology is applied consistently from period to period. 2008, which revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarify-
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price ing that pension plans may smooth the value of pension plans over
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 24 months. At December 31, 2014, no mandatory contribution was
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close required for 2015.
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pric- In 2015, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
ing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and $600 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined
foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or benefit pension plans in the UK, Japan and the Netherlands. This
Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices. amount represents the legally mandated minimum contributions.
Financial market performance in 2015 could increase the legally
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which require
monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The com-
pany could also elect to contribute more than the legally mandated
amount based on market conditions or other factors.

===== PAGE 145 =====
144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Contribution Plans amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on
The company contributed $1,239 million and $1,361 million in cash page 145.
to the defined contribution plans during the years ended Decem-
ber 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. In 2015, the company estimates Expected Benefit Payments
cash contributions to the defined contribution plans to be approxi- Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
mately $1.2 billion. The following table presents the total expected benefit payments
to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to
The company contributed $144 million and $80 million to the measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2014 and include ben-
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended efits attributable to estimated future compensation increases,
December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively. These contribution where applicable.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2015 $ 3,449 $113 $ 1,849 $ 348 $ 5,758
2016 3,476 115 1,854 344 5,790
2017 3,492 117 1,880 348 5,837
2018 3,501 118 1,911 357 5,887
2019 3,458 120 1,949 374 5,901
2020–2024 17,566 607 10,290 2,060 30,523
The 2015 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These payments
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2014.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualified Nonqualified Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2015 $ 426 $ 8 $ 31 $ 465
2016 405 8 35 448
2017 410 9 38 457
2018 412 9 41 463
2019 412 10 44 466
2020–2024 1,871 59 257 2,187
The 2015 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 146 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 145
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement expected to receive additional subsidies after 2014 to true up the
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company qualified to receive final subsidy amount due to IBM under the Act.
a federal subsidy through 2013. Due to benefit plan changes effec-
tive January 1, 2014, the company did not qualify for the subsidy Other Plan Information
as of that date. The company received total subsidies of $23 mil- The following table presents information for defined benefit pen-
lion and $30 million for prescription drug-related coverage during sion plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess
the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013, respectively, which of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded
were utilized to reduce the company contributions to the U.S. status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the
nonpension postretirement benefit plan. The company is also table on page 135.
($ in millions)
2014 2013
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $34,976 $21,655 $41,003 $29,223
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 33,148 20,680 40,315 29,213
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 71,501 73,660 58,651 64,194
NOTE T.
SEGMENT INFORMATION
The company’s major operations consist of five business seg- cost, as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the
ments: Global Tech nol ogy Services, Global Business Services, arm’s-length value of providing the services. The Global Services
Software, Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The segments enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to
segments represent components of the company for which market rates with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of
separate financial information is available that is utilized on a equipment used in services engagements. All internal transaction
regular basis by the chief executive officer in determining how prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
to allocate resources and evaluate performance. The segments The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
are determined based on several factors, including client base, to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a
homogeneity of products, technology, delivery channels and simi- result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the
lar economic characteristics. segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain
Information about each segment’s business and the products marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting,
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources and Billing and
in the “Description of Business” section on pages 29 to 31, and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
in “Segment Details,” on pages 33 to 38 in the Management on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear
Discussion. and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the compa-
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, ny’s management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used based on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared
by Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to
primarily sourced internally from Systems and Technology and the segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination
Software. For providing IT services that are used internally, Global of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover

===== PAGE 147 =====
146 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and mea-
surement system utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing operations. These
results are used, in part, by senior management, both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology* Financing Segments*
2014
External revenue $37,130 $17,825 $25,434 $ 9,996 $2,034 $ 92,418
Internal revenue 934 543 3,496 647 2,488 8,108
Total revenue $38,063 $18,367 $28,931 $10,643 $4,522 $100,527
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,340 $ 2,999 $10,699 $ 34 $2,189 $ 22,262
Revenue year-to-year change (3.9)% (3.9)% (0.7)% (21.6)% 5.1% (4.9)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (9.2)% (6.7)% (3.7)% (84.1)% 0.8% (6.0)%
Pre-tax income margin 16.7% 16.3% 37.0% 0.3% 48.4% 22.1%
2013*
External revenue $38,551 $18,396 $25,932 $12,988 $2,022 $ 97,889
Internal revenue 1,063 714 3,191 593 2,282 7,843
Total revenue $39,615 $19,109 $29,123 $13,581 $4,304 $105,732
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,983 $ 3,214 $11,106 $ 213 $2,171 $ 23,687
Revenue year-to-year change (4.3)% (0.9)% 1.4% (18.7)% 5.7% (4.0)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 0.3% 7.7% 2.7% (88.6)% 6.8% (3.9)%
Pre-tax income margin 17.6% 16.8% 38.1% 1.6% 50.4% 22.4%
2012*
External revenue $40,236 $18,566 $25,448 $16,034 $2,013 $102,297
Internal revenue 1,166 719 3,274 676 2,060 7,896
Total revenue $41,402 $19,286 $28,722 $16,710 $4,073 $110,193
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,961 $ 2,983 $10,810 $ 1,866 $2,034 $ 24,653
Revenue year-to-year change (1.7)% (4.0)% 1.8% (7.0)% (2.9)% (2.1)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 10.8% (0.8)% 8.4% (11.6)% 1.1% 5.4%
Pre-tax income margin 16.8% 15.5% 37.6% 11.2% 49.9% 22.4%
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.

===== PAGE 148 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 147
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
($ in millions) Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012* and equipment, including the assets associated with the outsourc-
ing business, goodwill, accounts receivable, deferred services
Revenue
arrangement transition costs, maintenance parts inventory and
Total reportable segments $100,527 $105,732 $110,193
acquired intangible assets. Global Business Services assets are
Other revenue and adjustments 374 478 577
primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. Software assets are
Elimination of internal transactions (8,108) (7,843) (7,896) mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets and accounts receiv-
Total IBM consolidated revenue $ 92,793 $ 98,367 $102,874 able. Systems and Technology assets are primarily plant, property
and equipment, goodwill, manufacturing inventory and accounts
receivable. Global Financing assets are primarily financing receiv-
($ in millions) ables and fixed assets under operating leases.
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012* To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
Pre-tax income from ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment
continuing operations: assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets
Total reportable segments $22,262 $23,687 $24,653 is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (791) (758) (703) and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 148. In those
cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment
Acquisition-related charges (12) (46) (36)
pre-tax income and segment assets.
Non-operating retirement-
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
related (costs)/income (353) (1,062) (538)
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be
Elimination of internal transactions (1,914) (1,480) (1,197)
consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’
Unallocated corporate amounts** 795 (98) 361
pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income
Total income from continuing reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are
operations, before tax $19,986 $20,244 $22,540
not specifically identified by the management reporting system.
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation. Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment also are
** The 2014, 2013 and 2012 amounts include the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions consistent with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
divestiture. The 2014 amount also includes the net gain related to the industry stan- Global Financing amounts for interest income and inter-
dard server divestiture.
est expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
Immaterial Items associated with the Global Financing business, including the
intercompany financing activities discussed on page 31, as well
Investment in Equity Alliances and
as the income from investment in cash and marketable securities.
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The explanation of the difference between cost of financing and
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and
interest expense for segment presentation versus presentation in
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the seg-
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is included on page 76 of
ments did not have a material effect on the financial position or the
the Management Discussion.
financial results of the segments.

===== PAGE 149 =====
148 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems and Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Technology** Financing Segments**
2014
Assets $17,245 $7,795 $25,813 $4,235 $38,845 $93,933
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,873 58 1,210 712 455 4,308
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 2,272 33 534 600 482 3,921
Interest income — — — — 1,951 1,951
Interest expense — — — — 518 518
2013**
Assets $18,048 $8,311 $27,101 $4,901 $40,138 $98,499
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,670 72 1,211 435 574 3,963
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,938 69 540 395 467 3,410
Interest income — — — — 1,904 1,904
Interest expense — — — — 405 405
2012**
Assets $15,884 $8,022 $26,291 $5,092 $38,882 $94,170
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,597 75 1,157 404 853 4,088
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,760 42 618 517 708 3,644
Interest income — — — — 1,972 1,972
Interest expense — — — — 410 410
* Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
** Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.

===== PAGE 150 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 149
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Geographic Information
($ in millions) The following provides information for those countries that are
At December 31: 2014 2013* 2012* 10 percent or more of the specific category.
Assets
Revenue*
Total reportable segments $ 93,933 $ 98,499 $ 94,170
($ in millions)
Elimination of internal transactions (5,193) (4,740) (4,943)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013** 2012**
Unallocated amounts
United States $32,021 $33,427 $ 34,653
Cash and marketable securities 7,182 9,697 9,779
Japan 8,382 9,070 10,696
Notes and accounts receivable 4,253 2,907 3,987
Other countries 52,390 55,871 57,525
Deferred tax assets 6,643 4,532 5,194
Total IBM consolidated revenue $92,793 $98,367 $102,874
Plant, other property
and equipment 2,169 4,827 4,900 * Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
Pension assets 2,160 5,551 945 ** Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.
Other 6,386 4,949 5,181
Plant and Other Property—Net
Total IBM consolidated assets $117,532 $126,223 $119,213
($ in millions)
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation. At December 31: 2014 2013 2012
United States $ 4,388 $ 6,723 $ 6,555
Major Clients
Other countries 5,690 6,257 6,299
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s
total revenue in 2014, 2013 or 2012. Total $10,078 $12,979 $12,854

===== PAGE 151 =====
150 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue by Classes of NOTE U.
Similar Products or Services SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of
products or services within the company’s reportable segments. On January 27, 2015, the company announced that the Board
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.10 per common
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2015 to shareholders of
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software, record on February 10, 2015.
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support On February 4, 2015, the company issued $2.0 billion in bonds
are reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, as follows: $1.5 billion of 3-year fixed-rate bonds with a 1.125 per-
education, training and other product-related services are reported cent coupon and $0.5 billion of 3-year floating-rate bonds priced
as Services. at LIBOR plus 19 basis points.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013* 2012*
Global Technology Services
Services $28,817 $29,953 $31,161
Maintenance 6,853 7,111 7,343
Systems 1,294 1,322 1,574
Software 165 164 159
Global Business Services
Services $17,515 $18,065 $18,216
Software 185 221 208
Systems 124 109 142
Software
Software $22,722 $23,420 $23,144
Services 2,712 2,512 2,304
Systems and Technology*
Servers $ 7,320 $ 9,946 $12,623
Storage 2,676 3,041 3,411
Global Financing
Financing $ 1,543 $ 1,493 $ 1,471
Used equipment sales 491 529 542
* Reclassified to reflect discontinued operations presentation.

===== PAGE 152 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 151
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
Revenue $ 92,793 $ 98,367 $102,874 $105,056 $ 98,018
Income from continuing operations $ 15,751 $ 16,881 $ 16,999 $ 16,108 $ 15,082
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (3,729) $ (398) $ (395) $ (253) $ (249)
Net income $ 12,022 $ 16,483 $ 16,604 $ 15,855 $ 14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $ 16,702 $ 18,356 $ 18,022 $ 16,571 $ 15,272
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 15.59 $ 15.30 $ 14.71 $ 13.27 $ 11.71
Discontinued operations $ (3.69) $ (0.36) $ (0.34) $ (0.21) $ (0.19)
Total $ 11.90 $ 14.94 $ 14.37 $ 13.06 $ 11.52
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 15.68 $ 15.42 $ 14.88 $ 13.46 $ 11.89
Discontinued operations $ (3.71) $ (0.36) $ (0.35) $ (0.21) $ (0.20)
Total $ 11.97 $ 15.06 $ 14.53 $ 13.25 $ 11.69
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $ 16.53 $ 16.64 $ 15.60 $ 13.65 $ 11.86
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 4,265 $ 4,058 $ 3,773 $ 3,473 $ 3,177
Per share of common stock 4.25 3.70 3.30 2.90 2.50
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 3,740 $ 3,623 $ 4,082 $ 4,108 $ 4,185
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 72.5% 83.8% 81.6% 71.2% 66.8%
At December 31: 2014 2013 2012 2011 2010
Total assets $117,532 $126,223 $119,213 $116,433 $113,452
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 10,771 $ 13,821 $ 13,996 $ 13,883 $ 14,096
Working capital $ 9,822 $ 11,196 $ 5,807 $ 8,805 $ 7,554
Total debt $ 40,804 $ 39,718 $ 33,269 $ 31,320 $ 28,624
Total equity $ 12,014 $ 22,929 $ 18,984 $ 20,236 $ 23,172
GAAP Reconciliation ($ in millions except per share amounts)
Refer to the “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 45 and 63 for the For the year ended December 31: 2011 2010
reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2014, 2013 and As reported:
2012. See the adjacent table for the reconciliation of non-GAAP Revenue $106,916 $99,870
financial information for 2011 and 2010. The reconciling items, as
Net income 15,855 14,833
described in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings,” section on
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings 16,318 15,023
page 22, have not changed from previously reported amounts.
Diluted earnings per share 13.06 11.52
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share 13.44 11.67
Continuing operations:
Revenue $105,056 $98,018
Income from continuing operations 16,108 15,082
Diluted earnings per share 13.27 11.71
Discontinued operations:
Revenue $ 1,859 $ 1,853
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (253) (249)
Diluted earnings per share (0.21) (0.19)
Operating (non-GAAP):
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $ 16,571 $15,272
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share 13.65 11.86

===== PAGE 153 =====
152 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2014 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Full Year
Revenue $22,236 $24,047 $22,397 $24,113 $92,793
Gross profi t $10,627 $12,044 $10,874 $12,862 $46,407
Income from continuing operations $ 2,530 $ 4,251 $ 3,455 $ 5,515 $15,751
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (146) $ (115) $ (3,437) $ (31) $ (3,729)
Net income $ 2,384 $ 4,137 $ 18 $ 5,484 $12,022
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*** $ 2,790 $ 4,456 $ 3,671 $ 5,785 $16,702
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.43 $ 4.23 $ 3.46 $ 5.54 $ 15.59
Discontinued operations $ (0.14) $ (0.11) $ (3.44) $ (0.03) $ (3.69)
Total $ 2.29 $ 4.12 $ 0.02 $ 5.51 $ 11.90
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.44 $ 4.25 $ 3.48 $ 5.57 $ 15.68
Discontinued operations $ (0.14) $ (0.11) $ (3.46) $ (0.03) $ (3.71)
Total $ 2.30 $ 4.14 $ 0.02 $ 5.54 $ 11.97
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*** $ 2.68 $ 4.43 $ 3.68 $ 5.81 $ 16.53
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.95 $ 1.10 $ 1.10 $ 1.10 $ 4.25
Stock prices**
High $195.63 $199.21 $196.40 $190.89
Low $172.19 $179.27 $181.70 $150.50
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2013 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Full Year
Revenue $23,101 $24,544 $23,338 $27,385 $98,367
Gross profi t $10,734 $12,184 $11,429 $14,337 $48,684
Income from continuing operations $ 3,161 $ 3,365 $ 4,139 $ 6,216 $16,881
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (129) $ (138) $ (98) $ (32) $ (398)
Net income $ 3,032 $ 3,226 $ 4,041 $ 6,185 $16,483
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*** $ 3,505 $ 3,718 $ 4,485 $ 6,649 $18,356
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.81 $ 3.03 $ 3.77 $ 5.76 $ 15.30
Discontinued operations $ (0.11) $ (0.12) $ (0.09) $ (0.03) $ (0.36)
Total $ 2.70 $ 2.91 $ 3.68 $ 5.73 $ 14.94
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.84 $ 3.06 $ 3.79 $ 5.80 $ 15.42
Discontinued operations $ (0.12) $ (0.13) $ (0.09) $ (0.03) $ (0.36)
Total $ 2.72 $ 2.93 $ 3.70 $ 5.77 $ 15.06
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*** $ 3.12 $ 3.35 $ 4.08 $ 6.16 $ 16.64
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.85 $ 0.95 $ 0.95 $ 0.95 $ 3.70
Stock prices**
High $215.90 $214.89 $200.94 $187.79
Low $190.39 $187.68 $181.10 $172.57
* Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed
using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
** The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.
*** Refer to pages 44 and 45 in Attachment II of the company’s Form 8-K filed on January 20, 2015 and Attachment A of the company’s Form 8-K (Item 8.01) filed on October 20,
2014 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the first and second quarters of 2014 and 2013, respectively. Refer to page 86 of the company’s third-quarter
2014 Form 10-Q filed on October 28, 2014 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the third quarter of 2014 and 2013. See also the “GAAP Reconciliation,”
sections on pages 45, 46 and 52 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the full year and fourth quarter of 2014 and 2013, respectively. The reconciling items
described in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings,” section on page 22 have not changed from previously reported amounts.

===== PAGE 154 =====
Performance Graph 153
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM,
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graph compares the five-year cumulative total or line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index
returns for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative is such an index. IBM is also included in this index.
return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the
that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100
SEC’s rules require the use of that index. Under those rules, the invested on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The com-
second index used for comparison may be a published industry parisons assume that all dividends are reinvested.
280
240
200
160
120
80
09 10 11 12 13 14
(U.S. Dollar) 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $114.28 $145.62 $154.26 $153.98 $134.89
S & P 500 Index 100.00 115.06 117.49 136.30 180.44 205.14
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 110.19 112.84 129.57 166.41 199.89

===== PAGE 155 =====
154 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Alain J.P. Belda Alex Gorsky Virginia M. Rometty
Managing Director Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Chairman, President and
Warburg Pincus LLC Johnson & Johnson Chief Executive Officer
IBM
William R. Brody Shirley Ann Jackson
President President Joan E. Spero
Salk Institute for Biological Studies Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
Columbia University School of
Kenneth I. Chenault Andrew N. Liveris International and Public Affairs
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Chairman, President and
American Express Company Chief Executive Officer Sidney Taurel
The Dow Chemical Company Senior Advisor
Michael L. Eskew Moelis & Company
Retired Chairman and W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chief Executive Officer Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Peter R. Voser
United Parcel Service, Inc. The Boeing Company Retired Chief Executive Officer
Royal Dutch Shell plc
David N. Farr James W. Owens
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and
Emerson Electric Co. Chief Executive Officer
Caterpillar Inc.
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Colleen F. Arnold Martin Jetter Robert J. Picciano
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
IBM Sales and Distribution IBM Global Technology Services IBM Analytics
Simon J. Beaumont James J. Kavanaugh Michael D. Rhodin
Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Tax and Treasurer Transformation and Operations IBM Watson
Michelle H. Browdy John E. Kelly III Virginia M. Rometty
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Chairman, President and
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, Solutions Portfolio and Research Chief Executive Officer
and General Counsel
Kenneth M. Keverian Thomas W. Rosamilia
Erich Clementi Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President Corporate Strategy IBM Systems
IBM Sales and Distribution
Arvind Krishna Martin J. Schroeter
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen Senior Vice President and Director Senior Vice President and
Senior Vice President IBM Research Chief Financial Officer
IBM Sales and Distribution
Robert J. LeBlanc Stanley J. Sutula III
Diane J. Gherson Senior Vice President Vice President and Controller
Senior Vice President IBM Cloud
Human Resources Bridget A. van Kralingen
Steven A. Mills Senior Vice President
Jon C. Iwata Executive Vice President IBM Global Business Services
Senior Vice President Software and Systems
Marketing and Communications
Christina M. Montgomery
Vice President
Assistant General Counsel
and Secretary

===== PAGE 156 =====
Stockholder Information 155
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services Annual Meeting
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
April 28, 2015, at 10 a.m. in the Statehouse Convention Center,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
Little Rock, Arkansas.
P.O. Box 43078
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078
Literature for IBM Stockholders
(888) IBM-6700
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
Computershare Trust Company, N.A.
should call (781) 575-2727.
P.O. Box 43078
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com (888) IBM-6700
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust should call (781) 575-2727.
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by
IBM on the Internet
early May, August and November.
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM An audio recording of the 2014 Annual Report will be available for
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address. sight-impaired stockholders in June 2015.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values and
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its innovative
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC. strategies to transforming communities through global citizenship.
The Report Summary is available in printed form and downloadable
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information
at www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate Responsibility Report
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
is online with downloadable sections at www.ibm.com/responsibility.
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material
General Information
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor).
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the online through this site.
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States,
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM
stock certificates for safe keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations,
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, 1 New Orchard
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.

===== PAGE 157 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
Aspera, BladeCenter, Bluemix, Cloudant, Cognos, Daeja, DemandTec,
Emptoris, FlashSystem, Flex System, Focal Point, IBM, IBM Watson, ILOG,
Kenexa, Netezza, OpenPOWER, POWER, POWER8, Power Systems,
Pure Systems, PurifyPlus, Rational, Showcase, Silverpop, Smarter
Analytics, Smarter Cities, Smarter Commerce, Smarter Planet, SoftLayer,
Star Analytics, StoredIQ, Storwize, System z, Tealeaf, Tivoli, Trusteer,
UrbanCode, Varicent, Vivisimo, Watson, WebSphere, Worklight and
Xtify are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Apple is
a registered trademark of Apple, Inc. in the United States, other
countries, or both. GLOBALFOUNDRIES is a registered trademark of
GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. Lenovo is a trademark of Lenovo Group
Limited in the United States, other countries, or both. Linux is a registered
trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, other countries, or
both. SAP is a registered trademark of SAP SE in Germany and other
countries. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open Group in the
United States and other countries. Other company, product and service
names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-05
Design: VSA Partners, Inc. Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 158 =====
2014 IBM Annual Report
2014
IBM
Annual
Report