

===== PAGE 1 =====
2015
IBM
Annual
Report
2015
IBM
Annual
Report

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
IBM is unique. It is the only company in our industry that
has reinvented itself through multiple technology eras and
economic cycles. We do so for one reason: to create
differentiating value for our clients and for you, our owners.
We are doing so again, in an IT industry that is
fundamentally reordering at an unprecedented pace.
In important ways, our industry is unrecognizable from
what it looked like just a few years ago. So is your company.
Today, IBM is much more than a “hardware, software,
services” company. IBM is now emerging as a cognitive
solutions and cloud platform company.

===== PAGE 4 =====
2 A Letter from the Chairman
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 5 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 3
In this year’s report, I will share my Then last year, we launched integrated
perspective on what this means to you and units to make it easier and quicker to put
to our clients around the world. I will discuss together solutions drawn from our expanding
our results from 2015 and what we expect digital portfolio, further accelerating growth
to achieve this year and beyond. Although more and enhancing client experience. We shifted
must be done and the work of transformation more than $5 billion of investment to add fuel
is never complete, I believe we have reached to our strategic imperatives, and in 2015 these
a turning point in our journey. businesses delivered solid growth, contributing
35 percent of IBM’s total revenue, up signifi -
The Progress of Our Transformation cantly from 22 percent two years ago.
Two years ago, we laid out our strategic plan Now, in 2016, we have reached a new
to transform IBM, in order to ensure that we meet stage in our transformation. As important
the changing needs of our clients and capture as “becoming digital” is to our clients, it
the highest-value opportunities for our investors. has become clear that it is not the destination.
As part of this, we divested commoditizing Rather, digital business is converging with
businesses that provided diminishing value a new kind of digital intelligence—what you will
to our clients and contributed revenue but little recognize as Watson. We call this Cognitive
or no profi t. We restructured other businesses, Business. In October we launched a global
of which hardware was the largest—businesses conversation about this new era of business
vital to our future but in need of reinvention. and technology.
At the same time, we dramatically accelerated Cognitive Business simultaneously speaks
the growth of our strategic imperatives— to clients about the coming era and explains
Data and Analytics, Cloud, Mobile, Social and the IBM that is now emerging. Let me describe
Security—to help our clients become “digital.” it in greater depth.

===== PAGE 6 =====
4 A Letter from the Chairman
Our Solutions Are Cognitive Data is the world’s Cognitive includes—but is broader than—
new natural resource, and it is transforming artifi cial intelligence, machine learning and natural
all industries and professions. IBM has been language processing. And its embodiment
building and acquiring the capabilities is Watson.
necessary to lead in data and analytics, Watson has come a long way since it won
deepening our industry expertise and growing on the American quiz show Jeopardy! in 2011.
partnerships and ecosystems. Today, our data Back then, it did one thing: natural language Q&A,
and analytics business is the industry leader, powered by fi ve technologies. Today, Q&A is
generating revenue of $18 billion in 2015. just one of more than 30 Watson capabilities—
This is a strong and growing business— all of which have been turned into digital services,
but its potential is actually much greater. or application programming interfaces (APIs),
That potential lies in the 80 percent of the delivered via the cloud. This means that we can
world’s data that is unstructured: everything literally build cognition into everything digital.
we encode in language—from textbooks With Watson, every digital application, product
and formulas to literature and conversation— and process can understand, reason and learn.
plus all digital video, audio and images. This You can see why cognitive is becoming the
unstructured data has been essentially heart of our solutions businesses. What started
invisible to computers. They can capture, store as one Watson unit is now a growing family:
and process it, but they cannot understand the core Watson team, which continues to build
what it means. new capabilities and nurture its expanding
But with cognitive technology, we can now ecosystem; and individual Watson businesses,
probe this “dark data.” Cognitive systems aimed at particular industries or professional
can ingest it all, and they can understand its domains, such as IBM Watson Health and
meaning, through sensing and interaction. They IBM Watson Internet of Things. Each business
can reason about it, generating hypotheses, brings together Watson capabilities with industry
arguments and recommendations. And unlike expertise, vast data sets and an ecosystem
any computing system we have known, they of partners and clients, and each is powered
are not programmed. Rather, they learn—from by the IBM Cloud.
training by experts and from their own
experience. In fact, they never stop learning.

===== PAGE 7 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 5
In IBM Watson Health, for example, our
partners include Medtronic, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, the New York Genome
Center and CVS Health. We have enhanced
our capabilities in healthcare with expertise and
data sets acquired through population health
management leader Phytel, health data
analytics provider Explorys and medical images
fi rm Merge Healthcare. In February 2016 we
announced our intention to acquire Truven
Health Analytics, a leading provider of cloud-
based healthcare data, analytics and insights.
And Watson is being trained by the world’s
leading practitioners and researchers in multiple
fi elds of life sciences, medicine and healthcare.
Because these IBM Watson units will be
fed by an enormous new volume and variety of
data, we have moved aggressively to expand
our clients’ access to it, through partnerships
with companies such as Twitter and Box and our
acquisition of assets from The Weather Company.
IBM Watson today is a rapidly expanding
business, with clients in 36 countries, including
leaders and start-ups in healthcare, fi nancial
services, retail, energy, automotive, government
and more. And we continue to grow Watson’s
capabilities—for example, giving it the capacity to
“see” and expanding its natural language range
beyond English—so far including Japanese,
Spanish, Brazilian Portuguese and Arabic.
“ We can literally build
cognition into everything
digital. With Watson,
every digital application,
product and process
can understand, reason
and learn.”

===== PAGE 8 =====
6 A Letter from the Chairman
Our Platform Is Cloud In a world being rewritten
in code, coders are the new builders, and
cloud is the platform on which they are building.
All of our IBM Watson units, along with the rest
of our growing portfolio of cognitive solutions,
are being built on a cloud platform.
The word “platform” is important. Much
more than simply a faster and cheaper way
to access IT, a cloud platform is a new model
of innovation, manufacturing and distribution.
Cloud platforms provide an open environment
for collaboration and rapid scaling. They expose
growing libraries of APIs from which partners
and third parties across a broad ecosystem can
create new, innovative solutions. And cloud
offers access to multiple data sets and relevant
expertise—not only about technology, but also
from business and societal domains.
The IBM Cloud is designed for this new era.
It is the overall platform on which we, our
clients and our ecosystem partners are building
a rapidly expanding array of solutions.
It encompasses multiple technology and
data platforms:
• IBM Bluemix, our platform-as-a-service for
developers, was created by IBMers using
Agile and Design Thinking approaches.
It has grown rapidly, ending the year onboard-
ing 15,000 developers a week. And with more
“ Hybrid is the fastest-
growing segment
of the cloud market,
and IBM is the global
leader in hybrid cloud
for the enterprise.”

===== PAGE 9 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 7
than 120 services, IBM Bluemix is the largest • For our industry-leading IBM Security
deployment of Cloud Foundry, an open source business, the IBM QRadar Security
cloud application development platform. Intelligence Platform offers collaboration,
an app exchange and pertinent APIs. Our
• IBM SoftLayer is the core of our infrastructure-
Security business also launched IBM X-Force
as-a-service platform, which now consists
Exchange, a cloud platform for more than
of 46 cloud data centers in every major market
2,000 mem bers across 16 industries to share
in the world. This business grew by double
threat data, with one of the world’s fullest
digits in 2015.
catalogs of threat information, from more than
• The Weather Company is not just a source 20 billion security events monitored daily.
of enormously valuable weather data. It is
• In January 2016 we announced IBM Cloud
a platform, and it forms the heart of our new
Video Services, enhancing our substantial
IBM Watson Internet of Things solutions unit.
organic video capabilities with the acquisi-
Today the platform can analyze data from
tions of Aspera, Cleversafe, Clearleap
3 billion weather forecast reference points,
and, most recently, streaming video service
including satellites, weather stations, air-
Ustream. Like weather, video is one of the
planes, consumer apps and more. It handles
richest and fastest-growing data sources—
26 billion inquiries to its cloud-based
expected to comprise 80 percent of Internet
services each day in the United States alone,
traffi c by 2019. The market for cloud-based
making it the country’s fourth most popular
video services, analytics and software
app. Going forward, we will apply this
is estimated to be more than $100 billion by
powerful platform to collect, integrate and
2019, and we are now positioned for strong
analyze data from multiple sources, such as
growth there.
telematics in cars, sensors in buildings,
readings from wearable devices and data • Finally, Watson itself is a cloud platform,
from smartphones, social media, supply supporting a growing ecosystem. More
chains and the environment. than 80,000 developers are using Watson
APIs, and more than 500 start-ups and
businesses in the Watson ecosystem
are building applications and solutions
powered by Watson.

===== PAGE 10 =====
8 A Letter from the Chairman
Importantly, the future of cloud is hybrid, will be the heart of hybrid. IBM WebSphere,
spanning public cloud, private cloud and the for example, unlocks all data and applications for
integration software, systems and services the cloud. It enables clients’ existing apps to
needed to bring these environments together access the cloud and new “born on the cloud”
securely and seamlessly. As enterprises move applications to access existing assets.
to the cloud, hybrid is not a transition phase; A fi nal reason we will remain the global
it is the destination. leader in enterprise cloud is that cloud’s future
Indeed, it is the fastest-growing segment depends on infrastructure innovation. This is
of the cloud market, and IBM is the global leader why the full spectrum of IBM Systems remains
in hybrid cloud for the enterprise. In this, our critical in this new era. We continue to design,
incumbency is a signifi cant advantage—from develop and deliver leading-edge servers,
processing and protecting nearly three-fourths storage and software built for a hybrid cloud
of the world’s transactions on the IBM main- world. For instance, our mainframe, reinvented
frame to designing and running core banking for mobile transactions, serves as an advanced
systems, supply chains, reservation and retail analytics accelerator and security-rich enterprise
systems, and more. cloud server. And our Power platform is being
For example, we are bringing our large base used to deliver cognitive workloads through the
of clients in IBM Global Technology Services rapidly growing OpenPOWER ecosystem and
(GTS) to the cloud. Last year, of our more than a vibrant Linux community.
70 services deals greater than $100 million, Cognitive and cloud—many in our industry
seven out of 10 featured hybrid cloud. see these as two separate phenomena. We see
We have also brought all of IBM’s relevant them differently: as two sides of the same coin,
middleware into IBM Cloud. Our middleware two dimensions of a single model. Cognitive
is the world’s leading IT integration platform, is the only way to ingest and extract value from
with one analyst fi rm naming us the middleware the new natural resource of data in all its forms,
leader for the past 14 years. And middleware so that it can be turned into competitive
advantage and societal value. And cloud is the
platform on which these solutions are designed,
built, tested and deployed in the world.

===== PAGE 11 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 9
2015 Performance
The impact of our transformation is clear in our
2015 results.
Our strategic imperatives—Analytics, Cloud,
Mobile, Social and Security—grew by 26 percent
and generated $29 billion last year. As I mention-
ed, that represented 35 percent of IBM’s total
revenue at year end.
Adjusted for the impact of currency and
divestitures (as are all revenue results
reported in this letter), Analytics revenue grew
16 percent for the year, to $18 billion. Mobile
more than tripled for the second straight year.
Security grew 12 percent. And Social was up
21 percent. Not only did total Cloud revenue
increase by more than 50 percent, to $10 billion,
making ours the largest cloud business in the
world, but our cloud-delivered as-a-service
revenue continued to grow, reaching $4.5 billion
in 2015, with a year-end annual run rate of
IBM’s strategic imperatives grew by 26 percent and
$5.3 billion.
generated$29 billion last year. That represented
Even as we fueled these high-growth
35 percent of IBM’s total revenue.
businesses, we continued to bring innovation
Revenue Growth Yr /Yr
to the businesses our clients have long valued
and relied on. Analytics 16%
IBM Global Technology Services, which
Cloud 57%
is increasingly injecting automation and
Mobile 250%
cognition into our services delivery, grew both
Security 12%
Social 21%
Revenue growth rate is at constant currency and excludes divested
businesses. Overlap in strategic imperatives primarily refl ects solutions
delivered via Cloud.
Investment
IBM prioritizes investments in research and develop ment,
capital and acquisitions, and those investments are
increasingly directed toward strategic imperatives.
2015 Total Investment:$13 billion
Strategic
Imperatives
54%

===== PAGE 12 =====
10 A Letter from the Chairman
revenue and signings, fi nishing with a growing The progress of our transformation—in
backlog. We have also grown in the parts particular our growth in hardware and GTS—
of IBM Global Business Services (GBS) where shows what IBMers can do to reinvent
we have transitioned to our high-growth our core businesses. In 2016, we will focus on:
strategic imperatives, with nearly half of our
• Our software businesses, where we will
GBS revenue now coming from those busi-
accelerate our shift to cognitive solution-
nesses. In December we announced that our
based opportunities and help our
partnership with Apple had delivered more
clients make the transition to as-a-service
than 100 IBM MobileFirst for iOS applications,
models delivered via hybrid cloud.
helping to transform the way work gets done
across 14 industries and 65 professions. • GBS, where we will use cognitive to differen-
Our Systems Hardware business had tiate and drive our consulting business;
a strong year. Since the launch of the z13 modernize GBS’s core business with digital
in the fi rst quarter of 2015, we have delivered value propositions; and grow margin through
mainframe growth of 35 percent, with strong continued focus on high-value markets and
double-digit gains every quarter. Power revenue improved productivity.
grew 4 percent in 2015 and has grown for
• Storage, where we will accelerate our
four straight quarters on the strength of
shift to object storage and strengthen
OpenPOWER and Linux on Power. The strong
our leadership in fl ash.
performance of our Systems Hardware
business over the past two years—swinging Our model is based on strong generation
from a year-to-year decline in profi t of $1.7 billion of free cash fl ow, which we maintained with
in 2013 to reporting profi t growth of nearly $13.1 billion in 2015. We use our cash to invest in
$600 million last year—is largely the result of the future and to return value to you, our owners.
the signifi cant business restructuring we In 2015 we invested more than 6 percent of
have implemented. our revenue in R&D and about $4 billion in capital
For the full year, we generated revenue expenditures. We announced 15 acquisitions.
of $81.7 billion, down 1 percent. We achieved And for the 23rd consecutive year, IBM led
operating earnings per share of $14.92 and
delivered operating net income of $14.7 billion.

===== PAGE 13 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 11
in U.S. patents earned, once again breaking
the 7,000 threshold. Even more important than
the total number is the transformation those
patents represent. Consider that when our streak
began more than two decades ago, 27 percent
of our patents were in hardware. Last year,
not only did we earn seven times as many total
patents, but 31 percent of them were in cloud,
analytics and cognitive.
We also returned $9.5 billion to you in
2015, including dividends of nearly $5 billion
and $4.6 billion in gross share repurchases.
This marks the 20th consecutive year of an
increased dividend, and IBM’s 100th straight
year of providing one.
The Emerging IBM
Because IBM uniquely transforms both tech-
nology and business, our own reinventions
in response to changing eras have been far-
reaching. This is evident again today. As you
have seen, we have transformed our portfolio—
shedding businesses that provided little differ-
entiating value to our clients, shifting our R&D
and making dozens of acquisitions to fuel our
growth businesses. At the same time, we have
also injected new thinking and talent into
IBM’s culture—such as training 60,000 IBMers
in Agile methods and increasing our team
“ As important as ‘becoming
digital’ is to our clients,
it has become clear that
it is not the destination.
Rather, digital business is
converging with a new kind
of digital intelligence. We call
this Cognitive Business.”

===== PAGE 14 =====
12 A Letter from the Chairman
of professional designers to more than 1,000, For IBM, 2015 was a pivotal year in our journey
embedded with clients and in 23 design studios to this new era, providing strong confi rmation
around the world. Both client satisfaction and of the strategic direction of our transformation.
employee engagement are on the rise. We know who we are. We know why our clients
Our experience over multiple eras of techno- seek to work with us. We know why you choose
logical change has also taught us the importance to invest with us.
of understanding its implications for the global We also know why brilliant experts,
economy, for society and for how all of us work professionals and innovators seek to become
and live. Today, some have expressed concerns and remain IBMers. Together, we understand
about the impact of intelligent systems on that we are at a turning point in IBM history
jobs and the future of work. These are legitimate and in the history of technology. We are
questions, which must be addressed in a committed to doing what every prior generation
thoughtful manner across business, government of IBMers has done—transforming ourselves
and civil society. to lead in a new era of business and technology,
At IBM, our experience with cognitive systems in order to remain essential to our clients and
—undertaking the deep science, learning what to the world.
cognitive systems actually do and working every My colleagues and I are excited and
day to apply these capabilities in the world—has confi dent about the cognitive future, and we
taught us that cognitive technology does not are working hard with our clients, partners
replace, but rather enhances, human capabilities. and peers to build it. I am proud of the IBM team
Instead of “artifi cial” intelligence, the real-world for bringing us here, and I am grateful to you,
work of cognitive business is intelligence our shareholders, for your steadfast support.
augmentation. And its benefi ts for the human
condition will be extraordinary.
In the end, the most important challenges
we face are not about technology, but about
values. Whether the question is civil liberties
and national security; or privacy and conven- Virginia M. Rometty
ience; or some professions rising while others Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Offi cer
decline, our path to this enormously hopeful
future will depend on the creation of mutual
value, transparency and, above all, trust.
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP fi nancial measures about the company’s fi nancial results related to z Systems revenue and Power
that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational revenue adjusted for currency, operating earnings per share and operating net
performance. For information about the company’s fi nancial results related to income on a continuing operations basis and free cash fl ow, which are non-GAAP
strategic imperatives, Analytics revenue, Security revenue, Social revenue, Mobile measures, see the company’s 2015 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 to the
revenue and IBM revenue adjusted for the impact of currency and divestitures, which Form 10-K submitted to the SEC on February 23, 2016. For reconciliation and other
are non-GAAP measures, see Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials and related information concerning these items, refer to pages 33, 41 and 62 of the company’s
information in the Form 8-K submitted to the SEC on January 19, 2016. For information 2015 Annual Report.

===== PAGE 15 =====
2015 IBM Annual Report 13
What does
it take
to change
the world
and transform
a company?

===== PAGE 16 =====
14

===== PAGE 17 =====
Explore 150+
stories of
IBM Today.
ibm.com/2015ar

===== PAGE 18 =====
16 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014
Revenue $ 81,741 $ 92,793
Net income $ 13,190 $ 12,022
Income from continuing operations $ 13,364 $ 15,751
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 14,659 $ 16,702
Earnings per share of common stock (continuing operations)
Assuming dilution $ 13.60 $ 15.59
Basic $ 13.66 $ 15.68
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 14.92 $ 16.53
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 17,008 $ 16,868
Capital expenditures, net 3,780 3,779
Share repurchases 4,609 13,679
Cash dividends paid on common stock 4,897 4,265
Per share of common stock 5.00 4.25
At December 31: 2015 2014**
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 8,195 $ 8,476
Total assets 110,495 117,271
Working capital 8,235 7,797
Total debt 39,890 40,722
Total equity 14,424 12,014
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 966 991
Market capitalization $133,507 $158,920
Stock price per common share $ 137.62 $ 160.44
* See pages 41 and 42 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of FASB guidance on deferred taxes and debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Report of Financials 17
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED
Overview 18 FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 19 A Significant Accounting Policies 82
Management Discussion Snapshot 19 B Accounting Changes 92
Description of Business 22 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 93
Year in Review 29 D Financial Instruments 99
Prior Year in Review 49 E Inventories 106
Other Information 60 F Financing Receivables 106
Looking Forward 60 G Property, Plant and Equipment 109
Liquidity and Capital Resources 61 H Investments and Sundry Assets 110
Critical Accounting Estimates 64 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 110
Currency Rate Fluctuations 67 J Borrowings 111
Market Risk 68 K Other Liabilities 114
Financing Risks 68 L Equity Activity 114
Cybersecurity 68 M Contingencies and Commitments 118
Employees and Related Workforce 69 N Taxes 120
Global Financing 69 O Research, Development and Engineering 123
P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 123
Report of Management 74 Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 124
R Stock-Based Compensation 124
Report of Independent Registered
S Retirement-Related Benefits 127
Public Accounting Firm 75
T Segment Information 141
U Subsequent Events 146
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Earnings 76
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
Comprehensive Income 77
Financial Position 78 Selected Quarterly Data 148
Cash Flows 79
Changes in Equity 80 Performance Graph 149
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 150
Stockholder Information 151

===== PAGE 20 =====
18 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW held for sale at December 31, 2014. The operating results of
The financial section of the International Business Machines Cor- the Microelectronics business are reported as discontinued
por ation (IBM or the company) 2015 Annual Report includes the operations. The transaction closed on July 1, 2015. In addition,
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State ments in 2015, the company renamed its Systems & Technology
and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statem ents. This Over- segment to Systems Hardware and its System z brand to
view is designed to provide the reader with some perspective z Systems. Also, in 2015, the company’s business process
regarding the information contained in the financial section. outsourcing business, Global Process Services, which was
previously managed within Global Technology Services,
Organization of Information was integrated into Global Business Services, creating an
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers end-to-end business transformation capability for clients and
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the to better leverage the company’s industry knowledge. Prior
company’s financial results and certain factors that may affect periods have been reclassified to conform to this presenta-
its future prospects from the perspective of the company’s tion in the Management Discussion, the Consolidated
management. The “Management Discussion Snap shot,” Financial Statements and the Notes, where applicable, to
beginning on page 19, presents an overview of the key per- allow for a meaningful comparison of continuing operations.
formance drivers in 2015. • The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 29, the currency” in the Management Discussion do not include
Manage ment Discussion contains the results of operations operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in
for each reportable segment of the business and a discus- foreign currency rates. Certain financial results are adjusted
sion of the company’s financial position and cash flows. based on a simple mathematical model that translates current
Other key sections within the Management Discussion period results in local currency using the comparable prior
include: “Looking Forward” on page 60, and “Liquidity and year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used
Capital Resources” on page 61. for countries where the functional currency is the local country
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured currency. This information is provided so that certain financial
as a stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in
is included in the Management Discussion beginning on foreign currency rates, thereby facilitating period- to-period
page 69. comparisons of business performance. See “Currency Rate
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on Fluctuations” on page 67 for additional information.
pages 76 through 81. These statements provide an overview • Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to
its financial position. the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s whole-dollar numbers.
accounting policies (pages 82 to 92), acquisitions and
divestitures (pages 93 to 99), detailed information Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
on specific items within the financial statements, certain In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational
contingencies and commitments (pages 118 to 120) and results of the business, the company separates business results
retirement-related plans information (pages 127 to 141). into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure that excludes
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles the effects of certain acquisition-related charges, retirement-re-
generally accepted in the United States (GAAP). lated costs, discontinued operations and their related tax impacts.
• In October 2014, the company announced a definitive agree- For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the amortization of
ment to divest its Microelectronics business. The assets and purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related charges
liabilities of the Microelectronics business were reported as such as in-process research and development, transaction costs,
applicable restructuring and related expenses and tax charges
related to acquisition integration. For retirement-related costs, the

===== PAGE 21 =====
Management Discussion 19
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
company characterizes certain items as operating and others as MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
non-operating. The company includes defined benefit plan and
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, amortization
Yr.-to-Yr.
of prior service cost and the cost of defined contribution plans Percent/
Margin
in operating earnings. Non-operating retirement-related cost For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement Revenue $ 81,741 $ 92,793 (11.9)%*
benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amor-
Gross profi t margin 49.8% 50.0% (0.2) pts.
tized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/
Total expense and other (income) $ 24,740 $ 26,421 (6.4)%
settlements and multi-employer plan costs, pension insolvency
Total expense and other
costs and other costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are
(income)-to-revenue ratio 30.3% 28.5% 1.8 pts.
primarily related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities
Income from continuing
which are tied to financial market performance and the company
operations before income taxes $ 15,945 $ 19,986 (20.2)%
considers these costs to be outside the operational performance
Provision for income taxes from
of the business.
continuing operations $ 2,581 $ 4,234 (39.1)%
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a
Income from continuing
view of operating earnings as described above provides increased
operations $ 13,364 $ 15,751 (15.2)%
transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the
Income from continuing
business and the performance of the company’s pension plans;
operations margin 16.3% 17.0% (0.6) pts.
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts on
Loss from discontinued
operational performance; enables better comparison to peer com-
operations, net of tax $ (174) $ (3,729) (95.3)%
panies; and allows the company to provide a long-term strategic
Net income $ 13,190 $ 12,022 9.7%
view of the business going forward. The company’s reportable
Earnings per share from
segment financial results reflect operating earnings from continu-
continuing operations:
ing operations, consistent with the company’s management and
Assuming dilution $ 13.60 $ 15.59 (12.8)%
measurement system.
Consolidated earnings per share—
assuming dilution $ 13.42 $ 11.90 12.8%
FORWARD-LOOKING AND
Weighted-average shares
CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS outstanding
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may consti-
Assuming dilution 982.7 1,010.0 (2.7)%
tute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
Assets** $110,495 $117,271+ (5.8)%
Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking
Liabilities** $ 96,071 $105,257+ (8.7)%
statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on
which it is made; the company assumes no obligation to update Equity** $ 14,424 $ 12,014 20.1%
or revise any such statements. Forward-looking statements are * (4.1) percent adjusted for currency; (1.2) percent adjusted for divestitures and
based on the company’s current assumptions regarding future currency.
business and financial performance; these statements, by their ** At December 31.
+ Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes and debt
nature, address matters that are uncertain to different degrees. issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting
Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks, uncer- Changes,” for additional information.
tainties and other factors that could cause actual results to be
materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this
Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities
and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the company’s 2015
Form 10-K filed on February 23, 2016.

===== PAGE 22 =====
20 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides the company’s (non-GAAP) operating System x divestiture, with double-digit growth in each quarter. In
earnings for 2015 and 2014. total, the strategic imperatives generated $28.9 billion in revenue
in 2015, which represents approximately 35 percent of the com-
($ in millions except per share amounts) pany’s total revenue, an increase of 13 points from 2013.
Yr.-to-Yr. Cloud revenue increased 43 percent as reported in 2015 and
Percent
57 percent adjusted for currency and the System x divestiture.
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
In 2015, Cloud revenue was $10.2 billion making the company
Net income as reported $13,190 $12,022 9.7%
the largest cloud provider. The company has been building off
Loss from discontinued operations,
its extensive relationships in enterprise IT and incumbency in the
net of tax (174) (3,729) (95.3)
data center to help clients implement hybrid cloud environments.
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $15,751 (15.2)%
In addition:
Non-operating adjustments
(net of tax)
• As-a-Service revenue increased 50 percent (61 percent
Acquisition-related charges 562 670 (16.1) adjusted for currency) year to year to $4.5 billion and the
Non-operating retirement-related company exited 2015 with an annual run rate of $5.3 billion.
costs/(income) 734 280 161.8 • 2015 Cloud revenue included $5.6 billion of revenue from
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $14,659 $16,702 (12.2)% foundational offerings—where the company provides
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) software, hardware and services for clients to build their
earnings per share $ 14.92 $ 16.53 (9.7)% own clouds.
* See pages 41 and 42 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating • Clients are using cloud not just to reduce costs, but also to
earnings. gain agility and to enable innovation. The company has
been leading clients in making the move to cloud through
In 2015, the company delivered $81.7 billion in revenue, $13.4 billion consuming as-a-Service, or through their own clouds or the
in income from continuing operations and $14.7 billion in operat- implementation of a hybrid environment.
ing (non-GAAP) earnings resulting in diluted earnings per share • The company made seven cloud acquisitions in 2015 includ-
from continuing operations of $13.60 as reported and $14.92 on an ing; Cleversafe, for object storage, Gravitant, for cloud
operating (non-GAAP) basis. The results of continuing operations brokerage services and Clearleap, for cloud video services.
exclude a net loss from discontinued operations of $174 million The company also invested nearly $1 billion in 2015 to expand
in 2015 and $3,729 million in 2014 related to the divestiture of the its global cloud data center footprint to 46. The company
Microelectronics business. On a consolidated basis, net income possesses an ecosystem of developers globally and its Blue-
in 2015 was $13.2 billion, with diluted earnings per share of $13.42. mix Platform-as-a-Service has already expanded to over a
The company generated $17.0 billion in cash from operations and million users, adding 15 thousand developers a week.
$13.1 billion in free cash flow in 2015 driving shareholder returns of
$9.5 billion in gross common stock repurchases and dividends. Business analytics revenue of $17.9 billion in 2015 increased 7 per-
Total consolidated revenue in 2015 decreased 11.9 percent as cent as reported and 16 percent year to year adjusted for currency
reported and 1 percent year to year adjusted for currency and making the company the largest analytics provider. The company
the divestitures of the System x and customer care businesses has also been moving into new areas including Watson Health and
reflecting a modest improvement in year-to-year performance Watson Internet of Things (IoT).
compared to the year ago period on an adjusted basis. Currency
had an 8 point, or $7.2 billion impact on reported revenue in 2015. • In Watson Health, the company is integrating its own organic
capabilities with content acquired through Merge Healthcare,
Revenue was impacted by 3 points in 2015 from the divested
Phytel and Explorys. Healthcare represents a new revenue
businesses. Combined, the impact of currency and divested busi-
and profit opportunity as the company changes the face of
nesses reduced the reported revenue growth by 11 points.
healthcare through its cognitive platform to provide value to
In 2014, the company declared its strategic imperatives around
providers, payers and partners.
big data and analytics, cloud, mobile, social and security, areas
where clients were looking to the company to help move them to • In the IoT market, The Weather Company acquisition will
not only provide the company tremendously valuable
the future. The company has made significant progress in shifting
data, but also a high-volume, cloud-based, insight-driven
its business toward these strategic imperatives and is continuing
platform to integrate with Watson to address significant
to invest in capabilities which are not yet reflected in its revenue
new opportunities.
stream. In 2015, strategic imperatives revenue grew 17 percent year
to year as reported and 26 percent adjusted for currency and the

===== PAGE 23 =====
Management Discussion 21
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In the area of engagement, revenue increased 64 percent as The reduction in expense was driven primarily by currency
reported and 77 percent adjusted for currency. Security revenue impacts, a lower level of workforce rebalancing charges and the
increased 5 percent as reported (12 percent adjusted for cur- impact of the divested System x business. These benefits were
rency), mobile revenue more than tripled year to year and social partially offset by the impact of lower divestiture gains ($1.6 billion)
revenue increased 14 percent as reported (21 percent adjusted year to year. The reduction in operating (non-GAAP) expense was
for currency). driven primarily by the same factors. The company is continuing
From a segment perspective, Global Services revenue to shift resources and spending within its operational expense
declined 10.5 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for base—driving productivity and efficiency in some areas while
currency (9 points) and divestitures. Global Technology Services increasing investment in support of the strategic imperatives. In
(GTS) declined 9.7 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent 2015, the company shifted over $5 billion of spending across cost,
year to year adjusted for currency (10 points) and the System x expense and capital expenditures, to the strategic imperatives.
divestiture with strong growth in the strategic imperatives on Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $15.9 billion in
an adjusted basis. Global Business Services (GBS) revenue 2015 decreased 20.2 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin
decreased 12.0 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for was 19.5 percent, a decrease of 2.0 points. The continuing oper-
currency (8 points). GBS revenue continues to be impacted by ations effective tax rate for 2015 was 16.2 percent, a decrease
the shift away from traditional large enterprise application imple- of 5.0 points versus 2014. The tax rate in 2015 reflected benefits
mentations. Software revenue declined 9.8 percent as reported from the settlement of the U.S. tax audit and geographic mix of
and 4 percent adjusted for currency with growth in annuity-based pre-tax profits, partially offset by less utilization of foreign tax cred-
revenue, including Software-as-a-Service (SaaS), more than its. Income from continuing operations of $13.4 billion decreased
offset by declines in transactional revenue reflecting the flexi- 15.2 percent and the net income margin was 16.3 percent, a
bility the company has provided to its largest enterprise clients. decrease of 0.6 points versus 2014. Losses from discontin-
Systems Hardware revenue decreased 24.2 percent as reported, ued operations, net of tax, were $174 million in 2015 compared
but increased 8 percent adjusted for the System x divestiture to $3,729 million in 2014. Net income of $13.2 billion increased
(28 points) and currency (4 points), reflecting a successful main- 9.7 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income
frame cycle in 2015 and the repositioning of Power Systems to from continuing operations decreased 16.3 percent year to year
address a broader opportunity. and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continu-
From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets ing operations decreased 1.1 points to 21.6 percent. Operating
declined 9.9 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for cur- (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of $14.7 billion
rency (8 points) and divestitures (2 points) with growth in Germany, decreased 12.2 percent including an impact of 7 points from the
Japan and the UK on an adjusted basis. Growth markets revenue 2014 gains from the System x and customer care divestitures. The
decreased 18.4 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing operations
currency (9 points) and divestitures (6 points). On an adjusted of 17.9 percent decreased 0.1 points. The operating (non-GAAP)
basis, declines in Asia Pacific were partially offset by growth in effective tax rate from continuing operations in 2015 was 17.2 per-
Latin America and Middle East and Africa. cent versus 21.0 percent in 2014. The 2015 profit and margin
The consolidated gross profit margin of 49.8 percent performance reflect portfolio actions taken as the company shifts
decreased 0.2 points year to year. The operating (non-GAAP) to higher value, as well as investments being made to add capa-
gross margin of 50.8 percent increased 0.2 points compared to bilities to drive the transformation.
the prior year primarily driven by the shift to higher value through Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $13.60
portfolio actions and the relative strength of z Systems, partially in 2015 decreased 12.8 percent year to year. In 2015, the company
offset by margin declines in Global Services and Software. repurchased 30.3 million shares of its common stock at a cost of
Total expense and other (income) decreased 6.4 percent in $4.7 billion. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of
2015 compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) $14.92 decreased 9.7 percent versus 2014 including an impact
expense and other (income) decreased 7.8 percent compared to of 7 points from the 2014 gains from the System x and customer
2014. The key year-to-year drivers were: care divestitures. Diluted earnings per share from discontinued
operations was ($0.18) in 2015 compared to ($3.69) in 2014.
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
• Currency* (9) points (9) points
• System x divestiture (2) points (2) points
• Divestiture gains 6 points 6 points
• Workforce rebalancing (3) points (3) points
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.

===== PAGE 24 =====
22 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2015, the company continued to have the DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with
and marketable securities at year end was $8.2 billion, a decrease the SEC on February 23, 2016 for a more detailed version
of $0.3 billion from December 31, 2014. Key drivers in the balance of this Des cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled
sheet and total cash flows were: “Risk Factors.”
Total assets decreased $6.8 billion ($0.3 billion adjusted for
currency) from December 31, 2014 driven by: The company creates value for clients through integrated solu-
tions and products that leverage: data, information technology,
• Decreases in total receivables ($4.4 billion), deferred taxes deep expertise in industries and business processes, and a
($1.9 billion) and prepaid expenses and sundry assets broad ecosystem of partners and alliances. IBM solutions typi-
($1.1 billion); partially offset by cally create value by enabling new capabilities for clients that
• Increased goodwill ($1.5 billion). transform their businesses and help them engage with their cus-
tomers and employees in new ways. These solutions draw from
Total liabilities decreased $9.2 billion ($4.7 billion adjusted for cur-
an industry-leading portfolio of consulting and IT implementation
rency) from December 31, 2014 driven by:
services, cloud and cognitive offerings, and enterprise systems
and software; all bolstered by one of the world’s leading research
• Decreases in other liabilities ($2.3 billion), taxes ($2.2 billion),
organizations.
retirement-related liabilities ($1.8 billion), deferred income
($0.8 billion), total debt ($0.8 billion) and accounts payable
Strategy
($0.8 billion).
IBM has transformed throughout its 100+ year history, and in its
current transformation, IBM is leading a reordering of the tech-
Total equity of $14.4 billion increased $2.4 billion from Decem-
nology industry.
ber 31, 2014 as a result of:
In 2014, the company’s strategic imperatives were declared
• Higher retained earnings ($8.3 billion) and higher common around the three main forces behind “digital”: big data and ana-
stock ($0.6 billion); partially offset by lytics, cloud and engagement. Since 2010, IBM has invested
• Increased treasury stock ($4.8 billion) and increased approximately $30 billion in these areas, built out the IBM Cloud
accumulated other comprehensive losses ($1.7 billion). on a global scale, established the Watson Group, announced 50
acquisitions and entered into major partnerships, including the
The company generated $17.0 billion in cash flow provided by landmark alliance with Apple to bring mobile to the enterprise.
operating activities, an increase of $0.1 billion when compared to As IBM’s clients transform, “digital” itself is not the destina-
2014, driven primarily by lower income tax payments, offset by tion, but a foundation to create a truly Cognitive Enterprise. This is
net income performance. Net cash used in investing activities of resulting in new types of interactions between people, organiza-
$8.2 billion was $5.2 billion higher than 2014, primarily driven by a tions and machines.
decrease in cash provided from divestitures ($2.8 billion) and an Through these developments, IBM is emerging as more than
increase in net cash used for acquisitions ($2.7 billion). Net cash a hardware, software and services company; IBM is transforming
used in financing activities of $9.2 billion decreased $6.3 billion into a cognitive solutions and cloud platform company. Key tenets
compared to the prior year, driven primarily by a decrease in cash of the company’s highly differentiated strategy include:
used for gross common stock repurchases ($9.1 billion), partially
offset by lower net debt issuances ($1.8 billion) and higher dividend Cognitive Solutions: Cognitive, advanced analytics and key data
payments ($0.6 billion). are being integrated into all leading solutions.
The 2015 results are a reflection of the continuing transition in Cloud Platform: New solutions will be built on the IBM Cloud and
the company’s business as it addresses the significant shifts in the the company’s offerings will be cloud-enabled. The company is
industry, as well as some of the cyclical challenges of the global continuing to build the premier cloud stack, developer environment
business environment. This transformation is taking place over and most secure hybrid cloud platform in the industry.
the longer term. In 2015, the company strengthened its existing Industry Focus: Because industry context is so important to the
portfolio while investing aggressively in new opportunities such value of IBM’s solutions, these solutions will be built for the needs
as Watson Health, Watson Internet of Things and IBM Cloud. In of individual industries and professions.
January 2016, the company disclosed that it is expecting GAAP
earnings of at least $12.45 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of
at least $13.50 per diluted share for 2016.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Management Discussion 23
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions Cloud Platform
Since 2011 when IBM’s Watson was introduced, IBM has been Cloud is at the heart of the “digital” revolution. No enterprise is
developing a new generation of cognitive systems that can see untouched by this revolution and the shifts are occurring rapidly.
and analyze the massive amounts of data that have previously Enterprises are benefiting from cloud by using it to transform
been invisible to computers and enterprises. Cognitive systems their information technology (IT) and business processes into dig-
have the capability to inject a kind of thinking ability into every ital services. Cloud brings two compelling sources of value:
digitalized object, process and service. IBM is on the forefront of
deploying these systems and assisting clients to become truly • Innovation: In addition to cloud enabling the sharing of
Cognitive Enterprises. infrastructure, the real promise of cloud is innovation. By
Cognitive systems are not programmed; like humans, they forcing greater levels of standards throughout the technol-
learn from experts, from every interaction, and from big data. They ogy value chain, new products and services, and even
are enabled to learn by using advanced algorithms to sense, pre- entire business models, can be created in weeks rather
dict and infer. Ultimately they can augment human intelligence, than months or years.
allowing individuals to make more informed decisions. • Hybrid: Data, cloud and engagement are powerful forces
For the past five years, IBM has continued to invest in Watson, changing the landscape of technology and businesses.
including dedicating $100 million to venture investments to support Enterprises need to bring this new world of technology
start-ups building cognitive apps through the Watson Developer together with their existing systems in order to capture their
Zone on Bluemix. IBM is also making Watson more widely available full value. Hybrid cloud brings together the back-end systems
through the Watson Ecosystem, which has grown to more than infrastructure with the new strategic imperative “digital”
500 partners. technologies. Unless the new and traditional IT worlds
Paired with Watson is the company’s core big data and ana- are brought together, they will be isolated within the
lytics business. IBM has invested over $15 billion in these areas enterprise. IBM servers and storage can handle mobile
since 2010, including over $7 billion on more than 20 acquisitions. transactions, compose and expose APIs and integrate
Nearly half of IBM Research’s spending is focused on analytics across hybrid clouds to unlock new value from data.
and cognitive.
Making applications work across on-premise, public and private
IBM’s leading-edge cognitive technology is only the starting
cloud environments is what hybrid cloud is all about. This requires
point. The company is developing entirely new solutions busi-
a deep understanding of both traditional and new IT models,
nesses around that cognitive capability. In 2015, the Watson
something that IBM is unique in bringing to its clients:
Health unit was formed, which is IBM’s first business unit designed
around a single industry. Watson Health will create cognitive
• In traditional IT, for example, the z Systems mainframe is
solutions that can better help doctors diagnose and anticipate
used by all of the top 25 global banks and almost three-
disease; it will recommend treatments that are tailored to individ-
quarters of the top 25 U.S. retailers. In addition, 70 percent
uals; and it will assist researchers to predict and prevent the next
of the top 25 Fortune 500 companies rely on IBM to manage
generation of diseases.
their critical IT infrastructures.
Another set of cognitive solutions IBM is building is the Internet
• In the new world of IT, the IBM Cloud has become the stan-
of Things (IoT). It is estimated that there are more than 9 billion
dard for enterprise-grade cloud—bringing performance
connected devices operating in the world today, generating
and the integration across all IT. The company continues to
2.5 quintillion bytes of new data daily. Watson IoT will bring the
build cloud into Global Technology Services’ (GTS) large
power of cognitive to the challenge of extracting and analyzing
base of outsourcing relationships.
data embedded in intelligent devices in real time. In addition,
• Each of these areas of IT requires uncompromising security.
the recent closure of The Weather Company acquisition essen-
IBM Security brings to clients advanced technologies in fraud
tially expands the company’s IoT platform; with one that collects,
and threat protection, identity and access management,
integrates and analyzes data from three billion weather forecast
application and data security, mobile and cloud security.
reference points, including satellites, weather stations, airplanes,
IBM’s systems are among the most secure in the world with
consumer apps and more for IBM and our clients.
advanced encryption, threat monitoring and tracking and
Through Cognitive, IBM is ushering in a new era for the industry
behavioral analytics. Further, high-end security consulting
and for clients.
brings the expertise of 6,000 dedicated security specialists.
Built on big data analytics, IBM manages over 20 billion
security events per day on 2.5 million desktops for 12,000
clients through its Security Operations Centers.

===== PAGE 26 =====
24 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM’s Cloud platform includes: Industry Focus
IBM’s solutions and platforms are most relevant in the context of
• IBM Cloud’s Infrastructure-as-a-Service, which offers bare each client’s industry. General-purpose tools have their place, but
metal, private cloud and virtual server instances, enabling it
the company can unlock much greater value in building solutions
to cover many different workloads with unprecedented per-
for the specific needs of an industry. In this context, Industries
formance. IBM’s platform also has tremendous geographic
are the focus.
reach—with 46 cloud centers around the globe.
Watson Health is an example of how the company is defining
• Bluemix is IBM’s Platform-as-a-Service, built on the open solutions around industry needs. In addition to Watson Health, in
standards foundation of Cloud Foundry and powered by IBM
2015, 20 new industry-specific analytics solutions were launched
Cloud’s infrastructure. Bluemix offers cloud-based services,
with pre-built predictive analytics capabilities. These include solu-
APIs and leading third-party services to developers in an
tions that allow clients to mine customer data for hidden insights
integrated platform. With $1 billion of investment, Bluemix
for action, spot fraud or risk and predict vulnerabilities to preempt
is now the largest Cloud Foundry development, has a signifi-
before they occur. These solutions, which are tailored specifically
cant number of services and is onboarding thousands of
for retail, banking, telecommunications, insurance and others, will
developers per week.
make it easier and faster for organizations to uncover and act on
• IBM Cloud Marketplace brings together the company’s critical business insights. In addition, IBM has announced over
extensive portfolio of cloud capabilities, providing a self-
100 apps through its alliance with Apple that bring value in the
service, digital experience for developers, IT and business
context of individual industries.
leaders. IBM has a significant number of Software-as-a-Ser-
Complementing the power of the company’s technology solu-
vice offerings and visitors to the Marketplace have access
tions is the industry expertise of IBM’s Global Business Services
to an extensive and growing portfolio of cloud capabilities
consulting business. It is the combination of IBM’s technology and
from IBM and qualified third-party vendors.
services, which enable clients to achieve their business outcomes.
• In 2015, IBM acquired: Blue Box Group, Inc. (private cloud),
Compose (database-as-a-service), StrongLoop, Inc. (devel- Summary
oper technology), Cleversafe, Inc. (object-based storage),
Each successive transformation of IBM has brought something
Gravitant, Inc. (cloud brokerage) and Clearleap, Inc. (cloud-
new and innovative to the world. More than 50 years ago, IBM
based video).
brought forward a revolutionary transactional computer called the
• The Weather Company acquisition in January 2016, whose mainframe. In the decades that followed, IBM commercialized the
dynamic cloud data platform powers the fourth most-used
personal computer, created an industry around IT services and a
daily mobile app in the United States and handles 26 billion
software market around middleware. Each of these innovations is
inquiries to its cloud-based services each day. This high-
with the world today; they were built to last.
volume cloud platform processes, analyzes and distributes
The company’s next chapter is ushering in an entirely new era
enormous data sets at scale in real time. It adds an important
of human-organization-computer interaction—embodied in Cog-
dimension to the company’s cloud platform.
nitive Solutions and the Cloud Platform.
• IBM has entered into strategic partnerships all focused
on bringing innovative data and analytics solutions to the Business Model
market. The IBM Cloud is the most powerful platform for The company’s business model is built to support two principal
enterprise-grade environments, bringing clients unparalleled goals: helping enterprise clients to become more innovative, effi-
levels of security, performance and scalability. cient and competitive through the application of business insight
and IT solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders.
The business model has been developed over time through strate-
gic investments in capabilities and technologies that have superior
long-term growth and profitability prospects based on the value
they deliver to clients.
The company’s global capabilities include services, software,
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide inte-
grated solutions and platforms to the company’s clients.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Management Discussion 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously Integrated Technology Services: delivers a portfolio of project-
changing industry and economic environment, including the based and managed services that enable clients to transform and
company’s transformation into cloud and -as-a-Service delivery optimize their IT environments by driving efficiency, flexibility and
models. The company continues to strengthen its position through productivity. The portfolio is built around a key set of solutions
strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-value addressing systems, mobility, resiliency, networking, cloud and
areas while divesting certain businesses. In addition, the company security. This portfolio includes key assets and intellectual prop-
is transforming into a more agile enterprise helping to drive pro- erty and incorporates best practices and proven methodologies
ductivity, which supports investments for participation in markets that ensure high quality delivery, security and compliance.
with significant long-term opportunity.
This business model, supported by the company’s financial Cloud: delivers a comprehensive set of hybrid cloud services
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash including assisting clients with building their own private clouds,
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term. building customized dedicated managed clouds, allowing cli-
ents to leverage standardized cloud infrastructure services from
Business Segments and Capabilities the SoftLayer and Cloud Managed Services offerings; and cre-
The company’s major operations consists of five business seg- ating environments linking their private and public workloads
ments: Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, together. This portfolio of cloud offerings spans across the GTS
which the company collectively calls Global Services, Software, business lines.
Systems Hardware and Global Financing.
Technology Support Services (Maintenance Services): delivers
In late February 2016, the company plans to meet with investors
a complete line of support services from product maintenance
to discuss changes in the business, which will result in a change in
through solution support to maintain and improve the availability
the company’s reportable segments beginning in the first quarter
of clients’ IT infrastructures.
of 2016.
Global Business Services (GBS) has the mission to deliver pre-
Global Services: is a critical component of the company’s strategy
dictable business outcomes to the company’s clients across:
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions
Consulting and Systems Integration, Application Management Ser-
to clients. These solutions include industry-leading IBM software
vices and Process Services. These professional services deliver
and systems, as well as other suppliers’ products if a solution
business value and innovation to clients through solutions which
requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services
leverage industry and business process expertise. The role of GBS
segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from out-
is to drive initiatives that integrate IBM content and solutions and
sourcing and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services
drive the progress of the company’s strategic imperatives. As cli-
backlog provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within
ents transform themselves in response to market trends like big
Global Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech-
data, social and mobile computing, GBS helps clients use these
nology Services and Global Business Services.
technologies to reinvent relationships with their customers and
Global Technology Services (GTS) provides IT infrastructure realize new standards of efficacy and efficiency in the internal pro-
services, creating business value for clients through integrated cesses, data and applications that they use to run their businesses.
services, incorporating unique intellectual property within its global In 2015, GBS announced the industry’s first practice dedicated to
delivery model. By leveraging insights and experience drawn cognitive business, Cognitive Business Solutions.
from IBM’s global scale, skills and technology, with applied inno-
vation from IBM Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, GBS Capabilities
high-quality services with improved productivity, flexibility, cost Consulting and Systems Integration: delivers client value with
and outcomes. solutions in Strategy and Transformation, Application Innovation
Services, Enterprise Applications and Smarter Analytics. Consult-
GTS Capabilities ing is also focused on bringing to market client solutions that drive
Strategic Outsourcing: delivers comprehensive IT outsourcing smarter commerce, cloud, mobile and social business.
services focused on clients’ enterprise IT infrastructure environ-
Application Management Services: delivers application manage-
ments to enable digital transformation and consistently deliver
ment, maintenance and support services for packaged software,
improved quality, flexibility, risk management and financial value.
as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered
The company integrates long-standing expertise in service man-
through advanced capabilities in areas such as application test-
agement and technology with the ability to exploit the power of
ing and modernization, cloud application services, the company’s
new technologies from IBM systems and software, such as cloud
highly differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry
computing, analytics, cognitive computing and virtualization,
knowledge and the standardization and automation of applica-
to deliver high performance, innovation and improved ability to
tion management.
achieve business objectives.

===== PAGE 28 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Process Services: (included within Application Management Tivoli: helps clients optimize the value they get from their infrastruc-
Services) delivers a range of offerings consisting of standardized tures and technology assets through greater visibility, control and
through transformational solutions including processing plat- automation across their end-to-end business operations. These
forms and business process outsourcing. These services deliver asset management solutions foster integrated service delivery
improved business results to clients through the strategic change for cloud and datacenter management, enterprise endpoint and
and/or operation of the client’s business processes, applications mobile device management, asset and facilities management, and
and infrastructure. storage management. Tivoli includes security systems software
that provides clients with a single security intelligence platform
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems that enables them to better secure all aspects of their enterprise
software. Middleware serves as a software layer that connects and prevent security breaches.
operating systems to applications across a standard software plat-
form. The IBM Middleware portfolio allows seamless integration of Workforce Solutions: enables businesses to connect people and
unrelated systems, processes, and applications all while providing processes for more effective communication and increased pro-
market leading functionality, in both on-premise and hybrid cloud ductivity through collaboration, messaging and social networking
environments. Operating systems are the software engines that software. By remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, IBM’s
run computers. Approximately 70 percent of external Software social business offerings help organizations reap real benefits
segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring license associated with social networking, as well as create a more effi-
charges, software sold “as-a-Service” and ongoing post-contract cient and effective workforce.
support. The remaining revenue relates to one-time charge (OTC)
arrangements in which clients pay one, up-front payment for a Rational: supports software development for both IT and com-
perpetual license. Typically, the sale of OTC software includes one plex embedded system solutions, with a portfolio of products and
year of post-contract support. Clients can also purchase ongoing solutions supporting DevOps and Smarter Product Development,
post-contract support after the first year, which includes unspec- transforming the way lines of business, development and opera-
ified product upgrades and technical support. tions work together to deliver innovation via software.
In January 2015, the company made several changes designed
Software Capabilities
to more effectively align its key capabilities and resources to its
WebSphere: delivers capabilities that enable organizations to run
strategic imperatives. These changes have enabled the com-
high-performance business applications. With these applications,
pany to respond more quickly to critical client agendas and drive
clients can integrate and manage business processes across their
higher value. Across Software, the company is transitioning its
organizations with the flexibility and agility they need to respond
portfolio to capture growth and continue to drive innovation. The
to changing conditions. Built on services-oriented architecture
focus is centered around analytics, security, and commerce, uti-
(SOA), and open standards support for cloud, mobile and social
lizing its software assets to improve speed and agility in bringing
interactions, the WebSphere platform enables enterprises to
integrated solutions to its clients and to help clients become cog-
extend their reach and optimize interactions with their key con-
nitive enterprises.
stituents. Smarter Commerce software helps companies better
manage and improve each step of their value chain and capitalize
Watson: the first commercially available cognitive computing
on opportunities for profitable growth, efficiency and increased
platform that has the ability to interact in natural language, pro-
customer loyalty.
cessing vast amounts of big data, and learning from its interactions
with people and computers. As an advisor, Watson is able to sift
Information Management: enables clients to integrate, manage
through and understand large amounts of data delivering insights
and analyze enormous amounts of data from a large variety of
with unprecedented speeds and accuracy.
sources in order to gain competitive advantage and improve their
business outcomes. With this approach, clients can extract real
value out of their data and use it to make better business decisions.
IBM’s middleware and integrated solutions include advanced
database management, information integration, data governance,
enterprise content management, data warehousing, business ana-
lytics and intelligence, predictive analytics and big data analytics.

===== PAGE 29 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Watson Health: a business unit focused on the health industry, Technology: In 2014, the company announced a definitive agree-
built upon the foundation of the work done with Watson and the ment to divest its Microelectronics business and manufacturing
momentum of Cloud. This team of consultants, medical prac- operations. This transaction closed in 2015.
titioners, clinicians, developers and researchers work with an
extensive ecosystem of partners and clients to advance the quality Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of information
and effectiveness of individual health with advanced data ana- technology systems, software and services by providing financ-
lytics and insights. ing solutions in the areas where the company has the expertise.
The financing arrangements are predominantly for products or
Watson Internet of Things (IoT): in today’s world, physical devices services that are critical to the end users’ business operations.
of all types are now instrumented with compute capabilities that These financing contracts are entered into after a comprehensive
allow for direct sensing and communication of data. IBM’s focus is credit evaluation and are secured by legal contracts. As a captive
enabling companies to use that data to improve operations, drive financier, Global Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge
new business and work directly with clients. of its client base and a clear insight into the products and services
financed. These factors allow the business to effectively manage
Systems Hardware provides clients with innovative infrastructure two of the major risks, credit and residual value, associated with
technologies to help meet the new requirements of hybrid cloud financing while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financ-
and cognitive workloads—from deploying advanced analytics, ing also maintains a long-term partnership with the companies’
to moving to digital service delivery with the cloud, and securing clients through various stages of IT asset life cycle—from initial
mobile transaction processing. Approximately half of Systems purchase and technology upgrades to asset disposition decisions.
Hardware’s server and storage sales transactions are through
the company’s business partners; with the balance direct to end- Global Financing Capabilities
user clients. IBM Systems also designs and procures advanced Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan financ-
semiconductor devices for use in the company’s systems. ing to end users and internal clients for terms up to seven years.
Assets financed are primarily IT products and services where
Systems Hardware Capabilities the company has expertise. Internal financing is predominantly
Servers: a range of high-performing systems designed to address in support of Global Services’ long-term client service contracts.
capacity, security, speed and compute power needs for busi- Global Financing also factors a selected portion of the company’s
nesses, organizations and technical computing applications. The accounts receivable, primarily for cash management purposes. All
portfolio includes z Systems, a trusted enterprise platform for internal financing arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are
integrating data, transactions and insight, and Power Systems, a based upon market conditions.
system designed from the ground up for big data, optimized for
scale-out cloud and Linux, and delivering open innovation with Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receiv-
OpenPOWER. The company is also a founding member of the able financing to suppliers, distributors and remarketers of IBM
OpenPOWER foundation, a group of industry-leading companies and OEM products.
working together to develop high-performance compute solutions
based on the IBM POWER architecture. Remanufacturing and Remarketing: assets include used equip-
ment returned from lease transactions, or used surplus equipment
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients acquired internally or externally. These assets may be refurbished
to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital or upgraded and sold or leased to new or existing clients both
information. These solutions address critical client requirements externally or internally. Externally remarketed equipment revenue
for information retention and archiving, security, compliance represents sales or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remar-
and storage optimization including data deduplication, availabil- keted equipment revenue primarily represents used equipment
ity and virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of that is sold internally to Systems Hardware and Global Services.
software-defined storage solutions, flash storage, disk and tape Systems Hardware may also sell the equipment that it purchases
storage solutions. from Global Financing to external clients.

===== PAGE 30 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Worldwide Organizations to IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients address their most
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s deliv- difficult challenges. IBM Research also explores the boundaries
ery of value to its clients: of science and technology—from nanotechnology and future
systems, to big data analytics, secure clouds and advancing the
• Sales and Distribution world’s first cognitive computing platform, IBM Watson.
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property In 2015, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other
• Integrated Supply Chain company for the 23rd consecutive year. IBM’s 7,355 patents
awarded in 2015 position the company to compete and lead in
Sales and Distribution the emerging opportunities represented by big data and analyt-
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than ics, security, social and mobile technologies. These inventions will
175 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic advance IBM’s cloud platform and the new era of computing in
distribution of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution which machines will learn, reason and interact with people in more
organization manages the IBM global footprint, with dedicated natural ways.
country-based operating units focused on delivering unique value The company continues to actively seek intellectual property
and a superior client experience. Within these units, client rela- (IP) protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on
tionship professionals work with integrated teams of consultants, other initiatives designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of
product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to enable clients’ IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM
business growth and innovation. These teams deliver value by products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM prod-
understanding the clients’ business and needs, and then bringing ucts and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s
together capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network various proprietary IP rights are important to its success, IBM
of Business Partners to develop and implement client solutions. believes its business as a whole is not materially dependent on
By combining global expertise and digital sales capabilities any particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents
with local experience, IBM’s geographic structure enables client or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number of patents,
relationships through dedicated management focus for local cli- which vary in duration, relating to its products.
ents, speed in addressing new market opportunities and timely
investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic units align Integrated Supply Chain
industry solution, product and services expertise to serve clients’ IBM has an extensive integrated supply chain, procuring mate-
agendas. IBM also extends the reach of its capabilities to com- rials and services globally. In 2015, the company also managed
mercial clients by leveraging industry skills with digital marketing, approximately $24 billion in procurement spending for its clients
digital sales and local Business Partner resources. through the Global Process Services organization. The supply,
The company continues to invest to capture the long-term manufacturing and logistics operations are seamlessly integrated
opportunity in key growth markets around the world—India, China and have optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and stream-
and countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle lining internal processes has improved sales force productivity and
East, Africa and Latin America. The company’s major markets operational effectiveness and efficiency. Supply chain resiliency
include the G7 countries of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, enables IBM to reduce its risk during marketplace changes.
the United States (U.S.) and the United Kingdom (UK) plus Austria, The company continues to derive business value from its own
the Bahamas, Belgium, the Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, globally integrated supply chain providing a strategic advantage
Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its supply
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. chain expertise for clients through its supply chain business trans-
formation outsourcing service to optimize and help operate clients’
Research, Development and Intellectual Property end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate Utilizing analytics, mobile, cloud and social—with numerous proj-
the company from its competitors. IBM annually invests approxi- ects, has allowed the integrated supply chain to drive positive
mately 6 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth, business outcomes for the company and its clients.
high-value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and
the company’s business units through global labs on near-term
and midterm innovations. It contributes many new technologies

===== PAGE 31 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2015 versus 2014 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014** Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $32,017 $35,442 (9.7)% 0.5%*
Gross margin 37.4% 39.0% (1.5) pts.
Global Business Services 17,166 19,512 (12.0)% (4.1)%*
Gross margin 28.2% 30.4% (2.2) pts.
Software 22,932 25,434 (9.8)% (3.5)%
Gross margin 87.3% 88.6% (1.3) pts.
Systems Hardware 7,581 9,996 (24.2)% 7.6%*
Gross margin 46.6% 39.5% 7.2 pts.
Global Financing 1,840 2,034 (9.5)% 1.5%
Gross margin 45.6% 49.4% (3.7) pts.
Other 206 374 (45.0)% (39.1)%
Gross margin (253.0)% (215.0)% (38.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $81,741 $92,793 (11.9)% (1.2)%*
Total consolidated gross profi t $40,684 $46,407 (12.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 49.8% 50.0% (0.2) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 373 416 (10.5)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 469 173 170.7%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $41,526 $46,996 (11.6)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.8% 50.6% 0.2 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
Global Services
In 2015, the Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, delivered million decreased 10.3 percent and 2 percent adjusted for cur-
combined revenue of $49,182 million, a decrease of 10.5 percent as rency. The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31,
reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency (9 points) and dives- 2015 of $121 billion increased 1 percent year to year, adjusted
titures. Total outsourcing revenue of $21,889 million decreased for currency. Combined pre-tax income for the year decreased
10.7 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency 18.2 percent and the pre-tax margin decreased 1.4 points to
(10 points) and divestitures. Total transactional revenue of $21,161 15.1 percent.

===== PAGE 32 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014** Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $49,182 $54,954 (10.5)% (1.1)%*
Global Technology Services $32,017 $35,442 (9.7)% 0.5%*
Outsourcing 16,992 19,082 (11.0) (0.5)
Integrated Technology Services 8,893 9,506 (6.4) 2.5
Maintenance 6,132 6,853 (10.5) 1.2*
Global Business Services $17,166 $19,512 (12.0)% (4.1)%*
Outsourcing 4,898 5,438 (9.9) (2.0)*
Consulting and Systems Integration 12,268 14,075 (12.8) (4.9)
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
Global Technology Services revenue of $32,017 million decreased cloud stack is an open platform that enables this innovation. Cli-
9.7 percent as reported in 2015 compared to the prior year, but ents can choose from public, private and dedicated environments
increased 1 percent adjusted for currency (10 points) and the based on their needs, such as workload, performance, data sov-
System x divestiture, as the company helps clients transition to a ereignty and regulatory requirements. Entire industries and value
hybrid cloud services platform bringing cloud, mobility and secu- chains are being disrupted, and clients are looking to the company
rity to infrastructure services. Within GTS, outsourcing revenue for competitive advantage.
of $16,992 million decreased 11.0 percent as reported and 1 per- Global Business Services revenue of $17,166 million decreased
cent adjusted for currency as the company continues to reinvent 12.0 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency
its portfolio, providing the most modern IT services that connect (8 points) compared to the prior year. Within GBS, outsourcing
clients to the cloud-based mobile world. Integrated Technology revenue of $4,898 million decreased 9.9 percent as reported and
Services (ITS) revenue of $8,893 million decreased 6.4 percent 2 percent adjusted for currency (8 points). Consulting and Systems
as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for currency compared Integration (C&SI) revenue of $12,268 million declined 12.8 percent
to the prior year with strong performance in SoftLayer through- as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency.
out the year. Maintenance revenue of $6,132 million decreased As the company continued to transform the GBS business
10.5 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted for currency during the year, revenue from the strategic imperative practices
(9 points) and the System x divestiture (3 points). This business grew at strong rates. However, overall revenue performance con-
continues to contribute significant revenue by delivering a wide tinues to be impacted by the company’s shift away from traditional
range of support services to maintain and improve clients’ IT infra- enterprise application implementations. Clients are moving away
structure. Throughout 2015, there was continued strong demand from ERP engagements to initiatives that focus on digitizing their
for Multi-Vendor Support services where clients can leverage the business with analytics, cloud and mobile technologies. As part of
company’s global distribution and inventory capabilities. the company’s partnership with Apple, it has now delivered over
Within GTS, the strategic imperatives, including hybrid cloud 100 MobileFirst for iOS applications. This unique partnership
services, grew strong double digits at constant currency for the full brings together the simplicity of design and ease of use of the
year, including strong demand for SoftLayer. The company con- Apple mobile device with IBM’s ability to build applications that
tinues to increase its cloud capacity with 46 cloud data centers scale securely and efficiently to the enterprise, helping to transform
opened around the world as of December 31, 2015. This Infrastruc- the way work gets done across 14 industries and 65 professions.
ture-as-a-Service cloud platform provides clients with a range of These applications allow clients to securely access their most
cloud services, including virtual and bare metal servers along with critical data and processes, so that they can redesign workflows
a dedicated dark fiber network infrastructure. As clients evaluate and drive productivity. Since the partnership with Apple was
their technology roadmap, they look for agility and innovation and announced in 2014, the company has generated over $1 billion in
to gain insight into data from all sources. The company’s hybrid signings from the program.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) The GBS gross profit margin decreased 2.2 points to 28.2 per-
Yr.-to-Yr. cent in 2015 compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income decreased
Percent/
Margin 22.7 percent to $2,634 million and pre-tax margin declined
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014* Change 2.1 points to 14.9 percent compared to the prior year. This year-to-
Global Services year profit decline reflects the market shifts in the GBS business.
Global Technology Services In parts of the portfolio where the market is declining, there is
External gross profi t $11,981 $13,808 (13.2)% price and profit pressure and action is being taken to optimize the
cost structure in these areas. The company continues to shift and
External gross profi t margin 37.4% 39.0% (1.5) pts.
add significant resources to the high-growth analytics, cloud and
Pre-tax income $ 5,002 $ 5,931 (15.7)%
mobility practices, which impacts productivity and margin in the
Pre-tax margin 15.2% 16.3% (1.1) pts.
near term.
Global Business Services
External gross profi t $ 4,837 $ 5,923 (18.3)% Global Services Backlog
External gross profi t margin 28.2% 30.4% (2.2) pts. The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2015 was
$121 billion, a decrease of 6.0 percent as reported, but an increase
Pre-tax income $ 2,634 $ 3,408 (22.7)%
of 1 percent adjusted for currency, compared to the December 31,
Pre-tax margin 14.9% 17.0% (2.1) pts.
2014 balance. The estimated transactional backlog at Decem-
* Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation. ber 31, 2015 decreased 6.5 percent as reported, but was flat year
to year adjusted for currency. The estimated outsourcing backlog
The GTS gross profit margin decreased 1.5 points to 37.4 per- decreased 5.4 percent as reported, but grew 2 percent adjusted
cent in 2015 compared to prior year. Pre-tax income decreased for currency compared to the prior year.
15.7 percent to $5,002 million. The GTS pre-tax margin declined Clients are looking to transform their most critical systems into
1.1 points to 15.2 percent compared to the prior year, primarily due hybrid cloud environments, and the complexity of these partner-
to investments being made in this business. The company con- ships in many cases results in larger engagements. For the full year
tinues to invest to deliver the most contemporary offerings that of 2015, over 70 services deals greater than $100 million were
are built with cloud, analytics, mobile, security and cognitive tech- signed, which was 40 percent more than in 2014. About 70 percent
nologies enabling it to transform clients’ enterprises. In addition, of those transactions feature hybrid cloud content, which reflects
currency had a large year-to-year impact on profit given the strong both the value IBM’s clients see in hybrid and the reality that not
dollar currency environment. all their workloads are optimized for the cloud.
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Backlog
Total backlog $120.7 $128.4 (6.0)% 0.8%
Outsourcing backlog 76.4 80.8 (5.4) 1.7
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate
GBS Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Main- of the value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services
tenance. Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS contract. There are no third-party standards or requirements
Outsourcing. Transactional backlog includes ITS and Consulting governing the calculation of signings. The calculation used by
and Systems Integration. Total backlog is intended to be a state- management involves estimates and judgments to gauge the
ment of overall work under contract and therefore does include extent of a client’s commitment, including the type and duration of
Maintenance. Backlog estimates are subject to change and are the agreement, and the presence of termination charges or wind-
affected by several factors, including terminations, changes in the down costs.
scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for revenue
not materialized and adjustments for currency.

===== PAGE 34 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract exten- positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
sions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
extent of the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or
in signings as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
where revenues equal renewals.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Total signings $48,243 $51,569 (6.5)% 2.8%
Outsourcing signings $25,196 $26,517 (5.0)% 4.9%
Transactional signings 23,046 25,052 (8.0) 0.5
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Software external revenue $22,932 $25,434 (9.8)% (3.5)%
Middleware $19,473 $21,474 (9.3)% (3.0)%
Key branded middleware 15,778 17,098 (7.7) (1.5)
WebSphere (5.3) 0.2
Information Management (8.0) (1.6)
Workforce Solutions (8.1) (0.6)
Tivoli (6.3) 0.1
Rational (20.3) (15.1)
Other middleware 3,695 4,376 (15.6) (8.7)
Operating systems 1,815 2,119 (14.3) (8.1)
Other 1,644 1,841 (10.7) (4.9)
Software revenue of $22,932 million decreased 9.8 percent as middleware, WebSphere decreased 5.3 percent (flat adjusted
reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency in 2015 compared for currency), Information Management decreased 8.0 percent
to the prior year. Year-to-year software revenue performance (2 percent adjusted for currency), Workforce Solutions decreased
reflected a decrease in middleware with declines in transactional 8.1 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency), Tivoli decreased
revenue and a continuing headwind from operating systems. 6.3 percent (flat adjusted for currency), and Rational decreased
Key branded middleware revenue of $15,778 million, which 20.3 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency). Other middleware
accounted for approximately 69 percent of total software revenue decreased 15.6 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for
in 2015, decreased 7.7 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted currency. Operating systems decreased 14.3 percent as reported
for currency compared to the prior year. Within key branded and 8 percent adjusted for currency.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On an annual basis, approximately 70 percent of the company’s Software gross profit margin decreased 1.3 points to 87.3 percent.
software business is annuity-like, including Software-as-a-Service Software pre-tax income of $9,066 million decreased 15.3 percent,
and subscription and support. Renewal rates are steady, the SaaS with a pre-tax margin of 34.6 percent, a decrease of 2.4 points.
business is growing, and overall annuity revenue grew for the full Profit performance for the year reflected the overall revenue trajec-
year. Transactional revenue declined year to year as large clients tory, a higher level of investments in areas such as Watson, Watson
with multi-year contracts continued to utilize the flexibility the com- Health, Watson IoT and Bluemix, and an impact from currency.
pany has provided in deployment of their software. Outside the The company continues to transform and invest in the Software
company’s top 250 clients, software revenue increased low single business. Middleware serves the purpose of integrating different
digits adjusted for currency on a year-to-year basis. environments, such as on premise and cloud. Key capabilities
have now been delivered on SoftLayer or as part of the Bluemix
($ in millions) platform to enable hybrid environments. The company’s middle-
Yr.-to-Yr. ware remains the number one integration platform in the world and
Percent/
now integrates across cloud environments. This allows clients’
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change existing applications to access the cloud, and new “born to the
Software cloud” applications to access clients’ existing assets.
External gross profi t $20,013 $22,533 (11.2)% The company is also adding substantial new capabilities to its
software and solutions portfolio, including The Weather Company
External gross profi t margin 87.3% 88.6% (1.3) pts.
acquisition, which closed in January 2016. This acquisition will
Pre-tax income $ 9,066 $10,699 (15.3)%
bring with it a high-volume platform that can ingest sensor data
Pre-tax margin 34.6% 37.0% (2.4) pts.
at scale. The power of this platform is its ability to use Watson
cognitive capabilities to gather new insights by connecting data
at scale from multiple industry domains.
Systems Hardware
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Systems Hardware external revenue $7,581 $9,996 (24.2)% 7.6%*
z Systems 28.1% 34.7%
Power Systems (0.4) 4.5
Storage (11.9) (7.0)
* Adjusted for the System x divestiture and currency.
Systems Hardware revenue of $7,581 million decreased 24.2 per- broader opportunity. The company continued to deliver innova-
cent as reported, but grew 8 percent year to year adjusted for tion to its systems to enable them to run the most contemporary
the divestiture of the System x business (28 points) and currency workloads. Approximately half of the Systems Hardware revenue
(4 points) driven by z Systems and Power Systems. Systems in 2015 was for solutions that address analytics workloads, or
Hardware had a successful mainframe product cycle in 2015 hybrid and private clouds.
and Power Systems grew as it was repositioned to address a

===== PAGE 36 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
z Systems revenue increased 28.1 percent as reported and ($ in millions)
35 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year, with Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
strong double-digit growth adjusted for currency in each quar- Margin
ter since the launch of the z13 system in the first quarter of 2015. For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
MIPS (millions of instructions per second) shipments increased Systems Hardware
33 percent in 2015. The z13 system was contemporized for the External gross profi t $3,535 $3,945 (10.4)%
workloads around mobile, hybrid cloud and analytics. These External gross profi t margin 46.6% 39.5% 7.2 pts.
innovations continue to resonate with existing customers and the
Pre-tax income $ 604 $ 34 NM
company continues to add new customers to the platform. In 2015,
Pre-tax margin 7.5% 0.3% 7.2 pts.
the z Systems business added 50 new clients across 25 countries.
Power Systems revenue decreased 0.4 percent as reported, NM—Not meaningful
but grew 4 percent adjusted for currency in 2015 compared to the
prior year, the first year of revenue growth since 2011. The Power Systems Hardware gross profit margin of 46.6 percent increased
Systems performance reflects the progress being made to trans- 7.2 points versus the prior year. The increase was due to mix
form the platform to align around data and cloud opportunities, (11.8 points) driven by strong growth in z Systems and the divesti-
while embracing an open ecosystem. The company continues to ture of the lower margin System x business. This improvement was
address the high value opportunity in the UNIX market. Simultane- offset by lower margins (4.6 points) in z Systems and Power Sys-
ously, the company has introduced a low-end Linux-based Power tems compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income was $604 million
system to capture the growing Linux market. The OpenPOWER ini- in 2015, an increase of $570 million compared to 2014. Pre-tax
tiative continues to progress as the company integrates innovation margin increased 7.2 points year to year to 7.5 percent. Systems
from the broader ecosystem with its own products and licenses IP Hardware results reflect a successful transformation and reposi-
to support third-party Power-based offerings. tioning of the business including a solid mainframe product cycle
Storage revenue decreased 11.9 percent as reported and 7 per- and successful Power Systems transformation.
cent adjusted for currency in 2015 driven by continued weakness in
traditional disk and tape. Value in the storage market continues to Global Financing
shift to software and offering requirements that are driving demand See pages 69 through 73 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
for flash and object-based storage. The company is well positioned segment results.
in these new areas with its FlashSystems offerings and the recent
acquisition of Cleversafe, Inc.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis.
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency*
Total revenue $81,741 $92,793 (11.9)% (1.2)%
Geographies $81,430 $92,326 (11.8)% (1.1)%
Americas 38,486 41,410 (7.1) (1.8)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 26,073 30,700 (15.1) 0.3
Asia Pacifi c 16,871 20,216 (16.5) (1.7)
Major markets (9.9)% (0.5)%
Growth markets (18.4)% (3.1)%
BRIC countries (27.1)% (10.1)%
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total geographic revenue of $81,430 million in 2015 decreased Asia Pacific revenue of $16,871 million decreased 16.5 percent
11.8 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency (9 points) and the
(8 points) and the divestitures of the System x and customer care divested businesses (6 points) compared to the prior year. Japan
businesses (3 points) compared to 2014. Major market coun- decreased 9.9 percent as reported, but had growth of 5 percent
tries decreased 9.9 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted adjusted for currency (13 points) and the divested businesses
for currency (8 points) and the divested businesses (2 points). (2 points). On an adjusted basis, the Japan growth was more than
Within the major markets, performance varied in 2015. While the offset by a decline in other markets. China decreased 34.4 percent
U.S. was down compared to the prior year, revenue in Germany, as reported and 21 percent adjusted for the divested businesses
Japan and the UK grew year to year on an adjusted basis. Over- (12 points) and currency (1 point). India decreased 3.8 percent as
all, growth market countries decreased 18.4 percent as reported reported, but had growth of 8 percent adjusted for the divested
and 3 percent adjusted for currency (9 points) and the divested businesses (7 points) and currency (5 points).
businesses (6 points). From a regional perspective, on an adjusted
basis, growth in Latin America and the Middle East and Africa Total Expense and Other (Income)
region was more than offset by declines in the Asia Pacific growth
($ in millions)
market countries. Yr.-to-Yr.
Americas revenue of $38,486 million decreased 7.1 percent Percent/
Margin
as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency (3 points) and For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
divestitures (2 points) compared to 2014 with a decline in North Total consolidated expense
America and growth in Latin America on an adjusted basis. The and other (income) $24,740 $26,421 (6.4)%
U.S. decreased 4.4 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for Non-operating adjustments
divestitures. Canada was down 17.2 percent as reported and 2 per-
Amortization of acquired
cent adjusted for currency (13 points) and divestitures (2 points). intangible assets (304) (374) (18.8)
In Latin America, Brazil decreased 26.0 percent as reported and Acquisition-related charges (26) (12) 112.6
2 percent adjusted for currency (22 points) and the divested
Non-operating retirement-related
businesses (2 points), while Mexico had growth of 0.5 percent (costs)/income (581) (180) 222.4
as reported and 14 percent adjusted for currency (9 points) and
Operating (non-GAAP)
divestitures (4 points). expense and other (income) $23,830 $25,855 (7.8)%
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue of $26,073 million
Total consolidated
in 2015 decreased 15.1 percent as reported, but was flat year to expense-to-revenue ratio 30.3% 28.5% 1.8 pts.
year adjusted for currency (13 points) and the divested businesses Operating (non-GAAP)
(3 points). On an adjusted basis, there was growth in Germany expense-to-revenue ratio 29.2% 27.9% 1.3 pts.
and the UK. Germany decreased 13.2 percent as reported, but
grew 7 percent adjusted for currency (17 points) and the divested The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and
businesses (3 points). The UK decreased 6.3 percent year to year other (income) were approximately:
as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for currency (7 points)
and the divested businesses (2 points). The Middle East and Africa Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
region decreased 4.8 percent as reported, but grew 5 percent
• Currency* (9) points (9) points
adjusted for the divested businesses (6 points) and currency
• System x divestiture (2) points (2) points
(4 points). Russia decreased 32.2 percent as reported and 24 per-
• Divestiture gains 6 points 6 points
cent adjusted for the divestitures.
• Workforce rebalancing (3) points (3) points
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
For additional information regarding total expense and other
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following anal-
yses by category.

===== PAGE 38 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Selling, general and Total consolidated research,
administrative expense development and engineering $5,247 $5,437 (3.5)%
Selling, general and Non-operating adjustment
administrative—other $16,643 $18,532 (10.2)%
Non-operating retirement-related
Advertising and promotional (costs)/income (48) 77 NM
expense 1,290 1,307 (1.3)
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
Workforce rebalancing charges 587 1,472 (60.1) development and engineering $5,200 $5,514 (5.7)%
Retirement-related costs 1,052 811 29.7
NM—Not meaningful
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets 304 374 (18.8)
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense was
Stock-based compensation 322 350 (8.0) 6.4 percent of revenue in 2015 and 5.9 percent of revenue in 2014.
Bad debt expense 231 334 (30.8) RD&E expense decreased 3.5 percent in 2015 versus 2014
Total consolidated selling, primarily driven by:
general and administrative
expense $20,430 $23,180 (11.9)% • The effects of currency (5 points); and
Non-operating adjustments • The impact of the divested System x business (4 points);
partially offset by
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (304) (374) (18.8) • Increased base spending (4 points); and
Acquisition-related charges (21) (11) 81.1 • Higher expense due to acquisitions (1 point).
Non-operating retirement-related
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 5.7 percent
(costs)/income (533) (257) 107.3
in 2015 compared to the prior year, driven primarily by the same
Operating (non-GAAP)
factors.
selling, general and
administrative expense $19,573 $22,537 (13.2)%
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense d e- ($ in millions)
creased 11.9 percent in 2015 versus 2014, driven primarily by the Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
following factors: For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Sales and other transfers
• The effects of currency (7 points); and of intellectual property $303 $283 7.1%
• Lower workforce rebalancing charges (3 points); and
Licensing/royalty-based fees 117 129 (9.8)
• The impact of the divested System x business (1 point).
Custom development income 262 330 (20.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) expense decreased 13.2 percent year to Total $682 $742 (8.1)%
year driven primarily by the same factors.
Bad debt expense decreased $103 million in 2015 compared The timing and amount of Sales and other transfers of IP may vary
to 2014. The receivables provision coverage was 2.6 percent at significantly from period to period depending upon the timing of
December 31, 2015, an increase of 40 basis points from Decem- divestitures, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the
ber 31, 2014. timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no
material individual IP transactions in 2015 or 2014.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense The decrease in interest expense in 2015 versus 2014 was primar-
ily driven by lower average debt levels, partially offset by higher
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. average interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of
Percent financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
related external borrowings are to support the Global Financing
Other (income) and expense
external business. Overall interest expense (excluding capital-
Foreign currency transaction
ized interest) in 2015 was $1,009 million, a decrease of $16 million
losses/(gains) $ 414 $ (599) NM
year to year.
(Gains)/losses on derivative
instruments (853) 654 NM
Stock-Based Compensation
Interest income (72) (90) (19.8)%
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $468 million decreased
Net (gains)/losses from securities $44 million compared to 2014. This was due primarily to decreases
and investment assets 47 (26) NM
related to performance share units ($32 million), the conversion
Other (260) (1,878) (86.1)% of stock-based awards previously issued by acquired entities
Total consolidated other ($6 million) and restricted stock units ($6 million). Stock-based
(income) and expense $(724) $(1,938) (62.6)%
compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected
Non-operating adjustment in the following categories: Cost: $100 million, down $21 million;
Acquisition-related charges (5) (1) NM SG&A expense: $322 million, down $28 million; RD&E expense:
Operating (non-GAAP) $51 million, down $3 million and Other (income) and expense:
other (income) and expense $(729) $(1,939) (62.4)% ($6 million), down $8 million. The amount of stock-based com-
pensation cost included in the loss from discontinued operations,
NM—Not meaningful
net of tax, was immaterial in 2015 and 2014.
The decrease in income of $1,214 million year over year was pri-
Retirement-Related Plans
marily driven by:
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retire -
• Lower gains on divestitures ($1,623 million) primarily associ- ment-related plans. These amounts are included in the Consoli-
ated with the divestitures of the System x and customer care dated Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A,
businesses in 2014; and RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan participants.
• Higher foreign currency transaction losses ($1,013 million);
partially offset by ($ in millions)
• Increased gains on derivative instruments ($1,507 million). Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Interest Expense Retirement-related plans—cost
($ in millions) Service cost $ 484 $ 482 0.5%
Yr.-to-Yr. Amortization of prior service
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change costs/(credits) (100) (114) (12.0)
Interest expense Cost of defi ned contribution
plans 1,138 1,253 (9.2)
Total $468 $484 (3.2)%
Total operating costs/(income) $ 1,522 $ 1,621 (6.1)%
Interest cost 3,316 3,994 (17.0)
Expected return on plan assets (5,879) (6,351) (7.4)
Recognized actuarial losses 3,283 2,467 33.1
Curtailments/settlements 36 25 41.2
Multi-employer plan/other costs 293 218 34.8
Total non-operating costs/
(income) $ 1,050 $ 353 197.2%
Total retirement-related
plans—cost $ 2,572 $ 1,974 30.3%

===== PAGE 40 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2015, total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost increased by Earnings Per Share
$598 million compared to 2014, primarily driven by an increase in Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weight-
recognized actuarial losses ($816 million), lower expected return ed-average number of shares of common stock outstanding
on plan assets ($472 million) and higher pension obligations related during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the
to litigation in Spain ($85 million), partially offset by lower inter- basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock
est cost ($678 million) and lower defined contribution plans cost outstanding plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares
($115 million). outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock
on pages 18 and 19, the company characterizes certain retire- options and stock awards.
ment-related costs as operating and others as non-operating.
Utilizing this characterization, operating retirement-related costs
Yr.-to-Yr.
in 2015 were $1,522 million, a decrease of $99 million compared Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
to 2014, primarily driven by lower defined contribution plans cost
($115 million). Non-operating costs of $1,050 million increased Earnings per share of common stock
from continuing operations
$696 million in 2015 compared to the prior year, driven primarily
Assuming dilution $13.60 $15.59 (12.8)%
by an increase in recognized actuarial losses ($816 million), lower
expected return on plan assets ($472 million), higher pension obli- Basic $13.66 $15.68 (12.9)%
gations related to litigation in Spain ($85 million), partially offset by Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $14.92 $16.53 (9.7)%
lower interest cost ($678 million). Weighted-average shares
outstanding (in millions)
Income Taxes
Assuming dilution 982.7 1,010.0 (2.7)%
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2015 was 16.2 per-
Basic 978.7 1,004.3 (2.5)%
cent, a decrease of 5.0 points versus the prior year, driven by the
following factors:
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were
965.7 million and 990.5 million, respectively. The average number
• The benefit resulting from the completion of the U.S. 2011–2012
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 27.3 million
tax audit, including the associated reserve redeterminations
shares lower in 2015 versus 2014. The decrease was primarily the
(3.9 points); and
result of the common stock repurchase program.
• A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax income in
2015 (3.5 points); and
Results of Discontinued Operations
• A benefit due to the 2014 tax charge related to the divestiture
The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $0.2 billion
of the System x business (0.9 points); partially offset by
in 2015 and $3.7 billion in 2014. The loss from discontinued opera-
• A reduced benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign tax
tions in 2014 included a nonrecurring pre-tax charge of $4.7 billion,
credits (2.5 points); and
or $3.4 billion, net of tax, which included an impairment to reflect
• The year-to-year increase in tax charges related to
the fair value less estimated costs to sell the Microelectronics
intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries and
business and other estimated costs related to the transaction,
the intercompany licensing of certain IP (0.8 points).
including cash consideration. The discontinued operations effec-
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate tive tax rate in 2015 was 40.3 percent compared to 30.2 percent
was 17.2 percent, a decrease of 3.8 points versus 2014 principally in 2014.
driven by the same factors described above.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2015, the company continued to have the financial The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing
flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash and business are a significant part of the company’s financial posi-
marketable securities at year end were $8,195 million. During the tion. The financial position amounts appearing on page 78 are the
year, the company continued to manage the investment portfolio consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts
to meet its capital preservation and liquidity objectives. appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on
Total debt of $39,890 million decreased $832 million from prior page 69, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an under-
year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at December 31, standing of the Global Financing business.
2015, was $600 million, a decrease of $50 million from the prior
year end. Within total debt, $27,205 million is in support of the Working Capital
Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.3 to 1 ratio.
($ in millions)
The company continues to have substantial flexibility in the debt
At December 31: 2015 2014
markets. During 2015, the company completed bond issuances
Current assets $42,504 $47,377*
totaling $3,368 million, with terms ranging from 3 to 7 years, and
Current liabilities 34,269 39,581* **
interest rates ranging from 0.53 to 2.88 percent depending on
Working capital $ 8,235 $ 7,797* **
maturity. The company has consistently generated strong cash
flow from operations and continues to have access to additional Current ratio 1.24:1 1.20:1* **
sources of liquidity through the capital markets and its $10 billion * Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in
global credit facility, with 100 percent of the facility available on a consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
additional information.
same day basis.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea- consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
sures the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans additional information.
at December 31. At December 31, 2015, the overall net under-
funded position was $15,513 million, a decrease of $1,419 million Working capital increased $439 million from the year-end 2014
from December 31, 2014 driven by an increase in discount rates. position. The key changes are described below:
At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans were Current assets decreased $4,873 million ($2,074 million
well funded and the cash requirements related to these plans adjusted for currency), as a result of:
remain stable going forward at approximately $500 million per
• A decline of $3,277 million ($1,316 million adjusted for currency)
year through 2020. In 2015, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension
in receivables driven by the receipt of tax refunds; and
Plan assets was negative 1.0 percent and the plan was 101 percent
• A decrease of $762 million ($470 million adjusted for currency)
funded at December 31. Overall, global asset returns were negative
in prepaid expenses and other current assets due to
0.2 percent and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide
decreases in counterparty collateral postings and derivative
were 97 percent funded at December 31, 2015.
assets, partially offset by an increase in prepaid income
During 2015, the company generated $17,008 million in cash
taxes; and
from operations, an increase of $139 million compared to 2014.
• A decline of $553 million ($480 million adjusted for currency) in
In addition, the company generated $13,075 million in free cash
inventories primarily driven by the Microelectronics divestiture.
flow, an increase of $703 million versus the prior year. See pages
62 to 63 for additional information on free cash flow. The company
Current liabilities decreased $5,311 million ($3,418 million adjusted
returned $9,507 million to shareholders in 2015, with $4,897 mil-
for currency), as a result of:
lion in dividends and $4,609 million in gross share repurchases.
In 2015, the company repurchased 30.3 million shares and had • A decrease in taxes of $2,237 million ($1,995 million adjusted
$5.6 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization at year for currency) primarily driven by income tax payments, settle-
end. The company’s cash generation permits the company to ment of the U.S. tax audit and a tax benefit associated with
invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long- the Microelectronics divestiture; and
term opportunities.

===== PAGE 42 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• A decrease in other accrued expenses and liabilities of $1,641 Net cash used in financing activities decreased $6,286 million as
million ($1,281 million adjusted for currency) driven by net compared to the prior year driven by the following factors:
activity associated with the Microelectronics divestiture and
workforce rebalancing payments; and • A decrease of $9,070 million of cash used for gross share
• A decrease in deferred income of $856 million ($226 million repurchases; partially offset by
adjusted for currency); and a decline of $837 million ($568 • A decrease in net cash sourced from debt transactions of
million adjusted for currency) in accounts payable reflecting $1,764 million driven by a lower level of issuances in the current
the wind down of the divested System x business payables year; and
and decreases in counterparty collateral postings; partially • An increase in dividend payments of $632 million.
offset by
• An increase in short-term debt of $731 million ($872 million Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
adjusted for currency). ($ in millions)
At December 31: 2015 2014
Cash Flow Noncurrent assets $67,991 $69,894* **
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and financ-
Long-term debt $33,428 $34,991**
ing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $28,374 $30,686*
Flows on page 79 are summarized in the table below. These
amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global Financ- * Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in
consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
ing business.
additional information.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in
consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
($ in millions)
additional information.
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014
Net cash provided by/(used in) The decrease in noncurrent assets of $1,903 million (an increase
continuing operations
of $1,735 million adjusted for currency) was driven by:
Operating activities $17,008 $ 16,868
Investing activities (8,159) (3,001) • A decrease of $1,853 million ($1,417 million adjusted for
Financing activities (9,166) (15,452) currency) in deferred taxes driven by the utilization of the tax
benefit associated with the Microelectronics divestiture; and
Effect of exchange rate changes on
cash and cash equivalents (473) (655) • A decrease of $1,096 million ($186 million adjusted for cur-
rency) in long-term financing receivables; partially offset by
Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ (790) $ (2,240)
• An increase in goodwill of $1,466 million ($2,561 adjusted for
currency) resulting from acquisitions during the year.
Net cash provided by operating activities increased by $139 million
in 2015 driven by the following key factors: Long-term debt decreased $1,563 million ($862 million adjusted
for currency) driven by:
• A decline in cash income tax payments ($3,092 million); and
• An improvement in sales cycle working capital of $1,192 million; • Reclassification of $5,549 million to short-term debt to reflect
partially offset by upcoming maturities; partially offset by
• Performance-related declines within net income; and • Debt issuances of $4,647 million.
• An increase in performance-related compensation payments
of $470 million. Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, decreased $2,312 million
($387 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
Net cash used in investing activities increased $5,158 million
driven by: • A decrease in retirement and nonpension postretirement
liabilities of $1,757 million driven by a currency impact of
• A decrease in cash provided by divestitures of $2,758 $1,295 million; and
million; and • A decline of $635 million ($207 million adjusted for currency)
• An increase in cash used related to acquisitions of in other liabilities associated with a reclass to short-term
$2,693 million. payables of a portion of the consideration payment associ-
ated with the Microelectronics divestiture.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and equity as management believes this is more representative
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liabil- of the company’s core business operations. This ratio can vary
ity profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility from period to period as the company manages its global cash
to access global funding sources as needed. and debt positions. “Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding
Global Financing debt and equity) was 54.3 percent at Decem-
($ in millions) ber 31, 2015 compared to 59.2 percent at December 31, 2014.
At December 31: 2015 2014 Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2015
Total company debt $39,890 $40,722* was 73.4 percent versus 77.2 percent at December 31, 2014.
Total Global Financing segment debt $27,205 $29,103
Equity
Debt to support external clients 23,934 25,531
Total equity increased by $2,410 million from December 31, 2014
Debt to support internal clients 3,271 3,572
as a result of an increase in retained earnings of $8,332 million and
Non-Global Financing debt 12,684 11,619* common stock of $596 million offset by an increase in treasury
stock of $4,803 million mainly due to gross common stock repur-
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in
consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for chases and an increase in other comprehensive losses of $1,731
additional information.
million primarily due to foreign currency translation adjustments.
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com- GAAP Reconciliation
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income
by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services,
statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earn-
generate long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global
ings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s
Financing asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global
calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may
Services assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global
differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
Financing asset base. The debt analysis above is further detailed
Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on
in the Global Financing section on pages 72 and 73.
pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting oper-
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a
ating earnings information.
debt-to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $40,684 $ 373 $ 469 $41,526
Gross profi t margin 49.8% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.8%
SG&A $20,430 $(324) $ (533) $19,573
RD&E 5,247 — (48) 5,200
Other (income) and expense (724) (5) — (729)
Total expense and other (income) 24,740 (330) (581) 23,830
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 15,945 703 1,050 17,697
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 19.5% 0.9 pts. 1.3 pts. 21.6%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,581 $ 141 $ 316 $ 3,037
Effective tax rate 16.2% 0.2 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.2%
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $ 562 $ 734 $14,659
Income margin from continuing operations 16.3% 0.7 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 13.60 $0.57 $ 0.75 $ 14.92
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 44 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $46,407 $ 416 $ 173 $46,996
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 0.4 pts. 0.2 pts. 50.6%
SG&A $23,180 $(385) $(257) $22,537
RD&E 5,437 — 77 5,514
Other (income) and expense (1,938) (1) — (1,939)
Total expense and other (income) 26,421 (386) (180) 25,855
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 19,986 803 353 21,142
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 21.5% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 22.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,234 $ 133 $ 73 $ 4,440
Effective tax rate 21.2% (0.2) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.0%
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $ 670 $ 280 $16,702
Income margin from continuing operations 17.0% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 18.0%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 15.59 $0.66 $0.28 $ 16.53
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2015 and 2014.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ ($ in millions except per share amounts)
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2015 2014 Change Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Revenue $22,059 $24,113 (8.5)%* For the fourth quarter: 2015 2014 Change
Gross profi t margin 51.7% 53.3% (1.6) pts. Net income as reported $4,463 $5,484 (18.6)%
Total expense and other (income) $ 6,308 $ 5,767 9.4% Income/(loss) from discontinued
operations, net of tax 3 (31) NM
Total expense and other
(income)-to-revenue ratio 28.6% 23.9% 4.7 pts. Income from continuing operations 4,460 5,515 (19.1)
Income from continuing operations Non-operating adjustments
before income taxes $ 5,098 $ 7,094 (28.1)% (net of tax)
Provision for income taxes from Acquisition-related charges 110 186 (41.0)
continuing operations $ 638 $ 1,580 (59.6)%
Non-operating retirement-related
Income from continuing operations $ 4,460 $ 5,515 (19.1)% costs/(income) 137 84 63.8
Income from continuing Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $4,707 $5,785 (18.6)%
operations margin 20.2% 22.9% (2.7) pts.
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
Income/(loss) from discontinued earnings per share $ 4.84 $ 5.81 (16.7)%
operations, net of tax $ 3 $ (31) NM
* See page 48 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
Net income $ 4,463 $ 5,484 (18.6)%
NM—Not meaningful
Earnings per share from continuing
operations:
Assuming dilution $ 4.59 $ 5.54 (17.1)%
Consolidated earnings per share—
assuming dilution $ 4.59 $ 5.51 (16.7)%
Weighted-average shares
outstanding
Assuming dilution 972.8 995.4 (2.3)%
* (2.3) percent adjusted for currency.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 45 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2015, the company reported $22.1 billion From a geographic perspective, revenue in the major markets
in revenue and delivered $4.5 billion in income from continuing declined 6.9 percent and 2 percent adjusted for currency. While
operations with diluted earnings per share from continuing oper- the U.S. was down, revenue in Europe and Japan grew on an
ations of $4.59 as reported and $4.84 on an operating (non-GAAP) adjusted basis. Growth markets revenue decreased 13.6 percent
basis. The results of continuing operations exclude net income and 4 percent adjusted for currency with growth in Latin America
from discontinued operations of $3 million related to the divesti- and the Middle East and Africa region more than offset by declines
ture of the company’s Microelectronics business. The company in Asia Pacific.
generated $5.3 billion in cash from operations and $6.1 billion in The consolidated gross profit margin decreased 1.6 points
free cash flow in the fourth quarter and continued a high level of versus the fourth quarter of 2014 to 51.7 percent. The operating
investment, including $2.5 billion in acquisitions and driving share- (non-GAAP) gross margin of 52.7 percent decreased 1.2 points
holder returns of $2.0 billion in gross common stock repurchases with year-to-year declines across all business segments.
and dividends. Total expense and other (income) increased 9.4 percent in the
Performance in the fourth quarter continued to reflect the fourth quarter of 2015 compared to the prior year. Total operating
transitions in the business as the company addressed both the (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased 9.2 percent
significant shifts in the industry as well as some of the cyclical year to year. The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total
challenges of the global business environment. expense and other (income) were approximately:
In the fourth quarter, total consolidated revenue decreased
Total Operating
8.5 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency, with Consolidated (non-GAAP)
a year-to-year impact of $1.5 billion due to currency. Revenue in the • Currency* (8) points (8) points
strategic imperatives grew 10 percent as reported and 16 percent • Divestiture gains 23 points 24 points
adjusted for currency. • Workforce rebalancing (10) points (10) points
Within the company’s segments, total Global Services reve-
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
nue declined 8.1 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for
currency. Global Technology Services revenue decreased 7.1 per-
The year-to-year increase in expense was driven by prior year
cent as reported but grew 1 percent adjusted for currency as the
items. A gain of $1.4 billion associated with the System x dives-
company continues to help clients transition to a hybrid cloud
titure was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2014 and a charge
services platform bringing more mobility and security to infra-
of $86 million for the impairment of equity securities received as
structure services. Global Business Services revenue decreased
consideration was recorded in the fourth quarter of 2015. These
9.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). GBS has continued
items were partially offset by lower workforce rebalancing charges
to add resources and transition to the strategic areas while shift-
of $0.6 billion and the impact of currency in the fourth quarter of
ing away from some of the more traditional areas of the business.
2015 compared to the prior-year period.
Software revenue decreased 10.7 percent (6 percent adjusted for
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $5,098 million
currency). Software annuity content grew but transactional per-
decreased 28.1 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin was
formance continued to be impacted by the flexibility the company
23.1 percent, a decrease of 6.3 points versus the fourth quarter
has provided in Enterprise License Agreements with clients. Sys-
of 2014. The prior period gain from the System x divestiture rep-
tems Hardware revenue decreased 1.4 percent but grew 3 percent
resented effectively all of the year-to-year decline in the pre-tax
adjusted for currency driven by z Systems and Power Systems.
margin, but the margin performance also reflected higher levels
of investment, mix of contracts and resource shifts in the ser-
vices business. The continuing operations effective tax rate for

===== PAGE 46 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
the fourth quarter was 12.5 percent, down 9.7 points year to year. Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of
While the underlying effective tax rate was approximately 20 per- $4.59 decreased 17.1 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP)
cent, the fourth quarter 2015 rate reflected the benefit from the diluted earnings per share of $4.84 decreased $0.97 or 16.7 per-
recent U.S. tax legislation and settlement of the company’s U.S. cent versus the fourth quarter of 2014. There was no impact to
tax audit. Income from continuing operations of $4,460 million diluted earnings per share from discontinued operations in the
decreased 19.1 percent year to year. Net income of $4,463 million fourth quarter of 2015. In the fourth quarter of 2015, the company
decreased $1,021 million year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre- repurchased 6.0 million shares of its common stock.
tax income from continuing operations of $5,516 million decreased
25.4 percent with a year-to-year impact from currency of approx- Results of Continuing Operations
imately $300 million. The operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin Segment Details
was 25.0 percent, a decrease of 5.7 points year to year. Operat- The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2015 versus
ing (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations decreased the fourth quarter of 2014 reportable segment external revenue
18.6 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin of and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes
21.3 percent decreased 2.7 points compared to the prior year. The transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect
operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations an arms-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated
was 14.7 percent versus 21.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014 corporate items.
reflecting the same current year factors described above.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2015 2014* Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $ 8,126 $ 8,746 (7.1)% 0.9%
Gross margin 37.7% 39.1% (1.5) pts.
Global Business Services 4,297 4,771 (9.9)% (4.2)%
Gross margin 28.2% 31.5% (3.3) pts.
Software 6,767 7,578 (10.7)% (5.8)%
Gross margin 88.0% 90.0% (2.0) pts.
Systems Hardware 2,372 2,406 (1.4)% 2.7%
Gross margin 48.0% 49.6% (1.6) pts.
Global Financing 454 532 (14.6)% (5.8)%
Gross margin 39.9% 48.7% (8.8) pts.
Other 43 82 (47.1)% (42.2)%
Gross margin (312.7)% (401.7)% (89.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $22,059 $24,113 (8.5)% (2.3)%
Total consolidated gross profi t $11,407 $12,862 (11.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 51.7% 53.3% (1.6) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 105 101 3.2%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 119 33 262.8%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $11,630 $12,996 (10.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 52.7% 53.9% (1.2 ) pts.
* Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.

===== PAGE 47 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
In the fourth quarter of 2015, the Global Services segments, Global Business Services revenue of $4,297 million decreased
GTS and GBS, delivered combined revenue of $12,422 million, a 9.9 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency in the
decrease of 8.1 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for cur- fourth quarter of 2015 compared to the prior year. GBS outsourc-
rency. Combined pre-tax income in the fourth quarter decreased ing revenue of $1,223 million decreased 9.7 percent as reported
0.1 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin increased 1.3 points and 4 percent adjusted for currency. C&SI revenue of $3,074 mil-
to 17.2 percent. lion declined 10.0 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for
Global Technology Services revenue of $8,126 million de- currency.
creased 7.1 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted Revenue continued to be impacted by the company’s shift
for currency. This was the third consecutive quarter of revenue away from traditional enterprise application implementations as
growth, adjusted for currency and divestitures. Outsourcing rev- clients move from these engagements to initiatives that focus on
enue of $4,262 million decreased 9.1 percent as reported and digitizing their business with analytics, cloud and mobile tech-
1 percent adjusted for currency. ITS revenue of $2,360 million nologies. Revenue from the strategic imperatives within the GBS
decreased 2.6 percent as reported but grew 5 percent adjusted segment increased double digits adjusted for currency in the
for currency. Maintenance revenue of $1,505 million decreased fourth quarter compared to the prior year.
8.0 percent as reported but was flat adjusted for currency. The GBS gross profit margin decreased 3.3 points to 28.2 per-
Within GTS, strategic imperatives including hybrid cloud ser- cent in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Pre-tax
vices grew strong double digits in the fourth quarter adjusted for income decreased 8.6 percent to $708 million and pre-tax margin
currency. This included strong demand for SoftLayer which again was up 0.2 points to 16.0 percent. Current year benefit from lower
grew double digits on an adjusted basis. The company continues workforce rebalancing charges was offset by the impact of price
to expand its cloud capabilities through acquisitions including pressure in declining areas of the business and continued invest-
Gravitant, Inc. and Clearleap, Inc. announced in the fourth quarter ment in analytics, cloud and mobility practices. In addition, the
of 2015. company is investing to scale a new cognitive consulting practice
The GTS gross profit margin decreased 1.5 points to 37.7 per- that is focused on helping clients unlock the transformative value
cent in the fourth quarter of 2015 compared to prior year. This of cognitive business.
decline was driven by investments in cloud data centers and the Within Global Services, the company has continued momen-
acceleration of new contracts, which generally have lower up-front tum in services offerings that modernize clients’ IT systems and
margins. In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income increased 4.5 per- move their operations into the cloud-based mobile world.
cent to $1,486 million and pre-tax margin was up 1.9 points to
17.8 percent. The margin increase was driven by lower workforce Software
rebalancing charges and savings from actions taken throughout In the fourth quarter of 2015, Software revenue of $6,767 million
the year to drive efficiency in the delivery model. These savings decreased 10.7 percent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for
were offset by higher investment as the company continues to currency compared to the prior year period. Annuity content grew
invest to contemporize clients IT systems, transforming them year to year, but transactional content declined. Key branded mid-
into digital enterprises. The company is scaling its cloud foot- dleware revenue of $4,858 million, which accounted for 72 percent
print with 46 cloud centers opened around the world. Currency of total software revenue in the fourth quarter, decreased 10.4 per-
also continued to impact margin in the fourth quarter and was cent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for currency with declines
the largest impact on year-to-year profit growth given the strong across all brands. Within key branded middleware, WebSphere
dollar environment. decreased 9.2 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), Infor-
mation Management decreased 10.2 percent (5 percent adjusted
for currency), Tivoli decreased 5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for
currency), Workforce Solutions decreased 9.9 percent (4 percent

===== PAGE 48 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
adjusted for currency) and Rational decreased 31.6 percent The Systems Hardware gross profit margin of 48.0 percent
(28 percent adjusted for currency). Other middleware decreased decreased 1.6 points in the fourth quarter of 2015 compared to
14.0 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for currency. the prior year. The decrease was due to margin (4.3 points) driven
Operating systems decreased 12.2 percent as reported and by z Systems, partially offset by a more favorable product mix.
7 percent adjusted for currency. Systems Hardware pre-tax income of $349 million in the fourth
While the transactional performance in the quarter was quarter decreased 10.1 percent year to year with a pre-tax margin
consistent with the third quarter of the year; the fourth quarter of 13.9 percent, down 1.5 points year to year.
has a higher transactional mix. This had a larger impact on total
software performance resulting in a deceleration in the software Global Financing
performance in the fourth quarter. Many large clients with multi- Global Financing Revenue of $454 million was down 14.6 per-
year contracts continue to utilize the flexibility on deployment of cent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for currency due to
their software as they build out their environments with the com- decreases in financing revenue and used equipment sales reve-
pany’s broad portfolio. Outside the company’s top 250 clients, nue. The Global Financing fourth quarter pre-tax income increased
software revenue increased low single digits adjusted for currency 28.3 percent to $674 million and the pre-tax margin increased
in the quarter. 8.5 points to 55.4 percent. The increase in pre-tax income was
The Software gross profit margin decreased 2.0 points to driven by an increase in gross profit ($97 million) and decreases in
88.0 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015 compared to the prior financing receivable provisions ($41 million) and SG&A expenses
year. Software pre-tax income of $2,959 million in the fourth quar- ($11 million).
ter decreased 21.4 percent, with a pre-tax margin of 39.4 percent,
a decrease of 5.3 points. Profit performance in Software con- Geographic Revenue
tinues to reflect the overall revenue trajectory, a higher level of Total geographic revenue of $21,988 million decreased 8.3 per-
investments in areas like Watson, Watson Health, Watson IoT and cent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency in the fourth
Bluemix, and an impact from currency translation. quarter of 2015 compared to the prior year. Major market countries
decreased 6.9 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for
Systems Hardware currency. Adjusted for currency, Europe returned to growth, led by
In the fourth quarter of 2015, Systems Hardware revenue of $2,372 continued growth in Germany, France and the UK. In Asia Pacific,
million decreased 1.4 percent as reported but grew 3 percent Japan continued to grow year to year, adjusted for currency. U.S.
adjusted for currency compared to the prior year period. This revenue was down in the fourth quarter compared to the prior
was the fourth consecutive quarter of growth in both z Systems year. Overall, growth market countries decreased 13.6 percent as
and Power Systems, adjusted for currency. z Systems revenue reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency, relatively consistent
increased 15.6 percent as reported and 21 percent adjusted for with the previous two quarters. From a regional perspective, on an
currency. MIPS shipments increased 28 percent year to year. Since adjusted basis, growth in Latin America and the Middle East and
the launch of z13 in the first quarter of 2015, there has been strong Africa region was more than offset by declines in the Asia Pacific
double-digit revenue growth on an adjusted basis in every quar- growth market countries.
ter of the year. Power Systems revenue increased 3.8 percent as Americas revenue of $10,251 million decreased 7.6 percent as
reported and 8 percent adjusted for currency in the fourth quar- reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency compared to the
ter compared to the prior year. This was the strongest quarterly fourth quarter of 2014 with a decline in North America and growth
performance during 2015. In Power, the company continues to in Latin America on an adjusted basis. The U.S. decreased 5.5 per-
serve a high-value market while adding capabilities and finding cent year to year. Although there was strong growth in the U.S. in
new economic models to grow over time. However, in the fourth Systems Hardware, it was offset by weak services and transac-
quarter the strong growth in servers was mitigated by a year-to- tional software performance. Canada was down 14.6 percent as
year decline in Storage. Storage revenue decreased 11.2 percent reported and was flat adjusted for currency. In Latin America, on
as reported and 7 percent adjusted for currency and continued to an adjusted basis, there was growth across a number of the larger
be impacted by weakness in traditional disk and tape. countries including Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, and Colombia.

===== PAGE 49 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
EMEA fourth quarter revenue of $7,320 million decreased Total expense and other (income) increased 9.4 percent in the
8.5 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted for cur- fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 28.6 percent
rency on a year-to-year basis. Germany decreased 0.3 percent compared to 23.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2014. Total
as reported, but had growth of 13 percent adjusted for currency. operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased
The UK decreased 1.4 percent year to year as reported, but grew 9.2 percent in the fourth quarter. The increase in total operating
3 percent adjusted for currency. France declined 10.6 percent as expense and other (income) was primarily driven by divestiture
reported, but grew 2 percent adjusted for currency. The Middle gains in the prior-year period (24 points), partially offset by lower
East and Africa region grew 2.6 percent as reported and 8 percent workforce rebalancing charges in the current year (10 points) and
adjusted for currency. However, there was a decline in the central the impact of currency in the fourth quarter of 2015 compared
and eastern European region. with the prior year (8 points). There were several large items that
Asia Pacific fourth quarter revenue of $4,417 million decreased impacted the growth rate this quarter. In the fourth quarter of
9.8 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency com- 2014, other (income) and expense included the pre-tax gain from
pared to the prior year. Japan decreased 2.6 percent as reported, the System x divestiture of $1.4 billion; while selling, general and
but had growth of 3 percent adjusted for currency, led by services. administrative expense included a workforce rebalancing charge
On an adjusted basis, this was the 13th consecutive quarter of of $577 million with essentially none in the current year period.
revenue growth in Japan. Australia decreased 5.2 percent year The fourth quarter of 2015 included a charge of $86 million for the
to year, but returned to strong growth of 11 percent in the fourth impairment of the equity securities received as consideration in the
quarter adjusted for currency. India also had strong growth com- System x divestiture. Outside these larger items, the fourth-quarter
pared to the prior year. However, this growth was more than offset expense dynamics were consistent with the rest of the year as the
by declines in China and other countries in the region. company accelerates shifts within the operational expense base
driving productivity and efficiency in some areas, while increasing
Total Expense and Other (Income) investment in support of the strategic imperatives.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Results of Discontinued Operations
Percent/ Income from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $3 million
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2015 2014 Change in the fourth quarter of 2015 compared with a loss of $31 million
Total consolidated expense in 2014.
and other (income) $6,308 $5,767 9.4%
Non-operating adjustments Cash Flow
The company generated $5,278 million in cash flow provided by
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (80) (93) (13.7) operating activities, a decrease of $781 million compared to the
fourth quarter of 2014 driven by operational performance within
Acquisition-related charges (15) (2) 646.7
net income, partially offset by declines in income tax payments.
Non-operating retirement-related
(costs)/income (100) (74) 33.8 Net cash used in investing activities of $5,445 million increased
$4,209 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to acqui-
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other (income) $6,114 $5,598 9.2% sitions in the fourth quarter of the current year and cash received
for the System x divestiture in the prior year period. Net cash used
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue ratio 28.6% 23.9% 4.7 pts. in financing activities of $1,348 million decreased $4,351 million
compared to the prior year, primarily due to a decline in net cash
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 27.7% 23.2% 4.5 pts. payments to settle debt, partially offset by an increase in cash used
for gross common stock repurchases.

===== PAGE 50 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earn- Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on
ings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting oper-
calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may ating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $11,407 $ 105 $ 119 $11,630
Gross profi t margin 51.7% 0.5 pts. 0.5 pts. 52.7%
SG&A $ 5,157 $ (95) $ (88) $ 4,975
RD&E 1,362 — (12) 1,350
Other (income) and expense (146) 0 — (146)
Total expense and other (income) 6,308 (95) (100) 6,114
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 5,098 $ 199 $ 218 $ 5,516
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 23.1% 0.9 pts. 1.0 pts. 25.0%
Provision for income taxes* $ 638 $ 89 $ 82 $ 809
Effective tax rate 12.5% 1.2 pts. 1.0 pts. 14.7%
Income from continuing operations $ 4,460 $ 110 $ 137 $ 4,707
Income margin from continuing operations 20.2% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 21.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 4.59 $0.11 $0.14 $ 4.84
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $12,862 $ 101 $ 33 $12,996
Gross profi t margin 53.3% 0.4 pts. 0.1 pts. 53.9%
SG&A $ 6,034 $ (94) $ (95) $ 5,845
RD&E 1,320 — 21 1,341
Other (income) and expense (1,506) (1) — (1,506)
Total expense and other (income) 5,767 (95) (74) 5,598
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 7,094 196 107 7,398
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 29.4% 0.8 pts. 0.4 pts. 30.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 1,580 $ 10 $ 24 $ 1,613
Effective tax rate 22.3% (0.5) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.8%
Income from continuing operations $ 5,515 $ 186 $ 84 $ 5,785
Income margin from continuing operations 22.9% 0.8 pts. 0.3 pts. 24.0%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 5.54 $0.19 $0.08 $ 5.81
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 51 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP)
company’s financial performance in 2014 as compared to 2013. earnings for 2014 and 2013.
For additional information, see the company’s 2014 Annual Report.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts) Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
Percent/
Margin Net income as reported $12,022 $16,483 (27.1)%
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
Loss from discontinued operations,
Revenue $ 92,793 $ 98,367 (5.7)%*
net of tax (3,729) (398) NM
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 49.5% 0.5 pts.
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $16,881 (6.7)%
Total expense and other (income) $ 26,421 $ 28,440 (7.1)%
Non-operating adjustments
Total expense and other (net of tax)
(income)-to-revenue ratio 28.5% 28.9% (0.4) pts.
Acquisition-related charges 670 747 (10.3)
Income before income taxes from
Non-operating retirement-related
continuing operations $ 19,986 $ 20,244 (1.3)%
costs/(income) 280 729 (61.5)
Provision for income taxes from
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $16,702 $18,356 (9.0)%
continuing operations 4,234 3,363 25.9%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
Income from continuing
earnings per share $ 16.53 $ 16.64 (0.7)%
operations $ 15,751 $ 16,881 (6.7)%
Income from continuing * See page 59 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-
GAAP) earnings.
operations margin 17.0% 17.2% (0.2) pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Loss from discontinued
operations, net of tax $ (3,729) $ (398) NM
Snapshot
Net income $ 12,022 $ 16,483 (27.1)%
In 2014, the company reported $92.8 billion in revenue, and deliv-
Earnings per share from
ered $20.0 billion in pre-tax income and diluted earnings per share
continuing operations:
from continuing operations of $15.59 as reported and $16.53 on an
Assuming dilution $ 15.59 $ 15.30 1.9%
operating (non-GAAP) basis. The results of continuing operations
Consolidated earnings per share—
excluded net losses from discontinued operations of $3.7 billion
assuming dilution $ 11.90 $ 14.94 (20.3)%
in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013 related to the divestiture of the
Weighted-average shares
Microelectronics business. On a consolidated basis, net income
outstanding:
in 2014 was $12.0 billion, with diluted earnings per share of $11.90.
Assuming dilution 1,010.0 1,103.0 (8.4)%
The company generated $16.9 billion in cash from operations and
Assets** $117,271+ $125,641+ (6.7)% $12.4 billion in free cash flow in 2014, driving shareholder returns of
Liabilities** $105,257+ $102,711+ 2.5% $17.9 billion in gross common stock repurchases and dividends.
Equity** $ 12,014 $ 22,929 (47.6)% Total consolidated revenue decreased 5.7 percent as reported
and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency
* (4.0) percent adjusted for currency; (1.5) percent adjusted for divestitures and
currency. (2 points) in 2014 versus 2013. In 2014, the company divested its
** At December 31. System x and customer care businesses. The company made
+ Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes and debt progress in 2014 in repositioning its portfolio and making invest-
issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting
Changes,” for additional information. ments to shift into the areas with the most value in enterprise
NM—Not meaningful information technology.

===== PAGE 52 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company has a set of strategic imperatives for growth that The company’s high-value transactional businesses include
are focused on the market shifts in data, cloud and engagement. project-based work in services, transactional software, Power
The model for these combined strategic imperatives is to deliver Systems and Storage—in areas other than the strategic imper-
double-digit revenue growth. In 2014, revenue from cloud, ana- atives. The objective for these businesses is to optimize the
lytics, mobile, social and security solutions combined, increased business model and maintain margins. In 2014, revenue declined
16 percent with double-digit growth in each quarter. In total, the year to year, with gross margins over 40 percent. Performance
strategic imperatives generated $25 billion in revenue, which reflected the secular challenges faced in some parts of the hard-
represented approximately 27 percent of total revenue. Business ware business.
analytics revenue of $17 billion increased 7 percent year to year In 2014, the company divested businesses that no longer fit
with growth led by the consulting business, as the company helped its strategic profile—System x and the customer care business
clients extract value from their data. Cloud revenue of $7 billion process outsourcing services and it announced the divestiture of
was up 60 percent year to year as client demand grew for high- the Microelectronics business. These three businesses generated
er-value cloud solutions across public, private and hybrid clouds. approximately $7 billion of revenue when reported in 2013, but
Cloud delivered as-a-Service revenue increased approximately had a pre-tax loss of approximately $500 million. The divestitures
75 percent to $3 billion in 2014, and exited the year with an annual reduce revenue but improve the company’s profit profile, consis-
run rate of $3.5 billion. Cloud revenue also includes the compa- tent with the shift to higher value.
ny’s foundational offerings where it provides software, hardware From a segment perspective, Global Services revenue declined
and services to clients to build private clouds. In engagement, the 3.5 percent as reported, but increased 1 percent adjusted for the
mobile business more than tripled year to year with strong growth divestitures (2 points) and currency (2 points). Global Technology
in MobileFirst driven by the integrated portfolio of offerings. Secu- Services declined 0.8 percent as reported, but increased 2 per-
rity revenue increased 19 percent year to year. cent adjusted for currency (2 points) and divestitures with growth
The company continued to shift its investments and resources in outsourcing and ITS on an adjusted basis. Global Business
to the strategic imperatives and solutions that address clients’ Services revenue decreased 8.0 percent and 1 percent adjusted
most critical needs. During 2014, the company spent approxi- for divestitures (5 points) and currency (2 points). Software reve-
mately 6 percent of revenue in research and development and nue declined 1.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). Total
invested approximately $4 billion on capital investments—support- middleware revenue was flat as reported, but increased 1 percent
ing actions in a number of areas that will yield financial benefits in at constant currency. Systems Hardware revenue decreased
the future. For example: 23.0 percent as reported and 17 percent adjusted for the divested
System x business (5 points) and currency (1 point). Performance
• Launched Bluemix, the company’s cloud Platform-as-a- reflected the impact of the z Systems product cycle as well as
Service for the enterprise. declines in Power Systems and Storage. In 2014, the company took
• Invested to globally expand the SoftLayer cloud datacenters. significant actions to reposition the Systems Hardware business
• Invested to bring Watson’s capabilities to the enterprise and for higher value, and reinforced its commitment to driving innova-
to build a partner ecosystem, effectively creating a market for tion in high-end systems and storage.
cognitive computing. Revenue from the major markets declined 4.3 percent as
• Introduced cloud application innovations around Watson reported and 1 percent adjusted for the divestitures (2 points) and
Analytics and Verse. currency (1 point). Growth markets revenue decreased 9.9 percent
• Launched POWER8, and building the OpenPOWER as reported and 3 percent adjusted for the divestitures (3 points)
consortium. and currency (4 points) compared to 2013.
• Formed a partnership with Apple for enterprise mobility, with The consolidated gross profit margin of 50.0 percent improved
Twitter for big data, and with SAP and Tencent for cloud. 0.5 points year to year. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
of 50.6 percent increased 0.1 points compared to 2013 primarily
The recurring core franchises include the annuity businesses, and
driven by an improved mix toward Software.
the highly recurring portions of the transactions business, such as
mainframe revenue from the largest clients. This content has annu-
ity characteristics, and in many cases, it supports mission-critical
processes for clients. The model for these combined businesses
is to have stable revenue, with improving margins. In 2014, reve-
nue was down approximately 3 percent with a modest decline in
margin. The decline was primarily driven by the mainframe product
cycle and currency.

===== PAGE 53 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) decreased 7.1 percent in Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of
2014 versus 2013. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other $15.59 increased 1.9 percent year to year reflecting the benefits
(income) decreased 6.3 percent year to year. The year-to-year of the common stock repurchase program. In 2014, the company
drivers were approximately: repurchased 71.5 million shares of its common stock. Operat-
Total Operating ing (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $16.53 decreased
Consolidated (non-GAAP)
• Currency* (1) point (1) point 0.7 percent versus 2013 driven primarily by the impacts of
• Acquisitions** 2 points 2 points decreased revenue and the higher tax rate, partially offset by the
• Base expense (8) points (7) points impact of share repurchases. Diluted earnings per share from
discontinued operations was ($3.69) in 2014 compared to ($0.36)
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. in 2013.
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating (non-GAAP) is
At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the
net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash
and marketable securities at year end was $8.5 billion, a decrease
The reported base expense reflected not only the ongoing run
of $2.6 billion from December 31, 2013. Key drivers in the balance
rate of the business, but also the impact of divestitures and work-
sheet and total cash flows are highlighted below:
force rebalancing charges. The company recorded pre-tax gains
Total assets decreased $8.4 billion ($2.3 billion adjusted for
of $1.6 billion in 2014 related to the divestitures of the System x
currency) from December 31, 2013 driven by:
($1.4 billion) and customer care ($0.2 billion) businesses. Work-
force rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1.5 billion, an increase
• Decreases in prepaid pension assets ($3.4 billion), property,
of $0.4 billion year to year. Excluding the gains from the divested
plant and equipment ($3.1 billion) driven primarily by the
businesses and the impact of workforce rebalancing charges,
expected divestiture of the Microelectronics business ($2.4
operating (non-GAAP) base expense decreased 3 points year
billion), cash and cash equivalents ($2.2 billion) and total
to year versus the 7 point as-reported decrease. Within base
receivables ($1.7 billion); partially offset by
expense, the company continued to shift resources and spending
• Increased deferred taxes ($2.5 billion).
to areas within the strategic imperatives.
Pre-tax income from continuing operations decreased 1.3 per-
Total liabilities increased $2.5 billion ($7.3 billion adjusted for cur-
cent and the pre-tax margin was 21.5 percent, an increase of
rency) from December 31, 2013 driven by:
1.0 points versus 2013. The continuing operations effective tax
rate for 2014 was 21.2 percent, an increase of 4.6 points versus • Increases in pension liabilities ($2.0 billion) and total debt
the prior year primarily driven by benefits in the 2013 rate asso- ($1.1 billion).
ciated with discrete items. Income from continuing operations of
$15.8 billion decreased 6.7 percent and the net income margin Total equity of $12.0 billion decreased $10.9 billion from Decem-
was 17.0 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2013. Losses ber 31, 2013 as a result of:
from discontinued operations, net of tax, were $3.7 billion in
2014 compared to $0.4 billion 2013. Net income of $12.0 billion • Increased treasury stock ($13.5 billion) primarily from share
repurchases, and increased losses in accumulated other
decreased $4.5 billion year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-
comprehensive income/(loss) ($6.3 billion), driven primarily
tax income from continuing operations decreased 4.4 percent
by the year-end remeasurement of the retirement-related
year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from
liabilities; partially offset by
continuing operations improved 0.3 points to 22.8 percent versus
2013. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of • Higher retained earnings ($7.8 billion) and higher common
stock ($1.1 billion).
$16.7 billion decreased 9.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP)
income margin from continuing operations of 18.0 percent
The company generated $16.9 billion in cash flow provided by
decreased 0.7 points. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
operating activities, a decrease of $0.6 billion when compared
rate from continuing operations in 2014 was 21.0 percent versus
to 2013, driven primarily by a higher level of cash tax payments
17.0 percent in 2013.
($1.7 billion). Net cash used in investing activities of $3.0 billion was
$4.3 billion lower than 2013, primarily due to a decrease in cash
used for acquisitions ($2.4 billion) and an increase in cash provided
from divestitures ($2.1 billion). Net cash used in financing activities
of $15.5 billion increased $5.6 billion compared to 2013, driven
primarily by lower net cash proceeds from total debt ($5.2 billion).

===== PAGE 54 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2014 versus 2013 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect
an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014** 2013** Change Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services $35,442 $35,737 (0.8)% 1.7%*
Gross margin 39.0% 39.1% (0.1) pts.
Global Business Services 19,512 21,210 (8.0)% (1.1)%*
Gross margin 30.4% 30.2% 0.1 pts.
Software 25,434 25,932 (1.9)% (0.9)%
Gross margin 88.6% 88.8% (0.2 ) pts.
Systems Hardware 9,996 12,988 (23.0)% (16.8)%*
Gross margin 39.5% 40.8% (1.3) pts.
Global Financing 2,034 2,022 0.6% 3.0%
Gross margin 49.4% 45.6% 3.7 pts.
Other 374 478 (21.7)% (20.4)%
Gross margin (215.0)% (195.6)% (19.4) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $92,793 $98,367 (5.7)% (1.5)%*
Total consolidated gross profi t $46,407 $48,684 (4.7)%
Total consolidated gross margin 50.0% 49.5% 0.5 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 416 388 7.2%
Acquisition-related charges — 5 (100.0)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 173 629 (72.4)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $46,996 $49,706 (5.5)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.6% 50.5% 0.1 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
Global Services
In 2014, the Global Services segments delivered revenue of decreased 0.8 points to 16.5 percent. Total outsourcing revenue
$54,954 million, a decrease of 3.5 percent as reported, but an of $24,520 million decreased 6.3 percent as reported, but was flat
increase of 1 percent adjusted for the divestitures of the customer year to year when adjusted for divestitures (4 points) and currency
care and System x businesses (2 points) and currency (2 points). (2 points). Total transactional revenue of $23,581 million decreased
Pre-tax income decreased 8.4 percent and the pre-tax margin 0.4 percent, but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency.

===== PAGE 55 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014** 2013** Change Currency
Global Services external revenue $54,954 $56,947 (3.5)% 0.7%*
Global Technology Services $35,442 $35,737 (0.8)% 1.7%*
Outsourcing 19,082 19,245 (0.8) 1.5
Integrated Technology Services 9,506 9,380 1.3 3.7
Maintenance 6,853 7,111 (3.6) (0.1)*
Global Business Services $19,512 $21,210 (8.0)% (1.1)%*
Outsourcing 5,438 6,912 (21.3) (4.7)*
Consulting and Systems Integration 14,075 14,298 (1.6) 0.4
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
Global Technology Services revenue of $35,442 million decreased ($ in millions)
0.8 percent as reported in 2014 compared to 2013, but increased Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
2 percent adjusted for currency (2 points) and divestitures. Within Margin
ITS revenue, the SoftLayer platform, which provides highly dif- For the year ended December 31: 2014* 2013* Change
ferentiated solutions for clients looking to deploy across public, Global Services
private or hybrid clouds all unified on one platform, had strong Global Technology Services
performance. GTS Outsourcing revenue decreased 0.8 percent External gross profi t $13,808 $13,958 (1.1)%
as reported in 2014, but increased 1 percent adjusted for currency.
External gross profi t margin 39.0% 39.1% (0.1) pts.
Growth was driven by performance from the substantial new con-
Pre-tax income $ 5,931 $ 6,649 (10.8)%
tracts brought on during 2013. In 2014, clients continued to sign
Pre-tax margin 16.3% 18.1% (1.8 ) pts.
large outsourcing engagements that leverage the company’s
cloud, business analytics and mobile solutions. Global Business Services
Global Business Services revenue of $19,512 million decreased External gross profi t $ 5,923 $ 6,409 (7.6)%
8.0 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures External gross profi t margin 30.4% 30.2% 0.1 pts.
(5 points) and currency (2 points) compared to 2013. Within Con-
Pre-tax income $ 3,408 $ 3,548 (3.9)%
sulting and Systems Integration revenue, there was strong growth
Pre-tax margin 17.0% 16.2% 0.8 pts.
in the practices that are highly differentiated in the marketplace
which address cloud, analytics, mobile and social, offset by * Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
declines in the more traditional parts of the portfolio, such as back
office implementations. As the new offerings continue to become Overall, the profit performance in GTS reflects the actions that
a larger part of the portfolio they will contribute more meaningfully the company has taken to transform the business. The company
to the revenue performance. In July 2014, the company announced has invested in its strategic imperatives to accelerate growth,
a strategic partnership with Apple to deliver a new class of “enter- continued to optimize its delivery platform through workforce
prise ready” MobileFirst business applications for iOS combining rebalancing and broader use of automation, and divested busi-
mobility and analytics. In the fourth quarter of 2014, the first appli- nesses, all impacting the year-to-year results. While these actions
cations were launched. all have near-term impacts to profit, they position the GTS business
more effectively going forward and will enable it to deliver more
value to clients.
In 2014, GBS profit was impacted by lower revenue on a rela-
tively fixed cost base partially offset by a benefit from the pre-tax
gain of $202 million related to the customer care divestiture. In
areas where the company has strong differentiation, such as
solutions that address the strategic imperatives, there was good
growth and gross margin performance. However, in the more
traditional parts of the portfolio, there was continued price and
profit pressure. The company will continue to invest in the strategic
imperatives and accelerate the transition to global delivery.

===== PAGE 56 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Software external revenue $25,434 $25,932 (1.9)% (0.9)%
Middleware $21,474 $21,557 (0.4)% 0.6%
Key branded middleware 17,098 17,322 (1.3) (0.2)
WebSphere 2.7 3.5
Information Management (4.1) (3.0)
Workforce Solutions (6.1) (5.1)
Tivoli 2.0 3.0
Rational (3.3) (1.3)
Other middleware 4,376 4,235 3.3 4.2
Operating systems 2,119 2,447 (13.4) (12.6)
Other 1,841 1,929 (4.5) (3.7)
Software revenue of $25,434 million decreased 1.9 percent (1 per- mobile devices, contributed to the significant growth of the com-
cent adjusted for currency) in 2014 compared to 2013. Middleware pany’s mobile business.
decreased 0.4 percent (increased 1 percent adjusted for currency) Within Information Management, with the acquisition of Clou-
while operating systems were down 13.4 percent (13 percent dant, the company has added Database-as-a-Service capability.
adjusted for currency). The decline in operating systems impacted Cloudant extends the company’s mobile and cloud platforms by
total software revenue growth year to year at constant currency by enabling developers to easily and quickly create next-generation
approximately 1 point. The company had solid growth in many of mobile and Web-based applications.
its solution areas, including security, mobile and cloud. In addition, Workforce Solutions revenue performance was impacted by
across the software brands, SaaS offerings grew rapidly through- the transition from on premise Notes to SaaS offerings. The com-
out the year, increasing approximately 50 percent compared to pany is working to transform this business and build recurring
2013. In the first quarter of 2014, the company launched Bluemix, revenue streams from the SaaS offerings.
a cloud Platform-as-a Service for the enterprise and, during the Year-to-year revenue growth in Tivoli was driven by security
year, the Software business completed five acquisitions adding to software which grew at double digit rates. As cybersecurity threats
its capabilities in mobile, cloud and security. Across Software, the are a key issue faced by all customers, these strong results were
company is transitioning its portfolio to capture growth areas while driven in part by incremental requirements for security with the
continuing to drive innovation in its core franchises. It is growing expansion into cloud and mobile computing.
and building capabilities in emerging areas like SaaS, mobile and Operating systems revenue decline was primarily driven by
security. Performance in 2014 reflected business model changes declines in Power Systems.
that impacted the transactional revenue growth. Given clients’
substantial investment in the IBM software platform, the com- ($ in millions)
pany has been providing more flexibility on how clients deploy Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
its software acquired through enterprise licensing agreements.
Margin
This enables clients to more effectively manage their capacity and For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
commit to the company’s platforms for the long term, however, it Software
does impact period transactional revenue. External gross profi t $22,533 $23,032 (2.2)%
Key branded middleware revenue accounted for 67 percent of
External gross profi t margin 88.6% 88.8% (0.2 ) pts.
total Software revenue in 2014. While there was growth in several
Pre-tax income $10,699 $11,106 (3.7)%
strategic areas like cloud, mobile and security, other parts of the
Pre-tax margin 37.0% 38.1% (1.2 ) pts.
portfolio declined on a year-to-year basis.
WebSphere revenue performance was driven by growth in
Application Server, Business Integration and Commerce offerings. Across software, the company continued to drive innovation and
In Commerce, there was strong momentum in Commerce-as-a- capture growth areas, integrating analytics and security capabili-
Service, which included the acquisitions of Silverpop and Aspera. ties that are needed to operate seamlessly in a hybrid environment.
MobileFirst, the comprehensive portfolio of mobile software and For example, the company introduced several new offerings that
services that enable clients to manage, integrate and leverage

===== PAGE 57 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
further enable its analytics portfolio in a cloud environment and innovation in offerings, together with expanding services on the
announced IBM Verse, a cloud-based email and collaboration Bluemix Platform-as-a-Service, will better allow customers to
offering that integrates Watson capabilities. This type of continued move to a hybrid environment.
Systems Hardware
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency
Systems Hardware external revenue $9,996 $12,988 (23.0)% (16.8)%*
z Systems (23.3)% (22.6)%
Power Systems (18.9) (18.2)
Storage (12.0) (11.0)
System x (35.1) (34.9)
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Systems Hardware revenue of $9,996 million decreased 23.0 a strategic partnership with Suzhou PowerCore, which intends to
percent as reported in 2014, 17 percent adjusted for the divesti- use POWER architecture to develop and market processors for
ture of the System x business (5 points) and currency (1 point). In servers in China.
2013, the Systems Hardware business reported a profit decline Storage revenue decreased year to year in 2014. However,
of $1,653 million compared to 2012. During 2014, the company at constant currency, it delivered sequential improvement in the
worked to reposition this business and to stabilize profit. It divested year-to-year growth rate over the last three quarters of 2014. Full-
the System x business and announced the divestiture of the year performance included strong contribution from FlashSystem
Microelectronics business. Performance in 2014 reflected year- and the Storwize portfolio. However, this was more than offset by
to-year declines related to the z Systems product cycle as well weakness in high-end disk and the continued wind down of the
as declines in Power Systems and Storage. Systems Hardware legacy storage-related OEM business.
grew profit in the fourth quarter, and was profitable for the year.
Profit performance year to year was impacted by the divestiture ($ in millions)
and currency, in addition to the revenue impacts. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
The fourth quarter of 2014 marked the 10th quarter of the
Margin
current z Systems product cycle. In January 2015, the company For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
announced the z13, the new generation mainframe. The z13 Systems Hardware
system culminates a $1 billion investment and five years of devel- External gross profi t $3,945 $5,299 (25.6)%
opment, leverages the innovation of more than 500 new patents
External gross profi t margin 39.5% 40.8% (1.3) pts.
and represents a collaboration with more than 60 clients. The
Pre-tax income $ 34 $ 213 (84.1)%
result of this effort is a mainframe that has the world’s fastest pro-
Pre-tax margin 0.3% 1.6% (1.3) pts.
cessor that can execute two-and-a-half billion transactions a day.
Although Power Systems revenue was down year to year, there
was sequential improvement in the year-to-year revenue growth Systems Hardware gross profit margin of 39.5 percent decreased
rate at constant currency in the last two quarters of 2014. The com- 1.3 points year to year. The decrease was driven by lower margins
pany has repositioned Power which is not only a systems business, in Power Systems (1.3 points) and Storage (0.9 points), partially
but also an open chip processor and an IP income opportunity offset by an increase due to mix (0.7 points), driven by the divesti-
through the OpenPOWER foundation. In June 2014, scale-out ture of the System x business.
systems based on POWER8 were introduced and high-end POW- In 2014, the company took significant actions to reposition its
ER8-based enterprise systems were announced in October 2014. Systems Hardware business for higher value, and reinforced its
These systems are highly scalable and can handle the most data commitment to driving innovation in high-end systems and storage.
intensive, mission critical applications in the industry. In addition, It repositioned Power through the development of the POWER8
the company saw continued expansion of the OpenPOWER con- systems which are built for cloud and big data, and it made
sortium, with over 80 members, 14 of which are in greater China. available the POWER8 architecture through the OpenPOWER
Since the establishment of the consortium in 2013, several offer- consortium to build an open ecosystem and an IP opportunity.
ings have been introduced by consortium members based on
the POWER architecture. In addition, the company has initiated

===== PAGE 58 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company announced the divestiture of its Microelectronics Global Financing
business with future chip supply coming from an at-scale provider, See pages 69 through 73 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
and has committed $3 billion of investment over five years in the segment results.
next era of chip technology as it strengthens its semiconductor
research and development and systems innovation. The company Geographic Revenue
also divested the System x business, and announced the z13, the In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the
new generation of the mainframe. With its portfolio repositioned company also measures revenue performance on a geographic
and the introduction of the new mainframe, this business segment basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific
should now see profit leverage going forward. revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change Currency*
Total revenue $92,793 $98,367 (5.7)% (1.5)%
Geographies $92,326 $97,800 (5.6)% (1.5)%
Americas 41,410 43,249 (4.3) (0.8)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 30,700 31,628 (2.9) (0.6)
Asia Pacifi c 20,216 22,923 (11.8) (4.1)
Major markets (4.3)% (1.0)%
Growth markets (9.9)% (3.2)%
BRIC countries (10.7)% (4.5)%
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency.
Total geographic revenue of $92,326 million decreased 5.6 per- Asia Pacific revenue of $20,216 million decreased 11.8 percent
cent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) as reported and 4 percent adjusted for the divested businesses
and currency (2 points) in 2014 compared to 2013. In total, major (3 points) and currency (5 points). Japan was down 7.6 percent as
market countries decreased 4.3 percent as reported and 1 percent reported, but increased 3 percent adjusted for currency (8 points)
adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and currency (1 point). Growth and divestitures (3 points). On this basis, Japan reflected year-to-
market countries decreased 9.9 percent as reported and 3 per- year growth in every quarter of 2014. However, this growth was
cent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and currency (4 points) more than offset by declines in the Asia Pacific growth markets.
compared to 2013. The year-to-year decline in growth markets rev-
enue adjusted for currency and the divestitures reflected growth in Total Expense and Other (Income)
the Latin American and Europe growth markets, more than offset
($ in millions)
by decreased revenue in the Asia Pacific growth markets. Yr.-to-Yr.
Americas revenue of $41,410 million decreased 4.3 percent as Percent/
Margin
reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points) and cur- For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
rency (1 point) compared to 2013. On an adjusted basis, there was Total consolidated expense
increased revenue in the growth markets offset by year-to-year and other (income) $26,421 $28,440 (7.1)%
declines in the major market countries. Within the North Ameri- Non-operating adjustments
can major markets, the U.S. declined 4.0 percent as reported and
Amortization of acquired
2 percent adjusted for divestitures (2 points). Canada was down intangible assets (374) (370) 1.2
9.8 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for divestitures Acquisition-related charges (12) (40) (70.0)
(1 point) and currency (7 points).
Non-operating retirement-related
EMEA revenue of $30,700 million decreased 2.9 percent as (costs)/income (180) (433) (58.4)
reported and 1 percent adjusted for divestitures (3 points) and
Operating (non-GAAP)
offset by currency (1 point). On an adjusted basis, growth in Ger- expense and other (income) $25,855 $27,597 (6.3)%
many, Italy and Spain was more than offset by declines in the UK
Total consolidated
and France, compared to 2013. expense-to-revenue ratio 28.5% 28.9% (0.4) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue ratio 27.9% 28.1% (0.2) pts.

===== PAGE 59 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
Selling, general and Total consolidated research,
administrative expense development and engineering $5,437 $5,743 (5.3)%
Selling, general and Non-operating adjustment
administrative—other $18,532 $19,178 (3.4)%
Non-operating retirement-related
Advertising and promotional (costs)/income 77 (57) NM
expense 1,307 1,294 1.1
Operating (non-GAAP) research,
Workforce rebalancing charges 1,472 1,031 42.7 development and engineering $5,514 $5,686 (3.0)%
Retirement-related costs 811 986 (17.8)
NM—Not meaningful
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets 374 370 1.2
Research, development and engineering expense was 5.9 percent
Stock-based compensation 350 435 (19.4) of revenue in 2014 and 5.8 percent of revenue in 2013.
Bad debt expense 334 156 113.8 RD&E expense decreased 5.3 percent in 2014 year to year
Total consolidated selling, general primarily driven by:
and administrative expense $23,180 $23,451 (1.2)%
Non-operating adjustments • Lower base expense (7 points); and
• The effects of currency (1 point); partially offset by
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (374) (370) 1.2 • Higher expense due to acquisitions (2 points).
Acquisition-related charges (11) (25) (54.1)
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 3.0 percent in
Non-operating retirement-related 2014 compared to the prior year, primarily driven by:
(costs)/income (257) (376) (31.7)
Operating (non-GAAP) • Lower base expense (4 points); and
selling, general and • The effects of currency (1 point); partially offset by
administrative expense $22,537 $22,680 (0.6)%
• Higher expense due to acquisitions (2 points).
Total selling, general and administrative expense decreased Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
1.2 percent in 2014 versus 2013 primarily driven by the following
($ in millions)
factors:
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
• The effects of currency (2 points); and For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
• Lower base expense (1 point); partially offset by Sales and other transfers of
• Acquisition-related spending (2 points). intellectual property $283 $352 (19.7)%
Licensing/royalty-based fees 129 150 (13.9)
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 0.6 percent
Custom development income 330 320 3.1
primarily driven by:
Total $742 $822 (9.8)%
• The effects of currency (2 points); partially offset by
• Acquisition-related spending (1 point). The timing and amount of Sales and other transfers of IP may vary
significantly from period to period depending upon the timing of
Workforce rebalancing charges in 2014 were $1,472 million, an divestitures, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the
increase of $440 million year to year, which resulted in a 2 point timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no
year-to-year impact in operating (non-GAAP) SG&A base significant individual IP transactions in 2014 or 2013.
expense. Bad debt expense increased $178 million year to year
driven by higher specific provision additions, primarily in China and
Latin America. The receivables provision coverage was 2.2 per-
cent at December 31, 2014, an increase of 60 basis points from
year-end 2013.

===== PAGE 60 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense • A tax charge related to the sale of the System x business
(0.9 points); partially offset by;
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. • A year-to-year benefit of reduced tax charges related to
Percent certain intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change
and the intercompany licensing of certain IP (3.7 points); and
Other (income) and expense
• An increased benefit in the utilization of foreign tax credits
Foreign currency transaction
(4.7 points); and
losses/(gains) $ (599) $(260) 130.4%
• A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax income in
(Gains)/losses on
2014 (2.5 points).
derivative instruments 654 166 293.3
Interest income (90) (74) 22.1 The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate
Net (gains)/losses from securities was 21.0 percent, an increase of 4.0 points versus 2013 principally
and investment assets (26) (29) (11.5) driven by the same factors described above.
Other (1,878) (137) NM
Total consolidated other Results of Discontinued Operations
(income) and expense $(1,938) $(333) 482.4% Losses from discontinued operations, net of tax, were $3.7 bil-
Non-operating adjustment lion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The loss in 2014 included a
Acquisition-related charges (1) (16) (94.7) non-recurring pre-tax charge of $4.7 billion, or $3.4 billion, net of
tax. The charge included an impairment to reflect the fair value
Operating (non-GAAP) other
(income) and expense $(1,939) $(349) 456.2% less estimated costs to sell the Microelectronics business, which
the company initially reported as held for sale at September 30,
NM—Not meaningful
2014. The charge also included other estimated costs related
to the transaction, including cash consideration expected to be
The increase in income of $1,605 million year over year was pri-
transferred of approximately $1.5 billion. The cash consideration is
marily driven by higher gains associated with divestitures ($1,710
expected to be paid over the next three years and will be adjusted
million), driven by the System x ($1,400 million) and customer care
down by the amount of the working capital due from GLOBAL-
($202 million) transactions. Divestiture gains are reflected in Other
FOUNDRIES, estimated to be $0.2 billion. In addition, discontinued
in the table above.
operations included operational net losses from the Microelec-
tronics business of $0.3 billion in 2014 and $0.4 billion in 2013. The
Interest Expense
discontinued operations effective tax rate in 2014 was 30.2 percent
($ in millions)
compared to 44.8 percent in 2013. The year-to-year decrease in
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent the rate was driven primarily by a one-time tax charge of $428 mil-
For the year ended December 31: 2014 2013 Change lion in the third quarter of 2014 in connection with the disposal.
Interest expense
Total $484 $402 20.4% Financial Position
At December 31, 2014, the company continued to have the financial
The increase in interest expense in 2014 versus 2013 was primar- flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash and
ily driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower marketable securities at December 31, 2014 were $8,476 million,
average interest rates. Overall interest expense, including interest a decrease of $2,589 million from December 31, 2013.
presented in the cost of financing, and excluding capitalized interest, Total debt of $40,722 million increased $1,084 million from
for 2014 was $1,025 million, an increase of $36 million year to year. the December 31, 2013 level. The commercial paper balance at
December 31, 2014, was $650 million, a decrease of $1,808 mil-
Income Taxes lion. Within total debt, $29,103 million was in support of the Global
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2014 was 21.2 per- Financing business which was leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. During
cent, an increase of 4.6 points versus 2013, driven by the following 2014, the company completed bond issuances totaling $6,852
factors: million, with terms ranging from 2 to 10 years, and interest rates
ranging from 0.30 to 3.63 percent depending on maturity.
• The year-to-year impact of factors that benefited the 2013 Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea-
rate (14.5 points), including completion of the U.S. 2008–2010 sured the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans
tax audit and the associated reserve redeterminations at December 31. At December 31, 2014, the overall net under-
(11.1 points), the retroactive impact of the 2012 American funded position was $16,932 million, an increase of $5,498 million
Taxpayer Relief Act (0.7 points), a tax agreement which from December 31, 2013 driven by a decrease in discount rates
required a reassessment of certain valuation allowances on and changes in U.S. mortality rate assumptions, partially offset by
deferred tax assets (1.4 points), the resolution of certain strong asset returns worldwide. At December 31, 2014, the compa-
non-U.S. tax audits (0.7 points) and newly enacted U.S. state ny’s qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and the cash
tax legislation (0.6 points); and

===== PAGE 61 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
requirements related to these plans remain stable going forward at company repurchased 71.5 million shares and had $6.3 billion
approximately $600 million per year through 2019. In 2014, the return remaining in share repurchase authorization at year end.
on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was 10.1 percent and the
plan was 102 percent funded at December 31. Overall, global asset GAAP Reconciliation
returns were 12.2 percent and the qualified defined benefit plans The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income
worldwide were 97 percent funded at December 31, 2014. statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earn-
During 2014, the company generated $16,868 million in cash ings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s
from operations, a decrease of $616 million compared to 2013. In calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may
addition, the company generated $12,372 million in free cash flow, differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies.
a decrease of $2,649 million versus 2013. The company returned Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on
$17,944 million to shareholders in 2014, with $13,679 million in gross pages 18 and 19 for the company’s rationale for presenting oper-
share repurchases and $4,265 million in dividends. In 2014, the ating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $46,407 $ 416 $ 173 $46,996
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 0.4 pts. 0.2 pts. 50.6%
SG&A $23,180 $(385) $(257) $22,537
RD&E 5,437 — 77 5,514
Other (income) and expense (1,938) (1) — (1,939)
Total expense and other (income) 26,421 (386) (180) 25,855
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 19,986 803 353 21,142
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 21.5% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 22.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,234 $ 133 $ 73 $ 4,440
Effective tax rate 21.2% (0.2) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.0%
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $ 670 $ 280 $16,702
Income margin from continuing operations 17.0% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 18.0%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 15.59 $0.66 $0.28 $ 16.53
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2013: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $48,684 $ 394 $ 629 $49,706
Gross profi t margin 49.5% 0.4 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.5%
SG&A $23,451 $(394) $ (376) $22,680
RD&E 5,743 — (57) 5,686
Other (income) and expense (333) (16) — (349)
Total expense and other (income) 28,440 (410) (433) 27,597
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 20,244 804 1,062 22,110
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 20.6% 0.8 pts. 1.1 pts. 22.5%
Provision for income taxes* $ 3,363 $ 57 $ 333 $ 3,753
Effective tax rate 16.6% (0.4) pts. 0.7 pts. 17.0%
Income from continuing operations $16,881 $ 747 $ 729 $18,356
Income margin from continuing operations 17.2% 0.8 pts. 0.7 pts. 18.7%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 15.30 $0.68 $ 0.66 $ 16.64
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual
effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 62 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company’s strategies, investments and actions are all taken while the company is fully participating in the shift to cloud, the
with an objective of optimizing long-term performance. A long-term margins in that business are impacted by the level of investment
perspective ensures that the company is well-positioned to take the company is making, and the fact that the business is not yet
advantage of major shifts occurring in technology, business and at scale.
the global economy. The company also expects a continued significant impact
Within the IT industry, there are major shifts occurring—driven from currency in 2016. At mid-January 2016 spot rates, the impact
by data and analytics, cloud and changes in the ways individuals to revenue growth is expected to be 2 to 3 points for the year, but,
and enterprises are engaging. In 2015, the company had continued as with all companies with a similar global business profile, with the
strong performance in its strategic imperatives that are focused on dollar strengthening, the company also expects that currency will
these market shifts. The company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, social have a significant impact on its profit growth. The profit impact will
and security solutions together generated $29 billion in revenue, be more significant than in 2015 because of translation impact and
which is approximately 35 percent of total consolidated revenue. the year-to-year impact from prior year cash flow hedging gains.
Revenue from the strategic imperatives increased 17 percent At mid-January 2016 spot rates, the company expects currency
compared to 2014, or 26 percent excluding the impacts of cur- to impact pre-tax profit growth by approximately $1.3 billion, or at
rency and the divested System x and customer care businesses. least a dollar of earnings per share.
In 2015, the company continued to take significant actions to drive Overall, looking forward to 2016, the company expects to con-
the shift towards its strategic imperatives with targeted invest- tinue to grow in many areas of the business, including continued
ments, as well as moving away from areas that do not support the strong growth in the strategic imperatives. The company expects
strategic profile. a modest expansion in gross margin, and to continue to invest at
The company’s strategic direction is clear and compelling, and a high level, shifting to areas that have the best opportunity. As
the company continues its shift to the higher value areas of enter- is typical, the company also expects over the course of 2016 to
prise IT. The strong revenue growth in the strategic imperatives acquire key capabilities, rebalance its workforce, resolve various
confirms that, as does the overall profitability of the business. The matters including tax, and return value to shareholders. This is
company expects revenue from its strategic imperatives to con- all taken into account in the full-year view. Overall, the company
tinue to deliver strong growth. These offerings are as high value expects GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations for
as other parts of the business, which continue to manage clients’ 2016 to be at least $12.45. Excluding acquisition-related charges
most critical business processes. As investments in the strategic of $0.66 per share and non-operating retirement-related items
imperatives begin to reach scale, the company expects modest of $0.39 per share, operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share is
margin improvement. In addition, the company expects to continue expected to be at least $13.50. For the first quarter of 2016, the
to allocate its capital efficiently and effectively to investments, and company expects operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to be
to return value to its shareholders through a combination of divi- approximately 15 percent of the full-year expectation.
dends and share repurchases. Over the longer term, in considering From a segment perspective, in 2015, mainframe revenues
the opportunities it will continue to develop, the company expects increased as a result of the release of the z13, and Power improved
to have the ability to generate low single-digit revenue growth, as it was repositioned to address broader opportunities in the
and with a higher value business mix, high single-digit operating Linux environment. The company is expecting mainframe reve-
(non-GAAP) earnings per share growth, with free cash flow reali- nues to decline in 2016 as it enters the back half of the product
zation in the 90’s percent range. cycle. Mainframe margins are expected to improve in the latter half
In the near term, there are a few dynamics that are inconsistent of 2016 in line with that cycle. Services backlog improved in 2015
with that longer term trajectory. Specifically, in 2016, the company to $121 billion with increased signings in the year, specifically in the
will be continuing to manage and drive the ongoing transformation strategic imperatives. Both GTS and GBS increased signings for
in the business. As an example, GBS continues its transition, with the full year at constant currency and the company expects to con-
strong growth in strategic imperatives offset by declines in the tinue to move clients into hybrid environments. There is continued
more traditional areas. The company will continue to engineer this ability to expand margins in the globalization of service delivery.
shift. The company expects a continued impact to its software The software annuity base, representing approximately 70 per-
transaction revenue growth, as many of its largest customers con- cent of software revenue, continued to grow. Software renewal
tinue to utilize the flexibility that the company has provided, as they rates remain high and growth from Software-as-a-Service offer-
commit to the company’s platform for the longer term. In addition, ings is expected. Transactional mix will not be as impactful in the

===== PAGE 63 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
first quarter of 2016 as it was in the fourth quarter of 2015. The Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
company also expects acquisitions to drive improvement in the
($ in billions)
software revenue trajectory in 2016. 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011
Free cash flow realization, defined as free cash flow to income
Net cash from
from continuing operations (GAAP), was 98 percent as reported operating activities $17.0 $16.9 $17.5 $19.6 $19.8
in 2015 and is expected to remain in the 90’s percent level in 2016.
Cash and short-term
At the profit level associated with the earnings per share expec- marketable securities $ 8.2 $ 8.5 $11.1 $11.1 $11.9
tations, this translates to a free cash flow range of $11 billion to Committed global
$12 billion in 2016. credit facility $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0
The company expects, in the normal course of business, that
its operating (non-GAAP) tax rate will be 18 percent, plus or minus The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securi-
a couple of percentage points, for 2016. The GAAP tax rate is ties at December 31, 2015 appear in the following table and remain
expected to be approximately 1 point lower. The rate will change unchanged from December 31, 2014. The company’s indenture
year to year based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring contain significant covenants which obligate the company to
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback transactions to
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. 10 percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets,
The company expects 2016 pre-tax retirement-related plan and restrict the company’s ability to merge or consolidate unless
cost to be approximately $2.0 billion, a decrease of approximately certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a cov-
$600 million compared to 2015. This estimate reflects current enant on the company’s consolidated net interest expense ratio,
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2015. Within total which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least
cost is expected to be approximately $1.4 billion, a decrease of $500 million.
approximately $100 million versus 2015. Non-operating retirement- The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
related plan cost is expected to be approximately $500 million, covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The
a decrease of approximately $500 million compared to 2015, failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event
driven by decreased recognized actuarial losses and the Spanish of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply.
pension litigation impacts in 2015. Contributions for all retire- If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest
ment-related plans are expected to be approximately $2.6 billion on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
in 2016, approximately flat compared to 2015. immediately due and payable.
For a discussion of new accounting standards that the com- The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its
pany will adopt in future periods, please see note B, “Accounting debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders
Changes,” beginning on page 92. to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate payments
thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. The com-
Liquidity and Capital Resources
pany’s contractual agreements governing derivative instruments
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow contain standard market clauses which can trigger the termination
from operations, providing a source of funds ranging between of the agreement if the company’s credit rating were to fall below
$16.9 billion and $19.8 billion per year over the past five years. The investment grade. At December 31, 2015, the fair value of those
company provides for additional liquidity through several sources: instruments that were in a liability position was $186 million, before
maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global funding any applicable netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations
sources, a committed global credit facility and other committed in fair value period to period based on the level of the company’s
and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The following table outstanding instruments and market conditions. The company has
provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years no other contractual arrangements that, in the event of a change in
ended December 31, 2011 through 2015. credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect on its finan-
cial position or liquidity.

===== PAGE 64 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in support of the growth in the services backlog and the build
Moody’s out of cloud data centers, the company generated free cash flow
Standard Investors Fitch
& Poor’s Service Ratings of $13.1 billion, an increase of $0.7 billion compared to 2014. The
Senior long-term debt AA- Aa3 A+ increase was driven by a reduction in cash tax payments of $3.1 bil-
lion, due primarily to a higher cash tax rate in 2014, and continued
Commercial paper A-1+ Prime-1 F1
improvement in sales cycle working capital ($1.2 billion). This was
partially offset by performance-related declines in net income and
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
a higher level of payments for performance-based compensation
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow
which was accrued in 2014.
presentation on page 79 and highlights causes and events under-
In 2015, the company continued to focus its cash utilization
lying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 40. For the
on returning value to shareholders including $4.9 billion in div-
purpose of running its business, the company manages, monitors
idends and $4.6 billion in gross common stock repurchases
and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
(30.3 million shares). In addition, $3.3 billion was utilized for 14
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the
acquisitions in 2015.
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, eval-
Over the past five years, the company generated over $75 bil-
uate strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and
lion in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested
need to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term
approximately $13 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned
under GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash
over $73 billion to shareholders through dividends and net share
flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The com-
repurchases. The company’s performance during this period
pany defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities
demonstrates that there is fungibility across the elements of
less the change in Global Financing receivables and net capital
share repurchases, dividends and acquisitions. The amount of
expenditures, including the investment in software. A key objective
prospective returns to shareholders in the form of dividends and
of the Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on
share repurchases will vary based upon several factors including
equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a financing
each year’s operating results, capital expenditure requirements,
business. Accordingly, management considers Global Financing
research and development investments and acquisitions, as well
receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working
as the factors discussed below.
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2015, the Board
operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by
of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
the company as free cash flow.
dividend from $1.10 to $1.30 per share.
From the perspective of how management views cash flow,
The table below represents the way in which management
in 2015, after investing $3.8 billion in capital investments primarily
reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $17.0 $ 16.9 $ 17.5 $ 19.6 $ 19.8
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables 0.2 0.7 (1.3) (2.9) (0.8)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding
Global Financing receivables 16.9 16.2 18.8 22.5 20.7
Capital expenditures, net (3.8) (3.8) (3.8) (4.3) (4.1)
Free cash fl ow (FCF) 13.1 12.4 15.0 18.2 16.6
Acquisitions (3.3) (0.7) (3.1) (3.7) (1.8)
Divestitures (0.4) 2.4 0.3 0.6 0.0
Share repurchase (4.6) (13.7) (13.9) (12.0) (15.0)
Dividends (4.9) (4.3) (4.1) (3.8) (3.5)
Non-Global Financing debt (0.1) (1.3) 3.2 0.7 1.7
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and
Global Financing debt) 0.0 2.6 2.4 (0.8) 2.3
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term
marketable securities $ (0.3) $ (2.6) $ (0.1) $ (0.8) $ 0.3
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations 98% 79% 89% 107% 103%

===== PAGE 65 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow December 31, 2007. No mandatory contribution is required for
dynamics discussed previously include significant changes in the U.S. defined benefit plan in 2016 as of December 31, 2015.
operating results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding its current domestic operations and obligations, including invest-
requirements during periods of severe downturn in the capital mar- ing and financing activities such as dividends and debt service.
kets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such The company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows,
an adverse impact will depend on a number of variables, which are and, in those circumstances where the company has additional
more completely described in note M, “Contingencies and Com- cash requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity
mitments,” on pages 118 to 120. With respect to pension funding, in options available. These options may include the ability to borrow
2015, the company contributed $514 million to its non-U.S. defined additional funds at reasonable interest rates, utilizing its commit-
benefit plans versus $519 million in 2014. As highlighted in the Con- ted global credit facility, repatriating certain foreign earnings and
tractual Obligations table, the company expects to make legally utilizing intercompany loans with certain foreign subsidiaries.
mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
approximately $2.5 billion in the next five years. The 2016 contri- income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely
butions are currently expected to be approximately $500 million. reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and
Contributions related to all retirement-related plans is expected to accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made
be approximately $2.6 billion in 2016, approximately flat compared on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company
to 2015. Financial market performance could increase the legally periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent
mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification
that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely rein-
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension vested earnings is not practicable. While the company currently
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in does not have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign sub-
the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations. sidiaries, if these funds are needed for operations and obligations
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in in the U.S., the company could elect to repatriate these funds
2006, and, among other things, increased the funding require- which could result in a reassessment of the company’s policy and
ments for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after increased tax expense.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Payments Due In
Total Contractual
Payment Stream 2016 2017–18 2019–20 After 2020
Long-term debt obligations $38,805 $ 5,266 $10,360 $ 8,504 $14,675
Interest on long-term debt obligations 9,688 1,184 1,892 1,252 5,360
Capital (fi nance) lease obligations 15 7 4 4 —
Operating lease obligations 6,435 1,347 2,338 1,761 988
Purchase obligations 3,057 764 1,093 1,154 45
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defi ned benefi t plan pension funding (mandated)* 2,500 500 1,000 1,000 —
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,621 176 385 430 630
Long-term termination benefi ts 1,164 221 195 131 617
Tax reserves** 3,014 413
Divestiture related 1,158 692 377 66 23
Other 977 95 123 91 667
Total $68,434 $10,666 $17,767 $14,393 $23,006
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2020 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that $413 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the next 12 months.
The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax
examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months.

===== PAGE 66 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table Critical Accounting Estimates
excluding the effects of time value and, therefore, may not equal The application of GAAP requires the company to make esti-
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial mates and assumptions about certain items and future events that
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the previ- directly affect its reported financial condition. The accounting esti-
ous table as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This includes mates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that
deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and the company considers to be the most critical to its financial state-
other sundry items. Certain obligations related to the company’s ments. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the
divestitures are included. nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate and assumption
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the is material to the company’s financial condition. Senior manage-
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, ment has discussed the development, selection and disclosure of
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments even these estimates with the Audit Committee of the company’s Board
if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or services of Directors. The company’s significant accounting policies are
(take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or services is described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages
noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the 82 to 92.
previous table. If the obligation is cancelable, but the company A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that infor-
would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the pen- mation is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and
alty is included as a purchase obligation. Contracted minimum provides material information to investors. The amounts used to
amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included in assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to
the table as they represent the portion of each contract that is a allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general direction
firm commitment. cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates,
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as fore-
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or casted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. Pension Assumptions
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measure-
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be pur- ment of the benefit obligation to employees and net periodic
chase obligations. pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions,
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected
effective interest rate at December 31, 2015, plus the interest rate return on plan assets.
spread associated with that debt, if any. Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected ben-
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet efit obligation (PBO). The company increased the discount rate
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67 assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based
(FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis defined benefit plan, by 30 basis points to 4.00 percent on Decem-
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con- ber 31, 2015. This change will decrease pre-tax cost and expense
tractual Obligations.” recognized in 2016 by an estimated $100 million. If the discount
At December 31, 2015, the company had no off-balance sheet rate assumption for the PPP had decreased by 30 basis points
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material on December 31, 2015, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in
current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial 2016 would have increased by an estimated $98 million. Changes
condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquid- in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which,
ity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table on in turn, may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO
page 63 for the company’s contractual obligations, and note M, exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the
“Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 120, for detailed discount rate would cause a corresponding decrease or increase,
information about the company’s guarantees, financial commit- respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.3 billion based
ments and indemnification arrangements. The company does not upon December 31, 2015 data.
have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated
entities or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.

===== PAGE 67 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability
is used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility.
Expected returns on plan assets are calculated based on the The company considers various factors, including a review of
market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in specific transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers,
the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period historical experience and market and economic conditions
in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension when calculating these provisions and allowances. Evaluations
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on plan are conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the esti-
assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are rec- mates. If these estimates were changed by 10 percent in 2015,
ognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets line net income would have been impacted by $77 million (excluding
in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component Global Financing receivables).
of actuarial (gains)/losses, which are recognized over the service
lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, Costs to Complete Service Contracts
provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon The company enters into numerous service contracts through its
the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by Global Services business. During the contractual period, revenue,
accounting standards. cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in of accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The
$263 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its POC-
(income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, based services contracts in order to determine whether the latest
2015 and assuming no contributions are made in 2016). estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the company
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be to estimate the future costs to complete each contract are future
required, by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual labor costs, future product costs and expected productivity effi-
results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less ciencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as a component of
future company funding into the pension plans than is planned other accrued expenses and liabilities were $12 million and $13 mil-
by management. Impacts of these types of changes on the com- lion at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
pany’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would vary
depending upon the status of each respective plan. Income Taxes
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in deter-
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect expe- mining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
rience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given During the ordinary course of business, there are many trans-
year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic actions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is
and other factors. uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based
For additional information on the company’s pension plans on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due.
and the development of these assumptions, see Note S, “Retire- These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s
ment-Related Benefits,” on pages 133 and 134. belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
Revenue Recognition review by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the its assessment of many factors, including past experience and
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, com- interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates
plex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may and assumptions, and may involve a series of complex judgments
require significant contract interpretation to determine the appro- about future events. To the extent that new information becomes
priate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in available which causes the company to change its judgment
a multiple-deliverable arrangement should be treated as separate regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to
units of accounting. Other significant judgments include deter- tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which
mining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a such determination is made.
transaction and whether separate contracts are considered part
of one arrangement.

===== PAGE 68 =====
66 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valua- Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental in
tion allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assump-
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all tions. These estimates and assumptions include revenue growth
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating rates and operating margins used to calculate projected future
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of cash flows, discount rates and future economic and market con-
ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that the company ditions. The company’s estimates are based upon assumptions
changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and
that can be realized, the company will adjust its valuation allow- unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s
ance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and
period in which such determination is made. circumstances that may occur.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period The annual goodwill impairment analysis, which the company
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement performed during the fourth quarter of 2015, did not result in an
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring impairment charge. All of the company’s reporting units had fair
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the values that substantially exceeded their carrying values.
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. Loss Contingencies
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial
decreased/improved by $159 million in 2015. exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceed-
ing is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably
Valuation of Assets estimated, the company accrues a liability for the estimated loss.
The application of business combination and impairment account- Significant judgment is required in both the determination of
ing requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is
The acquisition method of accounting for business combinations reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these
requires the company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, matters, accruals are based only on the best information available
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree at the time. As additional information becomes available, the com-
to properly allocate purchase price consideration between assets pany reassesses the potential liability related to its pending claims
that are depreciated and amortized from goodwill and indefi- and litigation, and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the
nite-lived intangible assets. Impairment testing for assets, other estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on
than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the the company’s results of operations and financial position.
allocation of cash flows to those assets or group of assets and
if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
assets. The company’s estimates are based upon assumptions The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A
unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s description of the methods used by management to estimate the
assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Signifi-
circumstances that may occur. cant Accounting Policies,” on page 91. Factors that could result in
actual receivable losses that are materially different from the estim-
Valuation of Goodwill ated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and when- change in the economic health of a particular client that represents
ever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
value of goodwill may not be recoverable. In 2015, the company To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage-
elected to perform the first step of the quantitative test to compare ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global
the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value instead of Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income
first conducting a qualitative assessment. The company deter- from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher
mines the fair value of its reporting units based on the income or lower by an estimated $61 million depending upon whether
approach. Under the income approach, the company calculates the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than
the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of the estimates.
estimated future cash flows. If the fair value of the reporting unit
exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned to that unit,
goodwill is not impaired. The second step of the impairment test
is only required if the first step results in a carrying value in excess
of fair value.

===== PAGE 69 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Residual Value The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period.
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency”
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as oper- reflect adjustments based upon a simple constant currency math-
ating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of ematical translation of local currency results using the comparable
leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current prior period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant
market for new and used equipment, and obtaining forward-look- currency methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this
ing product information such as marketing plans and technological information does not incorporate any operational actions that
innovations. Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed management may take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates.
and “other than temporary” declines in estimated future residual Currency movements impacted the company’s year-to-year reve-
values are recognized upon identification. Anticipated increases nue and earnings per share growth in 2015. Based on the currency
in future residual values are not recognized until the equipment rate movements in 2015, total revenue decreased 11.9 percent as
is remarketed. reported and 4.1 percent at constant currency versus 2014. On an
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from income from continuing operations before income taxes basis,
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment these translation impacts offset by the net impact of hedging activ-
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology inno- ities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or
vations and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $900 million in 2015,
equipment. on an as-reported basis and a decrease of approximately $1,000
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same mathematical
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s seg- exercise resulted in a decrease of approximately $400 million in
ment pre-tax income and the company’s income from continuing 2014 on both an as-reported and operating (non-GAAP) basis. The
operations before income taxes for 2015 would have been lower company views these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact
by an estimated $79 million. If the actual residual value recovery is to its as-reported financial results. Considering the operational
higher than management’s estimates, the increase in income will responses mentioned above, movements of exchange rates, and
be realized at the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. the nature and timing of hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict
future currency impacts on any particular period, but the company
Currency Rate Fluctuations believes it could be substantially less than the theoretical maxi-
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. mum given the competitive pressure in the marketplace.
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
At December 31, 2015, currency changes resulted in assets and lia- dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
bilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations.
dollars than at year-end 2014. The company uses financial hedg- Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities
ing instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars.
transactions and other foreign currency-based transactions. The company continues to monitor the economic conditions in
During periods of sustained movements in currency, the Venezuela. At the December 31, 2015 SICAD rate of 13.5 Bolivar per
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates. For USD, the company’s net asset position in Venezuela was $29 mil-
example, when pricing offerings in the marketplace, the company lion reflecting $7 million of currency losses in the Consolidated
may use some of the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to Statement of Earnings in 2015. In mid-February 2016, changes to
improve its position competitively, and price more aggressively to the currency exchange systems were announced. The company
win the business, essentially passing on a portion of the currency will continue to monitor transactions from the various exchange
advantage to its customers. Competition will frequently take the systems in Venezuela in 2016. The company’s operations in Ven-
same action. Consequently, the company believes that some of ezuela comprised less than 1 percent of total 2015, 2014 and 2013
the currency-based changes in cost impact the prices charged to revenue, respectively.
clients. The company also maintains currency hedging programs In January 2014, the Argentinian government devalued its cur-
for cash management purposes which temporarily mitigate, but do rency from 6 pesos per USD to 8 pesos per USD. On December 16,
not eliminate, the volatility of currency impacts on the company’s 2015, the Argentinian government announced an end to the offi-
financial results. cial controls on the foreign exchange market. At December 31,
2015 the Argentinian currency was devalued from 9.7 pesos per
USD to 12.9 pesos per USD. These devaluations did not have a
material impact given the size of the company’s operations in
Argentina (less than 1 percent of total 2015, 2014 and 2013 reve-
nue, respectively).

===== PAGE 70 =====
68 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the com- from the analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the
pany is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the financing or hedging of those items are included by definition.
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements Excluded items include short-term and long-term receivables
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and from sales-type and direct financing leases, forecasted foreign
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts currency cash flows and the company’s net investment in foreign
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets. operations. As a consequence, reported changes in the values
The company regularly assesses these risks and has estab- of some of the financial instruments impacting the results of the
lished policies and business practices to protect against the sensitivity analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes
adverse effects of these and other potential exposures. As a in the values of the items that those instruments are designed to
result, the company does not anticipate any material losses from finance or hedge.
these risks. The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2015 and
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing busi- 2014, are as follows:
ness and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations,
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and Interest Rate Risk
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through At December 31, 2015, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of inter-
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as est rates with all other variables held constant would result in a
described in note D, “Financial Instruments—Derivative Financial decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of
Instruments,” on pages 101 through 105. $69 million as compared with a decrease of $123 million at Decem-
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a ber 31, 2014. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest rates
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk expo- with all other variables held constant would result in an increase in
sures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $66 million
financial instruments. as compared to an increase of $119 million at December 31, 2014.
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash equiv- financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
alents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the com-
commercial financing and installment payment receivables, pany’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
investments, long-term and short-term debt and derivative finan-
cial instruments. The company’s derivative financial instruments Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
generally include interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and At December 31, 2015, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against for-
forward contracts. eign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instru-
the risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical ments of $74 million as compared with an increase of $872 million
changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates at December 31, 2014. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar
on market-sensitive instruments. The market values for interest against foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant,
and foreign currency exchange risk are computed based on the would result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s
present value of future cash flows as affected by the changes financial instruments of $74 million compared with a decrease of
in rates that are attributable to the market risk being measured. $872 million at December 31, 2014.
The discount rates used for the present value computations were
selected based on market interest and foreign currency exchange Financing Risks
rates in effect at December 31, 2015 and 2014. The differences in See the “Description of Business” on page 27 for a discussion of
this comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
with each type of risk. and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not neces-
sarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the company Cybersecurity
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to prac- The company’s approach to cybersecurity draws on the depth
tical limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk and breadth of its global capabilities, both in terms of its offer-
factor are held constant. In addition, the results of the model are ings to clients and its internal approaches to risk management.
constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded The company has commercial solutions that deliver identity
and access management, data security, application security,
network security and endpoint security. IBM’s solutions include
security intelligence, analytics and forensic tools that can collect

===== PAGE 71 =====
Management Discussion 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
information on customer IT security events and vulnerabilities and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s infrastruc-
provide detailed information to customers about potential threats ture and data are managed. IBM performs ongoing assessments
and security posture. The company’s services businesses offer regarding its technical controls and its methods for identifying
professional solutions for security from assessment to deploy- emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The company uses a
ment and resource augmentation. In addition, the company offers layered approach with overlapping controls to defend against
managed and outsourced security solutions from multiple security cybersecurity attacks and threats on networks, end-user devices,
operations centers around the world. Finally, security is embedded servers, applications and cloud solutions. The company also has
in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure engineering pro- a global incident response process to respond to cybersecurity
cesses and by critical functions (encryption, access control, etc.) threats. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online
in servers, storage, software, service, and other solutions. training, educational tools, social media and other awareness ini-
From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi- tiatives to foster a culture of security awareness and responsibility
faceted risk-management approach to identify and address among its workforce.
cybersecurity risks. The company has established policies and
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2015–14 2014–13
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 377,757 379,592* 431,212 (0.5)% (12.0)%*
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 9,577 8,862 9,018 8.1 (1.7)
Complementary 24,464 24,321 23,555 0.6 3.3
* Reflects reduction of approximately 35,000 employees (approximately 8 percent) due to divestitures.
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in more financing revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Orig-
than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the inations, which determine the asset base of Global Financing’s
higher value segments of enterprise IT. The company continues to annuity-like business, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing
remix its skills and people needs to match the best opportunities sales and services volumes and Global Financing’s participation
in the marketplace. rates. Participation rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equiv- finance their transactions through Global Financing in lieu of paying
alent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and IBM up-front cash or financing through a third party.
limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific business
needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner. Results of Operations
($ in millions)
GLOBAL FINANCING For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a External revenue $1,840 $2,034 $2,022
stand-alone entity. Internal revenue 2,637 2,488 2,282
In 2015, the Global Financing business remained focused on
Total revenue 4,477 4,522 4,304
its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s
Cost 1,412 1,428 1,417
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing deliv-
Gross profi t $3,065 $3,094 $2,888
ered external revenue of $1,840 million and total revenue of $4,477
million, maintaining constant gross margins. Total pre-tax income Gross profi t margin 68.5% 68.4% 67.1%
of $2,364 million increased 8.0 percent compared to 2014 and Pre-tax income $2,364 $2,189 $2,171
return on equity was 41.5 percent. After-tax income* $1,572 $1,462 $1,456
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact Return on equity* 41.5% 36.8% 40.6%
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact * See page 73 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation.
Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both

===== PAGE 72 =====
70 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2015 decreased $45 million versus 2014 as a Global Financing pre-tax income increased 8.0 percent in
result of: 2015 versus 2014, following an increase of 0.8 percent in 2014
versus 2013. The increase in 2015 was driven by decreases in
• A decrease in external revenue of 9.5 percent (up 1.5 percent SG&A expenses ($107 million) and financing receivables provi-
adjusted for currency) driven by decreases in financing reve- sions ($96 million), partially offset by the decrease in gross profit
nue (down 10.2 percent to $1,386 million) and used equipment ($29 million). The increase in 2014 was driven by the increase in
sales revenue (down 7.6 percent to $454 million); partially gross profit ($207 million), partially offset by increases in financing
offset by receivables provisions ($155 million) and SG&A expenses ($32 mil-
• An increase in internal revenue of 6.0 percent driven by an lion). The decrease in financing receivable provisions in 2015 was
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 10.7 percent to due to lower specific reserve requirements, primarily in China
$2,303 million); partially offset by a decrease in financing and Latin America. At December 31, 2015, the overall allowance
revenue (down 18.3 percent to $334 million). for credit losses coverage rate was 2.1 percent, an increase of
23 basis points year over year.
The decrease in internal and external financing revenue was pri-
The increase in return on equity from the period 2014 to 2015
marily due to decreases in the average asset balance and yields,
was driven by the increase in net income and a lower average
as well as a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global Financ-
equity balance. The decrease in return on equity from the period
ing gross profit decreased 0.9 percent compared to 2014 due to
2013 to 2014 was driven by a higher average equity balance.
a decrease in financing gross profit, partially offset by an increase
in used equipment sales gross profit. The gross profit margin was Financial Condition
flat compared to 2014 due to an increase in the equipment sales
Balance Sheet
margin, offset by a shift in mix away from higher margin financing
and a decrease in the financing margin. ($ in millions)
Total revenue in 2014 increased $218 million versus 2013 as a At December 31: 2015 2014
result of: Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,555 $ 1,538
Net investment in sales-type
• An increase in internal revenue of 9.0 percent driven by an and direct fi nancing leases 7,594 8,263
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 11.1 percent to Equipment under operating leases—
$2,080 million); partially offset by a decrease in financing external clients (1) 605 774
revenue (down 0.7 percent to $408 million); and Client loans 12,525 14,290
• An increase in external revenue of 0.6 percent (up 3 percent
Total client fi nancing assets 20,725 23,327
adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in financing
Commercial fi nancing receivables 8,948 8,424
revenue (up 3.4 percent to $1,543 million), partially offset by
Intercompany fi nancing receivables (2) (3) 4,245 4,611
a decrease in used equipment sales revenue (down 7.2 per-
cent to $491 million). Other receivables 308 368
Other assets 378 577
The decrease in internal financing revenue was primarily due to
Total assets $36,157 $38,845
lower asset yields, partially offset by an increase in the average
Intercompany payables (2) $ 3,089 $ 3,631
asset balance. The increase in external financing revenue was
Debt (4) 27,205 29,103
due to a higher average asset balance, partially offset by lower
asset yields and a decrease in remarketing lease revenue. Global Other liabilities 2,134 2,094
Financing gross profit increased 7.2 percent compared to 2013 due Total liabilities 32,428 34,828
to an increase in used equipment sales gross profit, partially offset Total equity 3,729 4,017
by a decrease in financing gross profit. The gross profit margin Total liabilities and equity $36,157 $38,845
increased 1.3 points due to an increase in the equipment sales
margin, partially offset by a decrease in the financing margin. (1) Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products
purchased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s
consolidated results.
(2) Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore
does not appear on page 78.
(3) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at
the value in the table using Global Financing debt.
(4) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt.
A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business,
or related to intercompany mark-up embedded in the Global Financing assets.

===== PAGE 73 =====
Management Discussion 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Sources and Uses of Funds Cash generated by Global Financing in 2015 was deployed to
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client pay intercompany payables and dividends to IBM as well as busi-
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end ness partners and OEM suppliers.
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but
also include OEM equipment, software and services to meet IBM Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are The following table presents external financing receivables exclud-
primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for sys- ing residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
tems products, as well as loans and installment plans for systems,
software and services with terms up to seven years. Global Financ- ($ in millions)
ing’s client loans and installment payment plans are primarily for At December 31: 2015 2014
software and services and are unsecured. These agreements are Gross fi nancing receivables $29,086 $31,007
subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and,
Specifi c allowance for credit losses 517 484
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks, which
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 93 96
include covenants to protect against credit deterioration during
Total allowance for credit losses 610 580
the life of the obligation.
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory Net fi nancing receivables $28,475 $30,427
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of Allowance for credit losses coverage 2.1% 1.9%
IBM and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory financing
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and
Allowance for Credit Losses
are also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate
the associated risk. ($ in millions)
In addition to the actions previously described, in certain cir- Allowance Additions/ December 31,
January 1, 2015 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2015
cumstances, the company may take mitigation actions to transfer
$580 $(63 ) $144 $(50 ) $610
credit risk to third parties, including credit insurance, financial guar-
antees, nonrecourse borrowings, transfer of receivables recorded * Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were written off during
as true sale in accordance with accounting guidance or sale of the period.
** Primarily represents translation adjustments.
equipment under operating lease.
At December 31, 2015, substantially all financing assets were IT
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was
related assets, and approximately 55 percent of the total external
2.1 percent at December 31, 2015, and 1.9 percent at December 31,
portfolio was with investment grade clients with no direct expo-
2014. Specific reserves increased 7 percent from $484 million
sure to consumers. The reduction in investment grade year to year
at December 31, 2014, to $517 million at December 31, 2015.
(5 points) was driven primarily by rating changes within the existing
Unallocated reserves decreased 3 percent from $96 million at
portfolio, not by changing the company’s approach to the market.
December 31, 2014, to $93 million at December 31, 2015, due to
the decrease in gross financing receivables, partially offset by
Originations
higher general reserve requirements in Latin America due to lower
The following are total financing originations:
credit ratings.
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was $144 million for 2015,
($ in millions)
compared to $240 million for 2014. The year-to-year decrease in
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
bad debt expense was due to lower specific reserve requirements,
Client fi nancing $14,444 $15,099 $15,792
primarily in China and Latin America, in the current year.
Commercial fi nancing 40,571 43,664 41,027
Total $55,015 $58,762 $56,819 Residual Value
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and
In 2015, cash collection of client financing assets exceeded new management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accu-
financing originations while new financing originations of commer- rately project future equipment values at lease inception. Global
cial financing exceeded collections. This resulted in a net decline Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM
in financing assets from December 2014. The decrease in orig- products under lease. Based upon this product information, Global
inations in 2015 versus 2014 was due to declining volumes, and Financing continually monitors projections of future equipment
the increase in 2014 versus 2013 was due to improving volumes. values and compares them with the residual values reflected in
Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed under a the portfolio.
loan facility and is not considered originations.

===== PAGE 74 =====
72 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by classifications for the covered equipment and provide protection
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment against risk of loss arising from declines in equipment values for
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current cli- these assets.
ents. Sales of equipment include equipment returned at the end of The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease
a lease, surplus internal equipment, or used equipment purchased payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a
externally. These sales represented 61.6 percent and 56.9 percent lease as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating
of Global Financing’s revenue in 2015 and 2014, respectively. The lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees
increase was due to a higher volume of used equipment sales of sales-type leases were $811 million and $503 million for the
for internal transactions. The gross profit margins on these sales financing transactions originated during the years ended Decem-
were 66.0 percent and 64.9 percent in 2015 and 2014, respectively. ber 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, respectively. In 2015, the
The increase in the gross profit margin was driven by a shift in mix residual value guarantee program resulted in the company rec-
toward higher margin internal equipment sales, partially offset by ognizing $608 million of revenue that would otherwise have been
decreases in internal and external equipment sales margins. recognized in future periods as operating lease revenue. If the
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaran- company had chosen to not participate in a residual value guar-
teed residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating antee program in 2015 and prior years, the 2015 impact would be
leases at December 31, 2015 and 2014. In addition, the table substantially mitigated by the effect of prior year asset values being
presents the residual value as a percentage of the related orig- recognized as operating lease revenue in the current year. The
inal amount financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of direct
residual value assigned to equipment on leases at December 31, financing leases were $185 million and $204 million for the financ-
2015 is expected to be returned to the company. In addition to the ing transactions originated during the years ended December 31,
unguaranteed residual value, on a limited basis, Global Financing 2015 and 2014, respectively. The associated aggregate guaranteed
will obtain guarantees of the future value of the equipment to be future values at the scheduled end of lease were $54 million and
returned at end of lease. While primarily focused on IBM products, $25 million for the financing transactions originated during the
guarantees are also obtained for certain OEM products. These years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. The cost
third-party guarantees are included in minimum lease payments as of guarantees was $5 million and $2 million for the years ended
provided for by accounting standards in the determination of lease December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2015 Balance
2019 and
At December 31: 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 Beyond
Sales-type and direct fi nancing leases $ 671 $ 645 $144 $172 $202 $128
Operating leases 166 144 61 46 26 11
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 837 $ 789 $205 $218 $228 $139
Related original amount fi nanced $15,636 $14,223
Percentage 5.4% 5.6%
Debt
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the com-
At December 31: 2015 2014
pany’s external client assets, as well as for assets under contract
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.3x 7.2x
by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures
Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest
The debt used to fund Global Financing assets is composed of
expense relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external
intercompany loans and external debt. Total debt changes gen-
client and internal business is included in the “Global Financing
erally correspond with the level of client and commercial financing
Results of Operations” on page 69 and in note T, “Segment Infor-
receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents, the change
mation,” on pages 141 to 146.
in intercompany and external payables and the change in inter-
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the
company investment from IBM. The terms of the intercompany
external debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financ-
loans are set by the company to substantially match the term and
ing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of
currency underlying the financing receivable and are based on
financing to interest expense.
arm’s-length pricing.

===== PAGE 75 =====
Management Discussion 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides additional information on total Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The com-
company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes inter- pany believes these assets should be appropriately leveraged in
nal loans and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2015 December 31, 2014
Global Financing Segment $27,205 $29,103
Debt to support external clients $23,934 $25,531
Debt to support internal clients 3,271 3,572
Non-Global Financing Segments 12,684 11,619*
Debt supporting operations 15,955 15,191*
Intercompany activity (3,271) (3,572)
Total company debt $39,890 $40,722 *
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources offerings are competitive and available to clients as a result of the
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore, is company’s borrowing cost and access to the capital markets.
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access Overall, Global Financing’s originations will be dependent upon
to capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was the demand for IT products and services as well as client partic-
deployed to pay dividends to the company in order to maintain an ipation rates.
appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted
Return on Equity period where IBM could not access the capital markets would
likely lead to a slowdown in originations.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2015 2014 Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency fluc-
tuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. The
Numerator
company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, com-
Global Financing after-tax income (1) * $1,572 $1,462
bined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate
Denominator
gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.
Average Global Financing equity (2) ** $3,785 $3,973 The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
Global Financing return on equity (1) /(2) 41.5% 36.8% Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of pro-
vision for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on rigorous credit policies in both the origination of new business
a consolidated basis. and the evaluation of the existing portfolio. Global Financing has
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters.
historically been able to manage residual value risk both through
insight into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its
Looking Forward
remarketing business.
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and fund- Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the
ing capacity which enables the company to be well positioned key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with
in the current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new product and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent man-
financing volumes are IBM and OEM products and services agement of the business going forward, even during periods of
financed to the company’s clients and business partners, and uncertainty with respect to the global economy.
substantially all financing assets are IT related assets which pro-
vide a stable base of business for future growth. Global Financing’s

===== PAGE 76 =====
74 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM man- adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
agement. The accompanying financial statements have been Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain esti- reporting and the preparation of financial statements for exter-
mates and judgments as required. nal purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, accepted in the United States of America.
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the con- of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
trol environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
to correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communi- company are being made only in accordance with authorizations
cation channels and foster an environment conducive to the of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance with of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into numerous Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
languages, are distributed to employees throughout the world, and reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
reemphasized through internal programs to assure that they are jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
understood and followed. subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is respon- policies or procedures may deteriorate.
sible for recommending to the Board the independent registered Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria estab-
to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically lished in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued
and privately with the independent registered public accounting by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM man- Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management con-
agement, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure cluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting
and financial reporting matters. was effective as of December 31, 2015.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered
public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated
Financial Statements and the effectiveness of the internal con-
trol over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on
audits conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 23, 2016
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 23, 2016

===== PAGE 77 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of
Directors of International Business
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State- A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a pro-
ments appearing on pages 76 through 146 present fairly, in all cess designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
material respects, the financial position of International Busi- reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
ness Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
2015 and 2014 and the results of their operations and their cash accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
flows for each of the three years in the period ended Decem- financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i)
ber 31, 2015 in conformity with accounting principles generally pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail,
accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of
Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015, based transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation
on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organi zations of the accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the
Treadway Commission (COSO). The Company’s management is company are being made only in accordance with authorizations
responsible for these financial statements, for maintaining effec- of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
tive internal control over financial reporting and for its assessment reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Inter- assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
nal Control over Financial Reporting appearing on page 74. Our Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
responsibility is to express opinions on these financial statements reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, pro-
and on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting jections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are
based on our integrated audits. We conducted our audits in subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
accordance with the standards of the Public Company Account- of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the
ing Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require that policies or procedures may deteriorate.
we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance
about whether the financial statements are free of material mis-
statement and whether effective internal control over financial
reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audits of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
the financial statements included examining, on a test basis, evi- New York, New York
dence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial February 23, 2016
statements, assessing the accounting principles used and signif-
icant estimates made by management, and evaluating the overall
financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal control over
financial reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal
control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and oper-
ating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.

===== PAGE 78 =====
76 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2015 2014 2013
Revenue
Services $49,911 $55,673 $57,655
Sales 29,967 35,063 38,666
Financing 1,864 2,057 2,047
Total revenue T 81,741 92,793 98,367
Cost
Services 33,126 36,034 37,564
Sales 6,920 9,312 11,009
Financing 1,011 1,040 1,110
Total cost 41,057 46,386 49,683
Gross profi t 40,684 46,407 48,684
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 20,430 23,180 23,451
Research, development and engineering O 5,247 5,437 5,743
Intellectual property and custom development income (682) (742) (822)
Other (income) and expense (724) (1,938) (333)
Interest expense D&J 468 484 402
Total expense and other (income) 24,740 26,421 28,440
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 15,945 19,986 20,244
Provision for income taxes N 2,581 4,234 3,363
Income from continuing operations 13,364 15,751 16,881
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax C (174) (3,729) (398)
Net income $13,190 $12,022 $16,483
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations P $ 13.60 $ 15.59 $ 15.30
Discontinued operations P (0.18) (3.69) (0.36)
Total P $ 13.42 $ 11.90 $ 14.94
Basic
Continuing operations P $ 13.66 $ 15.68 $ 15.42
Discontinued operations P (0.18) (3.71) (0.36)
Total P $ 13.48 $ 11.97 $ 15.06
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 982,700,267 1,010,000,480 1,103,042,156
Basic 978,744,523 1,004,272,584 1,094,486,604
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 79 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2015 2014 2013
Net income $13,190 $12,022 $16,483
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (1,379) (1,636) (1,335)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (54) (29) (4)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to net income 86 5 (8)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period — — 4
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities 32 (24) (8)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 618 958 43
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to net income (1,072) (97) (166)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges (454) 861 (123)
Retirement-related benefi t plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) 6 1 16
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,963) (9,799) 5,369
Curtailments and settlements 33 24 (3)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (100) (114) (114)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,304 2,531 3,499
Total retirement-related benefi t plans 279 (7,357) 8,767
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L (1,523) (8,156) 7,301
Income tax (expense)/benefi t related to items of other comprehensive income L (208) 1,883 (3,144)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L (1,731) (6,274) 4,157
Total comprehensive income $11,459 $ 5,748 $20,641
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 80 =====
78 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2015 2014
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 7,686 $ 8,476
Marketable securities D 508 0
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $367 in 2015 and $336 in 2014) 8,333 9,090
Short-term fi nancing receivables (net of allowances of $490 in 2015 and $452 in 2014) F 19,020 19,835
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $51 in 2015 and $40 in 2014) 1,201 2,906
Inventories E 1,551 2,103
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 4,205 4,967
Total current assets 42,504 47,377*
Property, plant and equipment G 29,342 39,034
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 18,615 28,263
Property, plant and equipment—net G 10,727 10,771
Long-term fi nancing receivables (net of allowances of $118 in 2015 and $126 in 2014) F 10,013 11,109
Prepaid pension assets S 1,734 2,160
Deferred taxes N 4,822 6,675*
Goodwill I 32,021 30,556
Intangible assets—net I 3,487 3,104
Investments and sundry assets H 5,187 5,520**
Total assets $ 110,495 $ 117,271 * **
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 2,847 $ 5,084
Short-term debt D&J 6,461 5,731**
Accounts payable 6,028 6,864
Compensation and benefi ts 3,560 4,031
Deferred income 11,021 11,877
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,353 5,994*
Total current liabilities 34,269 39,581* **
Long-term debt D&J 33,428 34,991**
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefi t obligations S 16,504 18,261
Deferred income 3,771 3,691
Other liabilities K 8,099 8,733*
Total liabilities 96,071 105,257* **
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 53,262 52,666
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2015—2,221,223,449; 2014—2,215,209,574)
Retained earnings 146,124 137,793
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2015—1,255,494,724; 2014—1,224,685,815) (155,518) (150,715)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (29,607) (27,875)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 14,262 11,868
Noncontrolling interests A 162 146
Total equity 14,424 12,014
Total liabilities and equity $ 110,495 $ 117,271 * **
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 81 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
Cash fl ows from operating activities
Net income $13,190 $ 12,022 $ 16,483
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 2,662 3,145 3,327
Amortization of intangibles 1,193 1,347 1,351
Stock-based compensation 468 512 614
Deferred taxes 1,387 (237) (1,610)
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other 481 (1,535) (236)
Loss on microelectronics business disposal 71 3,381 —
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including fi nancing receivables) 812 1,270 (1,407)
Retirement related (22) (655) 294
Inventories 133 (39) (57)
Other assets/other liabilities (3,448) (1,886) (747)
Accounts payable 81 (456) (529)
Net cash provided by operating activities 17,008 16,868 17,485
Cash fl ows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (3,579) (3,740) (3,623)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 370 404 372
Investment in software (572) (443) (517)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (3,073) (2,338) (4,608)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 2,842 2,493 4,873
Non-operating fi nance receivables—net (398) (1,078) (1,063)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (3,349) (656) (3,056)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred (401) 2,357 297
Net cash used in investing activities (8,159) (3,001) (7,326)
Cash fl ows from fi nancing activities
Proceeds from new debt 5,540 8,180 16,353
Payments to settle debt (5,622) (4,644) (10,013)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 101 (1,753) 621
Common stock repurchases (4,609) (13,679) (13,859)
Common stock transactions—other 322 709 1,074
Cash dividends paid (4,897) (4,265) (4,058)
Net cash used in fi nancing activities (9,166) (15,452) (9,883)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (473) (655) 28
Net change in cash and cash equivalents (790) (2,240) 304
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 8,476 10,716 10,412
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 7,686 $ 8,476 $ 10,716
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 2,657 $ 5,748 $ 4,024
Interest paid on debt $ 995 $ 1,061 $ 982
Capital lease obligations $ 4 $ 2 $ 14
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 82 =====
80 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2013
Equity, January 1, 2013 $50,110 $117,641 $(123,131) $(25,759) $ 18,860 $124 $ 18,984
Net income plus other comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 16,483 16,483 16,483
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 4,157 4,157 4,157
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 20,641 $ 20,641
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,058) (4,058) (4,058)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (9,961,389 shares) 1,216 1,216 1,216
Purchases (1,666,069 shares) and sales
(1,849,883 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plans—net (25) (117) (142) (142)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (73,121,942 shares) (13,993) (13,993) (13,993)
Changes in other equity 268 268 268
Changes in noncontrolling interests 13 13
Equity, December 31, 2013 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $ 22,792 $137 $ 22,929
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2014
Equity, January 1, 2014 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $ 22,792 $137 $ 22,929
Net income plus other comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 12,022 12,022 12,022
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (6,274) (6,274) (6,274)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 5,748 $ 5,748
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,265) (4,265) (4,265)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (7,687,026 shares) 977 977 977
Purchases (1,313,569 shares) and sales
(1,264,232 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plans—net (6) (79) (85) (85)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (71,504,867 shares) (13,395) (13,395) (13,395)
Changes in other equity 95 95 95
Changes in noncontrolling interests 8 8
Equity, December 31, 2014 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $ 11,868 $146 $ 12,014
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 83 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2015
Equity, January 1, 2015 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $11,868 $146 $12,014
Net income plus other comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 13,190 13,190 13,190
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (1,731) (1,731) (1,731)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $11,459 $11,459
Cash dividends paid—common stock (4,897) (4,897) (4,897)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (6,013,875 shares) 606 606 606
Purchases (1,625,820 shares) and sales
(1,155,558 shares) of treasury stock under
employee plans—net 39 (102) (63) (63)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (30,338,647 shares) (4,701) (4,701) (4,701)
Changes in other equity (10) (10) (10)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 16 16
Equity, December 31, 2015 $53,262 $146,124 $(155,518) $(29,607) $14,262 $162 $14,424
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 82 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 84 =====
82 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. Use of Estimates
SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
Basis of Presentation affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are reported
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with disclosures. These estimates are based on management’s best
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that
America (GAAP). the company may undertake in the future and on various other
Within the financial statements and tables presented, cer- assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circum-
tain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded stances. As a result, actual results may be different from these
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are cal- estimates. See “Critical Accounting Estimates” on pages 64 to 67
culated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior for a discussion of the company’s critical accounting estimates.
year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year
presentation. This is annotated where applicable. Revenue
On October 20, 2014, the company announced a definitive The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and manu- and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable
facturing operations to GLOBALFOUNDRIES. The assets and and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement,
liabilities of the Microelectronics business were reported as held delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and
for sale at December 31, 2014 and the operating results of the collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until
Microelectronics business have been reported as discontinued products have been shipped or services have been provided to
operations. The transaction closed on July 1, 2015. Prior periods the client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client
have been reclassified to conform to this presentation to allow for acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have
a meaningful comparison of continuing operations. Refer to note C, lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
“Acquisitions/Divestitures,” for additional information on the trans- specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied.
action. In addition, in 2015, the company renamed its Systems & The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until
Technology segment to Systems Hardware and its System z brand all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved.
to z Systems. The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution pro-
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $8 million, $6 million and viders, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”)
$7 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 when the reseller has: economic substance apart from the com-
and 2013, respectively, are included in the Consolidated Statement pany, credit risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to
of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. the company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end
user, the company has no further obligations related to bringing
Principles of Consolidation about resale or delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of have been met.
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns,
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary stock rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allow-
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial ances. (See Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling Reserves” included in the company’s Annual Report on Form
interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated State- 10-K). Revenue is recognized only if these estimates can be rea-
ment of Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) sonably and reliably determined. The company bases its estimates
are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. on historical results taking into consideration the type of client,
Investments in business entities in which the company does not the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement.
have control, but has the ability to exercise significant influence Payments made under cooperative marketing programs are rec-
over operating and financial policies, are accounted for using the ognized as an expense only if the company receives from the client
equity method and the company’s proportionate share of income an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale
or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The account- whose fair value can be reasonably and reliably estimated. If the
ing policy for other investments in equity securities is on page 90 company does not receive an identifiable benefit sufficiently sep-
within “Marketable Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly arable from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably
traded entities are primarily accounted for using the cost method. estimated, such payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue.
All intercompany transactions and accounts have been eliminated Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
in consolidation. is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company
is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered

===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
to determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as
notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, or one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being rec-
has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the com- ognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the
pany adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered
was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element
has latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk. and there is a relative selling price for all units of accounting in an
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the
taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative selling
and concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In price. The following revenue policies are then applied to each unit
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are of accounting, as applicable.
the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable Revenue from the company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, secu-
arrangements and for each major category of revenue. rity, and cognitive offerings follow the specific revenue recognition
policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements and for each major
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements category of revenue depending on the type of offering which can
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may con- be comprised of services, hardware and/or software.
sist of multiple deliverables of its products and services based
on the needs of its clients. These arrangements may include Services
any combination of services, software, hardware and/or financ- The company’s primary services offerings include information
ing. For example, a client may purchase a server that includes technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourc-
operating system software. In addition, the arrangement may ing, application management services, consulting and systems
include post-contract support for the software and a contract integration, technology infrastructure and system maintenance,
for post-warranty maintenance service for the hardware. These hosting and the design and development of complex IT systems to
types of arrangements can also include financing provided by the a client’s specifications (design and build). Many of these services
company. These arrangements consist of multiple deliverables, can be delivered entirely or partially through the cloud. These ser-
with the hardware and software delivered in one reporting period vices are provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price
and the software support and hardware maintenance services contract or as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and
delivered across multiple reporting periods. In another example, the contract terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.
a client may outsource the running of its datacenter operations to Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
the company on a long-term, multiple-year basis and periodically contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided
purchase servers and/or software products from the company to using either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line
upgrade or expand its facility. The outsourcing services are pro- basis over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the
vided on a continuous basis across multiple reporting periods and amount of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered
the hardware and software products are delivered in one reporting in the period.
period. To the extent that a deliverable in a multiple-deliverable Revenue from application management services, technology
arrangement is subject to specific accounting guidance that deliv- infrastructure and system maintenance and hosting contracts is
erable is accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
Examples of such arrangements may include leased hardware Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
which is subject to specific leasing guidance or software which hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
is subject to specific software revenue recognition guidance on related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
whether and/or how to separate multiple-deliverable arrange- is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
ments into separate units of accounting (separability) and how to Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recog-
allocate the arrangement consideration among those separate nized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under
units of accounting (allocation). For all other deliverables in multi- the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs
ple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance below is applied for incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs
separability and allocation. A multiple-deliverable arrangement is to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original
separated into more than one unit of accounting if the following estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward com-
criteria are met: pletion, revisions to the estimates are made. These revisions may
result in increases or decreases in estimated revenues or costs,
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone and such revisions are reflected in income in the period in which
basis; and the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become known
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative by the company.
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially
in the control of the company.

===== PAGE 86 =====
84 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its In multiple-deliverable arrangements that include software
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order that is more than incidental to the products or services as a
to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and whole (software multiple-deliverable arrangements), software
profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that and software-related elements are accounted for in accordance
the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the with software revenue recognition guidance. Software-related
remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC elements include software products and services for which a soft-
method services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred. ware deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tangible products
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior containing software components and non-software components
to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred that function together to deliver the tangible product’s essential
income of $6,039 million and $6,352 million at December 31, 2015 functionality are not within the scope of software revenue recog-
and 2014, respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement nition guidance and are accounted for based on other applicable
of Financial Position. In other services contracts, the company revenue recognition guidance.
performs the services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated
receivable of $1,630 million and $1,833 million at December 31, 2015 into more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria
and 2014, respectively, is included in notes and accounts receiv- are met:
able-trade in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs • The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. on the undelivered element(s);
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months. • There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is based
Hardware on the price charged when the deliverable is sold separately
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of by the company on a regular basis and not as part of the
system servers, storage solutions and the sale of semiconductors. multiple-deliverable arrangement; and
The company also offers installation services for its more complex • Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmina-
hardware products. tion of the earnings process for that element(s).
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is rec-
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is accounted
ognized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there
for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being
are no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties
the earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undeliv-
and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunc-
ered element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element
tory are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an
Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a
arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the
straight-line basis over the term of the rental or lease.
separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE
of fair value. There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE
Software
of fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is
the delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue rec-
to allocate the arrangement consideration. Under the residual
ognition criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring
method, the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered
license charge) license software is recognized on a straight-line
item(s) equals the total arrangement consideration less the aggre-
basis over the period that the client is entitled to use the license.
gate VSOE of fair value of the undelivered elements.
Revenue from post-contract support, which may include unspec-
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have
ified upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized
a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
on a straight-line basis over the period such items are delivered.
software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
Revenue from software hosting or Software-as-a-Service arrange-
multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software
ments is recognized as the service is delivered, generally on a
deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the rela-
straight-line basis, over the longer of the term of the arrangement
tive selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using
or the expected period of the customer relationship. In software
the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of
hosting arrangements, the rights provided to the customer (e.g.,
selling price (BESP). In circumstances where the company cannot
ownership of a license, contract termination provisions and the
determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the delivera-
feasibility of the customer to operate the software) are consid-
bles in the arrangement, including the software deliverable, BESP
ered in determining whether the arrangement includes a license.
is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
In arrangements which include a software license, the associated
revenue is recognized according to whether the license is perpet-
ual or term, subject to the guidance above.

===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated minimum
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financ- remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to the unamor-
ing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the tized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted cash flows
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, an impairment
on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. loss is recognized.
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,144 million
Best Estimate of Selling Price and $2,230 million at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
In certain instances, the company is not able to establish VSOE Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs
for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When VSOE was estimated at December 31, 2015 to be $653 million in 2016,
cannot be established, the company attempts to establish the sell- $522 million in 2017, $366 million in 2018, $254 million in 2019 and
ing price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined based $349 million thereafter.
on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold separately. Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of
When the company is unable to establish selling price using acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $184 mil-
VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrange- lion and $64 million at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
ment consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the
price at which the company would transact a sale if the product or fair value of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue
service were sold on a stand-alone basis. BESP may be used, for and was estimated at December 31, 2015 to be $53 million in 2016,
example, if a product is not sold on a stand-alone basis or when $41 million in 2017, $39 million in 2018, $21 million in 2019 and
the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does $30 million thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing con-
not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling tract is terminated, the terms of the contract may require the client
the new product on a stand-alone basis. to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors receivable, unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including specific assets utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, additional costs incurred by the company to transition the services.
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that Software Costs
includes review and approval by the company’s management. Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of
In addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research,
products and services, in addition to BESP. development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred
to produce the finished product after technological feasibility has
Services Costs been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capital-
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs ized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. ranging up to three years and are recorded in software cost within
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external cost of sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future
are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are
to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill charged to software cost within cost of sales as incurred.
the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to pur-
initial phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subse- chase or to create and implement internal-use software programs,
quently amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup including software coding, installation, testing and certain data
costs related to the installation of systems and processes and conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period line basis over periods ranging up to two years and are recorded
of benefit, not to exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, in selling, general and administrative expense.
fixed assets associated with outsourcing contracts are capital-
ized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the expected Product Warranties
useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, then the The company offers warranties for its hardware products that
depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the asset generally range up to three years, with the majority being either
or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair one or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard
value of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements are to the deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for
deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of the related deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs
revenue over the expected period of benefit not to exceed the standard to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim
term of the contract. The company performs periodic reviews to experience and estimates of future spending, and applies this
assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup estimate to the revenue stream for products under warranty. Esti-
mated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized
in the current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty

===== PAGE 88 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the insurance and office rental. In addition, general and administrative
remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over expense includes other operating items such as an allowance for
the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when credit losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obli-
actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs gated payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course
from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including of business, acquisition costs related to business combinations,
extended warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred. amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental reme-
Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded diation costs.
as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-
line basis over the delivery period. Changes in deferred income for Advertising and Promotional Expense
extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty liability for stan- The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as
dard warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from ven-
and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement dors are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense
of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables: in the period in which the related advertising and promotional
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, which
Standard Warranty Liability includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,290
million, $1,307 million and $1,294 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013,
($ in millions)
respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated
2015 2014
Statement of Earnings.
Balance at January 1 $ 197 $ 376
Current period accruals 173 240
Research, Development and Engineering
Accrual adjustments to refl ect experience* 7 (120)
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are
Charges incurred (196) (298) expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to pro-
Balance at December 31 $ 181 $ 197 duce the finished product after technological feasibility has been
established are capitalized as an intangible asset.
* Includes an adjustment of $(125 million) in 2014 related to the System x business
divestiture.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intel-
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
lectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade
($ in millions)
secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to
2015 2014
third parties are licensing/royalty-based and others are transac-
Balance at January 1 $ 536 $ 579
tion-based sales and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based
Revenue deferred for new extended fees involve transfers in which the company earns the income
warranty contracts 286 298
over time, or the amount of income is not fixed or determinable
Amortization of deferred revenue* (253) (316) until the licensee sells future related products (i.e., variable roy-
Other** (31) (24) alty, based upon licensee’s revenue). Sales and other transfers
Balance at December 31 $ 538 $ 536 typically include transfers of IP whereby the company has fulfilled
Current portion $ 238 $ 254 its obligations and the fee received is fixed or determinable at
the transfer date. The company also enters into cross-licensing
Noncurrent portion $ 300 $ 282
arrangements of patents, and income from these arrangements
* Includes an adjustment of $(21 million) in 2014 related to the System x business is recorded when earned. In addition, the company earns income
divestiture.
from certain custom development projects for strategic technology
** Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
partners and specific clients. The company records the income
from these projects when the fee is realized and earned, is not
Shipping and Handling
refundable and is not dependent upon the success of the project.
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than
Expense and Other Income
from Global Financing external transactions), gains and losses on
Selling, General and Administrative
certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from securities
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged
and other investments, gains and losses from certain real estate
to income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling prod-
transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, gains
ucts and services are classified as selling expense and include
and losses from the sale of businesses, other than reported as
such items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and
discontinued operations, and amounts related to accretion of asset
travel. General and administrative expense includes such items
retirement obligations.
as compensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes,

===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Business Combinations and Environmental
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are
The company accounts for business combinations using the preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will
acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental
fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifi- liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for
able intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and the
company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of which Asset Retirement Obligations
qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. Goodwill Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associ-
recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting ated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are
units based on expected revenues. Identifiable intangible assets initially recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs
with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. Amortization are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related
of completed technology is recorded in Cost, and amortization of assets by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs
all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisi- are subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related
tion-related costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records
and other costs, are expensed in the periods in which the costs period-to-period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the
are incurred. The results of operations of acquired businesses passage of time in interest expense and revisions to either the
are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the timing or the amount of the original expected cash flows to the
acquisition date. related assets.
Impairment Defined Benefit Pension and
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived intangi- Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
ble assets, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans
in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
recoverable. The impairment test is based on undiscounted cash benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
flows and, if impaired, the asset is written down to fair value based Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference
on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at
and indefinite-lived intangible assets are tested annually, in the December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pen-
fourth quarter, for impairment and whenever changes in circum- sion plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation
stances indicate an impairment may exist. Goodwill is tested (PBO), which represents the actuarial present value of benefits
at the reporting unit level which is the operating segment, or a expected to be paid upon retirement based on employee services
business, which is one level below that operating segment (the already rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For
“component” level) if discrete financial information is prepared and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation
regularly reviewed by management at the segment level. Compo- is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which
nents are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar represents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits
economic characteristics. attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value
of plan assets represents the current market value of assets held
Depreciation and Amortization in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit of partici-
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated pants, which are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit obligation, are
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: aggregated and recorded as a prepaid pension asset equal to this
buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit obligation exceeding
improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, the fair value of plan assets, are aggregated and recorded as a
2 to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligation equal
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated to this excess.
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postre-
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno- tirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value
logical feasibility has been established are amortized over periods of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value
ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation
are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up is recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated
to 2 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods Statement of Financial Position.
between 1 and 7 years.

===== PAGE 90 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement ben- Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted
efit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share Units (PSUs). RSUs
Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder
on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a
(gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of OCI and one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined
amortization of the net transition asset remaining in accumulated and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price,
other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). Service cost rep- adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. The company
resents the actuarial present value of participant benefits earned estimates the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes
in the current year. Interest cost represents the time value of money valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in
cost associated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
changes in the employee base, plan amendments and changes in based on the employees’ respective functions.
actuarial assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation The company records deferred tax assets for awards that
and the corresponding change in OCI. The result of these events result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based
is amortized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) over on the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Dif-
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are ferences between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial
based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets. Net reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the
periodic cost/(income) is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in income tax return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ tax deduction exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consol-
respective functions. idated Statement of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized the tax deduction and no additional paid-in capital exists from
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated previous awards).
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a com-
ponent of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income Taxes
Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic cost/ taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions differences between asset and liability amounts that are recog-
of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result nized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are
of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are
a result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/ measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allow-
(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior ances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount
service granted in plan amendments. that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/ valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning
plans and use participant-specific information such as compen- strategies. When the company changes its determination as to the
sation, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation
including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates expense in the period in which such determination is made.
and mortality rates. The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable,
Defined Contribution Plans the company believes that certain positions may not be fully sus-
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is tained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than
The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consoli- 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. The current
dated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ respective portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the noncurrent
functions. portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in the Con-
solidated Statement of Financial Position. To the extent that new
Stock-Based Compensation information becomes available which causes the company to
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock- change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabil-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures ities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax expense
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the in the period in which such determination is made. Interest and
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for potential tax
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee assessments are included in income tax expense.
requisite service period. The company grants its employees

===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each
at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments
in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-av- are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of
erage rates of exchange prevailing during the year. financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or lia-
non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and bilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in other
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approx- (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
imate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI, in
in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. When net
exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in income is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the
other (income) and expense. Income and expense items are trans- applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the derivative
lated at the weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during that is deferred in AOCI is released to net income and reported
the year. These translation gains and losses are included in net in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and
income for the period in which exchange rates change. expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net
Derivative Financial Instruments investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of basis. The effective portion of changes in the fair value of net
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial
expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded
assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. as foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Changes in
Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative
upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded in inter-
than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, the company est expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge
requires that the instruments be effective in reducing the risk expo- ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are
sure that they are designated to hedge. For instruments that hedge included in net income each period until the instrument matures.
cash flows, hedge designation criteria also require that it be prob- When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset
able that the underlying transaction will occur. Instruments that or liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except
meet established accounting criteria are formally designated as as required under other relevant accounting standards.
hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the derivative is expected Derivatives that are not designated as hedges, as well as
to be highly effective at offsetting changes in fair value or cash changes in the fair value of derivatives that do not effectively offset
flows of the underlying exposure both at inception of the hedging changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item throughout
relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of assessing the designated hedge period (collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are
hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffectiveness is for- recorded in net income for each period and are primarily reported
mally documented at hedge inception. The company assesses in other (income) and expense. When a cash flow hedging relation-
hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffectiveness at least ship is discontinued, the net gain or loss in AOCI must generally
quarterly throughout the designated hedge period. remain in AOCI until the item that was hedged affects earnings.
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction will not
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a occur by the end of the originally specified time period or within
recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm an additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or for- AOCI must be reclassified into earnings immediately.
eign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of The company reports cash flows arising from derivative finan-
a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or paid cial instruments designated as fair value or cash flow hedges
related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge consistent with the classification of cash flows from the underlying
attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge hedged items that these derivatives are hedging. Accordingly, the
of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign oper- cash flows associated with derivatives designated as fair value
ation. In addition, the company may enter into derivative contracts or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows from operating
that economically hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Cash
accounting does not apply or the company elects not to apply flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges and
hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash
relationship in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, flows from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of
which are recognized currently in net income, act as an economic Cash Flows. For currency swaps designated as hedges of foreign
offset to changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s).

===== PAGE 92 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
currency denominated debt (included in the company’s debt risk • Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
management program as addressed in note D, “Financial Instru- own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair
ments,” on pages 101 through 105), cash flows directly associated value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in
with the settlement of the principal element of these swaps are developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incor-
reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing porates the company’s own credit risk as observed in the
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. credit default swap market.
Financial Instruments As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the com- discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs
pany uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs
date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 100 to 101 relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets which
for further information. All methods of assessing fair value result are available for the full term of the derivative.
in a general approximation of value, and such value may never Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a non-
actually be realized. recurring basis. These assets include equity method investments
that are recognized at fair value at the measurement date to the
Fair Value Measurement extent that they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired.
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be Certain assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly can be subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. assets include available-for-sale equity investments that are
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy: other-than-temporary impairment of a financial instrument, fair
value is measured using a model described above.
• Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair
measurement date; value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not
• Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within permitted to be accounted for at fair value under other account-
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either ing standards. This election is irrevocable. The company has not
directly or indirectly; and applied the fair value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.
• Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
Cash Equivalents
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or
data is available without undue cost and effort. less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies Marketable Securities
such items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that
fair value is based upon internally developed models that use cur- are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance
rent market-based or independently sourced market parameters sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be
such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using inter- realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are
nally generated models are classified according to the lowest level included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable
input or value driver that is significant to the valuation. equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported
The determination of fair value considers various factors includ- at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable
ing interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses for available-for-sale
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Con-
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensu- solidated Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and losses are
rate with the duration of the instrument. calculated based on the specific identification method.
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the com- In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in
pany considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base market value has occurred, the company considers the duration
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below
for several parameters that market participants would consider in its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the
determining fair value: issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an antic-
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial
ipated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines in fair
instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
value from amortized cost for available-for-sale equity and debt
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
securities that the company intends to sell or would more likely as the current economic environment, collateral net of reposses-
than not be required to sell before the expected recovery of the sion cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral
amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and expense dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the col-
in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities that the lateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the
company has no intent to sell and believes that it more likely than company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable
not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only the credit loss and calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probabil-
component of the impairment is recognized in other (income) and ity of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the
expense, while the remaining loss is recognized in OCI. The credit company records a specific reserve.
loss component recognized in other (income) and expense is iden-
tified as the amount of the principal cash flows not expected to be Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated
received over the remaining term of the debt security as projected reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its differ-
using the company’s cash flow projections. ent portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically
reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probabil-
Inventories ity of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at Factors that could result in actual receivable losses that are mate-
the lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the rially different from the estimated reserve include sharp changes in
sale of inventories are reflected in net cash provided by operating the economy, or a significant change in the economic health of a
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. particular client that represents a concentration in the company’s
receivables portfolio.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of Other Credit-Related Policies
a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receiv- recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual
ables is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses. status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired
loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated collect all amounts due according to original terms of the lease
based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued on these
any specific, known troubled accounts. receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a reduction to
principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal
Financing Receivables payments outstanding is recognized as interest income. Receiv-
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing ables may be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate,
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with based upon changes in client circumstances.
lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allow-
recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The
ance when management believes the uncollectibility of the
company determines its allowances for credit losses on financing
receivable is confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are cred-
receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables
ited to the allowance.
and loan receivables. The company further segments the portfolio
into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the
ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equip-
original billing date.
ment and by considering the current fair market value of any other
collateral. The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all
The allowance for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales
financing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for
and customer loans includes an assessment of the entire balance
impairment on a quarterly basis. The company considers any
of the capital lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The loan with an individually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan.
methodologies that the company uses to calculate its receivables Depending on the level of impairment, loans will also be placed
reserves, which are applied consistently to its different portfolios, on non-accrual status as appropriate. Client loans are primarily
are as follows: for software and services and are unsecured. These loans are
subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and,
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing receiv-
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in the
ables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily
loan agreements which include covenants to protect against credit
consists of an analysis based upon current information available
deterioration during the life of the obligation.
about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, pub-
lished credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well

===== PAGE 94 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets In September 2015, the FASB issued guidance eliminating the
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at requirement that an acquirer in a business combination account
the inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the for a measurement-period adjustment retrospectively. Instead, an
assets at the end of the lease term. The company periodically acquirer will recognize a measurement-period adjustment during
reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any the period in which the amount of the adjustment is determined.
anticipated increases in specific future residual values are not rec- In addition, the portion of the amount recorded in current-period
ognized before realization through remarketing efforts. Anticipated earnings by line item that would have been recorded in previous
decreases in specific future residual values that are considered to reporting periods if the adjustment to the provisional amounts had
be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon iden- been recognized as of the acquisition date should be presented
tification and are recorded as an adjustment to the residual value separately on the face of the income statement or disclosed in the
estimate. For sales-type and direct-financing leases, this reduction notes. The guidance was effective January 1, 2016 on a prospec-
lowers the recorded net investment and is recognized as a loss tive basis. The guidance is not expected to have a material impact
charged to financing income in the period in which the estimate is in the consolidated financial results.
changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned income to reduce In July 2015, the FASB issued guidance which requires all inven-
future-period financing income. tories, except those using the last-in, first-out or retail methods, to
be measured at the lower of cost and net realizable value. Net real-
Common Stock izable value is the estimated selling price in the ordinary course of
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock business, less reasonably predictable cost of completion, disposal,
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Trea- and transportation. The guidance is effective January 1, 2017 with
sury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury early adoption permitted. The guidance is not expected to have a
stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
weighted-average basis. In May 2015, the FASB issued guidance which removed the
requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all invest-
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock ments for which fair value is measured using the net asset value
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. per share practical expedient. The amendments also removed the
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common requirement to make certain disclosures for all investments that
stock and participating securities according to dividends and are eligible to be measured at fair value using the net asset value
dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights per share practical expedient. Rather, those disclosures are limited
in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is com- to investments for which the entity has elected to measure the fair
puted by dividing net income by the weighted-average number value using that practical expedient. The guidance was effective
of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of January 1, 2016. The guidance was a change in disclosure only
common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-aver- and will not have an impact in the consolidated financial results.
age number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive In April 2015, the FASB issued guidance about whether a
potential common shares outstanding during the period using the cloud computing arrangement includes a software license. If a
treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include cloud computing arrangement includes a software license, then
outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and stock options. the customer should account for the software license element of
the arrangement consistent with the acquisition of other software
licenses. If a cloud computing arrangement does not include a
NOTE B.
software license, the customer should account for the arrange-
ACCOUNTING CHANGES
ment as a services contract. All software licenses recognized
New Standards to be Implemented under this guidance will be accounted for consistent with other
licenses of intangible assets. The guidance was effective Janu-
In January 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
ary 1, 2016 and the company will adopt it on a prospective basis.
issued guidance which addresses aspects of recognition, mea-
The guidance is not expected to have a material impact in the
surement, presentation and disclosure of financial instruments.
consolidated financial results.
Certain equity investments will be measured at fair value with
changes recognized in net income. The amendment also sim-
plifies the impairment test of equity investments that lack readily
determinable fair value. The guidance is effective January 1, 2018
and early adoption is not permitted except for limited provisions.
The guidance is not expected to have a material impact in the
consolidated financial results.

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In May 2014, the FASB issued guidance on the recognition of In July 2013, the FASB issued guidance regarding the presen-
revenue from contracts with customers. Revenue recognition will tation of an unrecognized tax benefit when a net operating loss
depict the transfer of promised goods or services to customers carryforward, a similar tax loss, or a tax credit carryforward exists.
in an amount that reflects the consideration to which the entity Under certain circumstances, unrecognized tax benefits should be
expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The presented in the financial statements as a reduction to a deferred
guidance also requires disclosures regarding the nature, amount, tax asset for a net operating loss carryforward, a similar tax loss,
timing and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from or a tax credit carryforward. The guidance was effective January 1,
contracts with customers. The guidance permits two methods of 2014. The guidance was a change in financial statement presen-
adoption: retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented, tation only and did not have a material impact in the consolidated
or retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying the financial results.
guidance recognized at the date of initial application (the cumula- In March 2013, the FASB issued guidance on when foreign cur-
tive catch-up transition method). The guidance was initially effective rency translation adjustments should be released to net income.
January 1, 2017 and early adoption was not permitted. In August When a parent entity ceases to have a controlling financial interest
2015, the FASB issued guidance which provides for a one-year in a subsidiary or group of assets that is a business within a for-
deferral of the effective date to January 1, 2018, with an option of eign entity, the parent is required to release any related cumulative
applying the standard on the original effective date. The company translation adjustment into net income. Accordingly, the cumula-
will adopt the guidance on January 1, 2018 and apply the cumulative tive translation adjustment should be released into net income
catch-up transition method. The company is continuing to evaluate only if the sale or transfer results in the complete or substantially
the impact of the new guidance in the consolidated financial results. complete liquidation of the foreign entity in which the subsidiary
or group of assets had resided. The guidance was effective Janu-
Standards Implemented ary 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact in the consolidated
In November 2015, the FASB issued guidance which requires financial results.
deferred tax liabilities and assets be classified as noncurrent in In February 2013, the FASB issued guidance for the recognition,
the statement of financial position. The guidance was effective measurement and disclosure of obligations resulting from joint
January 1, 2016 with early adoption permitted. The company and several liability arrangements for which the total amount of the
adopted the guidance in the fourth quarter of 2015 on a retro- obligation within the scope of the guidance is fixed at the report-
spective basis. The company reclassified current deferred tax ing date. Examples include debt arrangements, other contractual
assets of $2.0 billion at December 31, 2014 to deferred tax assets obligations and settled litigation matters. The guidance requires an
and current deferred tax liabilities of $19 million at December 31, entity to measure such obligations as the sum of the amount that
2014 to other liabilities from other accrued expenses and liabilities the reporting entity agreed to pay on the basis of its arrangement
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. In order to among its co-obligors plus additional amounts the reporting entity
offset deferred tax assets and liabilities for presentation as a single expects to pay on behalf of its co-obligors. The guidance was
noncurrent amount by tax jurisdiction, the company also reclassi- effective January 1, 2014 and did not have a material impact in the
fied $178 million at December 31, 2014 from deferred tax assets to consolidated financial results.
other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
In April 2015, the FASB issued guidance which requires debt NOTE C.
issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability to be presented
ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES
in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the carrying amount
of that debt liability, consistent with debt discounts. The guidance Acquisitions
was effective January 1, 2016 with early adoption permitted. The
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in
company adopted the guidance in the fourth quarter of 2015 on a
the tables in this note, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
retrospective basis. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the company
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of
had $74 million and $83 million, respectively, in debt issuance costs.
acquired cash and cash equivalents.
Debt issuance costs were previously included in investments and
sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
2015
In April 2014, the FASB issued guidance that changed the cri-
In 2015, the company completed fourteen acquisitions at an aggre-
teria for reporting a discontinued operation. Only disposals of a
gate cost of $3,555 million.
component that represents a strategic shift that has (or will have)
a major effect on an entity’s operations and financial results is Merge Healthcare, Inc. (Merge)—On October 13, 2015, the com-
a discontinued operation. The guidance also requires expanded pany completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Merge, a publicly
disclosures about discontinued operations and disposals of a held company, for cash consideration of $1,036 million. Merge is
significant part of an entity that does not qualify for discontinued a leading provider of medical image handling and processing,
operations reporting. The guidance was effective January 1, 2015. interoperability and clinical systems designed to advance health-
The impact to the company will be dependent on any transaction care quality and efficiency. Merge joined the company’s Watson
that is within the scope of the new guidance. There were no such Health business unit, bolstering clients’ ability to analyze and
transactions in 2015.

===== PAGE 96 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
cross-reference medical images against billions of data points Each acquisition is expected to enhance the company’s port-
already in the Watson Health Cloud. Goodwill of $695 million has folio of product and services capabilities. AlchemyAPI is a leading
been assigned to the Software segment. At the acquisition date, it provider of scalable cognitive computing application program
was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible for tax interface services and computing applications. Blekko technology
purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified provides advanced Web-crawling, categorization and intelligent
intangible assets acquired is 7.0 years. filtering. Explorys provides secure cloud-based solutions for
clinical integration, at-risk population management, cost of care
Cleversafe, Inc. (Cleversafe)—On November 6, 2015, the company measurement and pay-for-performance. Phytel is a leading pro-
completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Cleversafe, a privately vider of SaaS-based population health management offerings that
held company, for cash consideration of $1,309 million. Cleversafe help providers identify patients at risk for care gaps and engage the
is a leading developer and manufacturer of object-based storage patient to begin appropriate preventative care. Blue Box provides
software and appliances. Cleversafe will be integrated into the hosted, managed, OpenStack-based production-grade private
company’s Cloud business to give clients strategic data flexibility, clouds for the enterprise and service provider markets. Compose
simplified management and consistency with on-premise, cloud offers auto-scaling, production-ready databases to help software
and hybrid cloud deployment options. Goodwill of $1,000 million development teams deploy data services efficiently. StrongLoop
has been assigned to the Global Technology Services ($590 mil- is a leading provider of application development software that
lion) and Systems Hardware ($410 million) segments. At the enables software developers to build applications using applica-
acquisition date, it was expected that none of the goodwill would tion programming interfaces. AAC engages in system integration
be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average application development, software support and services. AAC was
useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired is 6.9 years. an affiliate of JBCC Holdings Inc. and IBM Japan Ltd. The company
acquired all the shares of AAC which became a wholly owned
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment completed acqui-
subsidiary as of October 1, 2015. Gravitant develops cloud-based
sitions of eight privately held businesses: in the first quarter,
software to enable organizations to easily plan, buy and manage,
AlchemyAPI, Inc. (AlchemyAPI) and Blekko, Inc. (Blekko); in the
or “broker” software and computing services from multiple suppli-
second quarter, Explorys, Inc. (Explorys) and Phytel, Inc. (Phytel); in
ers across hybrid clouds. Meteorix offers consulting, deployment,
the third quarter, Compose, Inc. (Compose) and StrongLoop, Inc.
integration and on-going post production services for Workday
(StrongLoop); and in the fourth quarter, Clearleap, Inc. (Clearleap)
Financial Management and Human Capital Management applica-
and IRIS Analytics. Global Technology Services (GTS) completed
tions. Clearleap is a provider of cloud-based video services. IRIS
acquisitions of two privately held businesses: in the second
Analytics provides technology and consultancy services to the
quarter, Blue Box Group, Inc. (Blue Box); and in the fourth quarter,
payments industry to detect electronic payment fraud.
Gravitant, Inc. (Gravitant). Global Business Services (GBS) com-
All acquisitions were for 100 percent of the acquired companies
pleted acquisitions of two privately held businesses in the fourth
with the exception of the AAC acquisition.
quarter, Advanced Application Corporation (AAC) and Meteorix,
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
LLC. (Meteorix).
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
December 31, 2015.
2015 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Merge Cleversafe Acquisitions
Current assets $ 94 $ 23 $ 60
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 128 63 82
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 695 1,000 895
Completed technology 5–7 133 364 163
Client relationships 5–7 145 23 95
Patents/trademarks 2–7 54 11 23
Total assets acquired 1,248 1,484 1,318
Current liabilities (73) (15) (34)
Noncurrent liabilities (139) (160) (73)
Total liabilities assumed (212) (175) (107)
Total purchase price $1,036 $1,309 $1,210
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations At the date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial
using the acquisition method, and accordingly, the identifiable purchase accounting for the Ustream, The Weather Company and
assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling Resource/Ammirati transactions was not complete.
interest in the acquired entity were recorded at their estimated fair
values at the date of acquisition. The primary items that generated 2014
the goodwill are the value of the synergies between the acquired In 2014, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate
businesses and IBM and the acquired assembled workforce, nei- cost of $608 million.
ther of which qualify as an amortizable intangible asset. The Software segment completed acquisitions of five privately
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of held companies: in the first quarter, Aspera, Inc. (Aspera) and Clou-
the identified intangible assets acquired is 6.4 years. These iden- dant, Inc. (Cloudant); in the second quarter, Silverpop Systems, Inc.
tified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis (Silverpop) and Cognea Group Pty LTD (Cognea); and in the third
over their useful lives. Goodwill of $717 million was assigned to the quarter, CrossIdeas Srl (CrossIdeas). Global Technology Services
Software segment, $104 million was assigned to the GTS segment, completed one acquisition in the third quarter, Lighthouse Security
and $74 million was assigned to the GBS segment. It is expected Group, LLC (Lighthouse), a privately held company.
that 7 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. Aspera’s technology helps make cloud computing faster, more
On December 17, 2015, the company announced that it had predictable and more cost effective for big data transfers such
entered into a definitive agreement with AT&T to acquire their appli- as enterprise storage, sharing virtual images or accessing the
cation and hosting services business. The acquisition is expected cloud for increased computing capacity. Cloudant extends the
to strengthen IBM’s outsourcing portfolio and will align with IBM’s company’s mobile and cloud platform by enabling developers to
cloud strategy. easily and quickly create next-generation mobile and web-based
On January 21, 2016, the company announced that it had applications. Silverpop is a provider of cloud-based capabilities
acquired Ustream, Inc. (Ustream), a privately held company based that deliver personalized customer engagements in highly scalable
in San Francisco, California. Ustream provides cloud-based video environments. Cognea offers personalized artificial intelligence
streaming to enterprises and broadcasters. capabilities designed to serve as an intuitive interface between
On January 29, 2016, the company announced that it had human users and data-driven information. CrossIdeas delivers
acquired The Weather Company’s B2B, mobile and cloud-based next generation identity and access governance capabilities to
web-properties, weather.com, Weather Underground, The Weather help mitigate access risks and segregation of duty violations.
Company brand and WSI, its global business-to-business brand Lighthouse is a provider of cloud-enabled managed identity and
for cash consideration of approximately $2 billion. The cable tele- access management solutions.
vision segment was not acquired by IBM, but will license weather The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
forecast data and analytics from IBM under a long-term contract. acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
On February 2, 2016, the company announced its intent to December 31, 2014.
acquire Aperto, a digital agency with headquarters in Berlin,
Germany. Aperto will join the IBM Interactive Experience (IBM iX) 2014 Acquisitions
team. IBM iX provides clients a unique fusion of services span-
($ in millions)
ning strategy, analytics and systems integration for scalable digital, Amortization Total
commerce, mobile and wearable platforms. The transaction is Life (in Years) Acquisitions
expected to close in the first quarter of 2016. Current assets $ 56
On February 3, 2016, the company announced its intent to Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 39
acquire ecx.io, a digital agency headquartered in Dusseldorf, Intangible assets
Germany. The proposed acquisition of ecx.io will enhance IBM iX
Goodwill N/A 442
with new digital marketing, commerce and platform skills to accel-
Completed technology 5–7 68
erate clients’ digital transformations. The transaction is expected
Client relationships 7 77
to close in the first quarter of 2016.
On February 18, 2016, the company announced that it had Patents/trademarks 1–7 18
acquired Resource/Ammirati, a leading U.S. based digital mar- Total assets acquired 701
keting and creative agency, addressing the rising demand from Current liabilities (26)
businesses seeking to reinvent themselves for the digital economy.
Noncurrent liabilities (67)
On February 18, 2016, the company announced its intent to
Total liabilities assumed (93)
acquire Truven Health Analytics (Truven), a leading provider of
Total purchase price $608
healthcare analytics solutions, for estimated cash consideration
of $2.6 billion. Truven has developed proprietary analytic meth- N/A—Not applicable
ods and assembled analytic content assets, creating extensive
national healthcare utilization, performance, quality, and cost data.
The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2016.

===== PAGE 98 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable quarter, Trusteer, Ltd. (Trusteer) and Daeja Image Systems, Ltd.
intangible assets acquired is 6.8 years. These identified intan- (Daeja); and in the fourth quarter, Xtify, Inc. (Xtify), The Now Fac-
gible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their tory and Fiberlink Communications (Fiberlink). Systems Hardware
useful lives. Goodwill of $442 million was assigned to the Software completed one acquisition in the third quarter, CSL International
($430 million) and GTS ($11 million) segments. It was expected (CSL), a privately held company. All acquisitions in 2013 were for
that approximately 1 percent of the goodwill will be deductible 100 percent of the acquired companies.
for tax purposes. All acquisitions were for 100 percent of the The acquisition of StoredIQ advances the company’s efforts
acquired companies. to help clients derive value from big data. The combination of the
company’s and Star Analytics’ software advances the company’s
2013 business analytics initiatives. UrbanCode automates the deliv-
In 2013, the company completed 10 acquisitions at an aggregate ery of software, helping businesses quickly release and update
cost of $3,219 million. mobile, social, big data and cloud applications. CSL deepens
the consolidation cloud capabilities by offering simplified man-
SoftLayer Technologies, Inc. (SoftLayer)—On July 3, 2013, the agement of the virtualization environment. Trusteer extends the
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of the pri- company’s data security capabilities further into the cloud, mobile
vately held company, SoftLayer, a cloud computing infrastructure and endpoint security space. Daeja delivers software that helps
provider based in Dallas, Texas for cash consideration of $1,977 employees across all industries, especially data intensive ones
million. SoftLayer joined the company’s Cloud business unit, which such as banking, insurance and healthcare, get faster access to
combined SoftLayer with IBM SmartCloud into a global platform. critical business information, and complements the company’s
Goodwill of $1,285 million was assigned to the Global Technology big data capabilities. Xtify is a leading provider of cloud-based
Services ($1,246 million) and Software ($39 million) segments. At mobile messaging tools that help organizations improve mobile
the acquisition date, it was expected that none of the goodwill sales, drive in-store traffic and engage customers with personal-
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-av- ized offers. The Now Factory is a provider of analytics software that
erage useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired is helps communications service providers (CSPs) deliver better cus-
7.0 years. tomer experiences and drive new revenue opportunities. Fiberlink
is a mobile management and security company, that supports the
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment completed acqui-
company’s expanding vision for enterprise mobility management,
sitions of eight privately held companies: in the first quarter,
which encompasses secure transactions between businesses,
StoredIQ Inc. (StoredIQ) and Star Analytics, Inc. (Star Analytics);
partners, and customers.
in the second quarter, UrbanCode Inc. (UrbanCode); in the third
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of Decem-
ber 31, 2013.
2013 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) SoftLayer Acquisitions
Current assets $ 80 $ 97
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 300 41
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,285 961
Completed technology 5–7 290 181
Client relationships 6–7 245 97
In-process R&D N/A 2 —
Patents/trademarks 2–7 75 32
Total assets acquired 2,277 1,408
Current liabilities (56) (61)
Noncurrent liabilities (244) (105)
Total liabilities assumed (300) (166)
Total purchase price $1,977 $1,242
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of the Microelectronics business met the criteria for discontinued
the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years. operations reporting. The disposal group constitutes a compo-
These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight- nent under accounting guidance. The continuing cash inflows and
line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $961 million was outflows with the discontinued component are related to the man-
assigned to the Software ($948 million) and Systems Hardware ufacturing sourcing arrangement and the transition, packaging
($13 million) segments. At the acquisition dates, it was expected and test services. These cash flows are not direct cash flows as
that approximately 2 percent of the goodwill would be deductible they are not significant and the company will have no significant
for tax purposes. continuing involvement.
Summarized financial information for discontinued operations
Divestitures is shown below.
Microelectronics—On October 20, 2014, IBM and GLOBAL-
FOUNDRIES announced a definitive agreement in which ($ in millions)
GLOBALFOUNDRIES would acquire the company’s Microelec- For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
tronics business, including existing semiconductor manufacturing Total revenue $ 720 $ 1,335 $1,384
assets and operations in East Fishkill, NY and Essex Junction,
Loss from discontinued operations,
VT. The commercial OEM business to be acquired by GLOBAL- before tax (175) (619) (720)
FOUNDRIES included custom logic and specialty foundry,
Loss on disposal, before tax (116) (4,726) —
manufacturing and related operations. The transaction closed on
Total loss from discontinued
July 1, 2015. operations, before income taxes (291) (5,346) (720)
The transaction included a 10-year exclusive manufacturing
Provision/(benefi t) for income taxes (117) (1,617) (322)
sourcing agreement in which GLOBALFOUNDRIES will provide
Loss from discontinued
server processor semiconductor technology for use in IBM Sys-
operations, net of tax $(174) $(3,729 ) $ (398 )
tems. The agreement provides the company with capacity and
market-based pricing for current semiconductor nodes in produc-
The assets and liabilities at December 31, 2014 presented below
tion and progression to nodes in the future for both development
were classified as held for sale.
and production needs. As part of the transaction, the company
provides GLOBALFOUNDRIES with certain transition services,
including IT, supply chain, packaging and test services and lab ($ in millions)
services. The initial term for these transition services is one to three At December 31: 2015 2014
years, with GLOBALFOUNDRIES having the ability to renew. Assets:
In the third quarter of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax Accounts receivable $— $245
charge of $4.7 billion related to the sale of the Microelectronics dis- Inventory — 380
posal group, which was part of the Systems Hardware reportable
Property, plant & equipment, net — —
segment. The pre-tax charge reflected the fair value less the esti-
Other assets — 92
mated cost of selling the disposal group including an impairment
Total assets $— $717
to the semiconductor long-lived assets of $2.4 billion, $1.5 billion
representing the cash consideration expected to be transferred Liabilities:
to GLOBALFOUNDRIES and $0.8 billion of other related costs. Accounts payable $— $177
Additional pre-tax charges of $116 million were recorded during Deferred income — 87
2015 related to the disposal. The cumulative pre-tax charge was Other liabilities — 163
$4.8 billion as of December 31, 2015. Additional charges may be
Total liabilities $— $427
recorded in future periods.
All assets and liabilities of the business, which were held for
Industry Standard Server—On January 23, 2014, IBM and Lenovo
sale at June 30, 2015, were transferred at closing. The company
Group Limited (Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement in which
transferred $515 million of net cash to GLOBALFOUNDRIES in the
Lenovo would acquire the company’s industry standard server
third quarter of 2015. This amount included $750 million of cash
portfolio (System x) for an adjusted purchase price of $2.1 billion,
consideration, adjusted by the amount of working capital due from
consisting of approximately $1.8 billion in cash, with the balance in
GLOBALFOUNDRIES and other miscellaneous items. The remain-
Lenovo common stock. The stock represented less than 5 percent
ing cash consideration will be transferred over two years.
equity ownership in Lenovo. The company would sell to Lenovo
Reporting the related assets and liabilities initially as held for
its System x, BladeCenter and Flex System blade servers and
sale at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all of the criteria
switches, x86-based Flex integrated systems, NeXtScale and
for such reporting in the applicable accounting guidance. While
iDataPlex servers and associated software, blade networking and
the company met certain criteria for held for sale reporting in prior
maintenance operations.
periods, it did not meet all of the criteria until September 30, 2014.
In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company concluded that

===== PAGE 100 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM and Lenovo entered into a strategic relationship which Retail Store Solutions—On April 17, 2012, the company announced
included a global OEM and reseller agreement for sales of IBM’s that it had signed a definitive agreement with Toshiba TEC for
industry-leading entry and midrange Storwize disk storage the sale of its Retail Store Solutions business. As part of the
systems, tape storage systems, General Parallel File System soft- transaction, the company agreed to transfer the maintenance
ware, SmartCloud Entry offering, and elements of IBM’s system business to Toshiba TEC within three years of the original closing
software, including Systems Director and Platform Computing of the transaction.
solutions. Effective with the initial closing of the transaction, Lenovo The company completed the final phase of the transfer of the
assumed related customer service and maintenance operations. maintenance workforce to Toshiba in the second quarter of 2015.
IBM will continue to provide maintenance delivery on Lenovo’s The parts and inventory transfer to Toshiba will commence in 2018.
behalf for an extended period of time. In addition, as part of the An assessment of the ongoing contractual terms of the transaction
transaction agreement, the company will provide Lenovo with cer- resulted in the recognition of a pre-tax gain of $8 million in 2015.
tain transition services, including IT and supply chain services. Overall, the company has recognized a cumulative total pre-tax
The initial term for these transition services ranges from less than gain on the sale of $519 million.
one year to three years. Lenovo can renew certain services for an
additional year. Others—In addition to those above, the company completed the
The initial closing was completed on October 1, 2014. A subse- following divestitures:
quent closing occurred in most other countries in which there was
2015—In the fourth quarter of 2015, the company completed the
a large business footprint on December 31, 2014. The remaining
divestiture of its Kenexa Compensation Portfolio business to
countries closed on March 31, 2015 resulting in a pre-tax gain of
SCMC Acquisition, LLC. and the divestiture of the Rational System
$16 million in the first quarter of 2015. In the second quarter of 2015,
Architect and SPSS Data Collections suite of products to UNICOM.
an additional pre-tax gain of $36 million was recorded attributed to
In the second quarter of 2015, the company completed the dives-
certain adjustments resolved during the quarter. An assessment
titure of its Travel & Transportation kiosk business to Embross
of the ongoing contractual terms of the transaction resulted in the
North America Ltd., and the divestiture of its Telecom Expense
recognition of a pre-tax gain of $11 million in the fourth quarter of
Management product to Tangoe, Inc. In the first quarter of 2015,
2015. A total pre-tax gain of $63 million was recognized in 2015.
the company completed the divestiture of the Algorithmics Col-
Overall, the company expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain
lateral Management suite of products to SmartStream, Inc. and
on the sale of approximately $1.6 billion, which does not include
the divestiture of the Commerce ILOG Supply Chain Optimization
associated costs related to transition and performance-based
Tools suite of products to Llamasoft, Inc.
costs. Net of these charges, the pre-tax gain is approximately
All of the above transactions closed in 2015 and the financial
$1.2 billion, of which $1.1 billion was recorded in the fourth quarter
terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the
of 2014. The balance of the gain is expected to be recognized in
company recorded a pre-tax gain of $81 million related to these
2019 upon conclusion of the maintenance agreement.
transactions in 2015.
Customer Care—On September 10, 2013, IBM and SYNNEX
2014—In the second quarter of 2014, the company completed the
announced a definitive agreement in which SYNNEX would
divestitures of its solidDB suite of products to UNICOM Systems,
acquire the company’s worldwide customer care business pro-
Inc. and its Human Capital Management business line in France
cess outsourcing services business for $501 million, consisting
to Sopra Group. In the third quarter of 2014, the company com-
of approximately $430 million in cash, net of balance sheet
pleted the divestiture of its Cognos Finance product to UNICOM
adjustments, and $71 million in SYNNEX common stock, which
Systems, Inc., its IMS Tools Suite of products to Rocket Software,
represented less than 5 percent equity ownership in SYNNEX. As
Inc., its Sterling Transportation Management System to Kewill Inc.,
part of the transaction, SYNNEX entered into a multi-year agree-
and its ILOG JViews and Elixir Visualization products to Rogue
ment with the company, and Concentrix, SYNNEX’s outsourcing
Wave Software, Inc. In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company
business, became an IBM strategic business partner for global
completed the divestiture of its Focal Point and PurifyPlus product
customer care business process outsourcing services.
suite to UNICOM Systems, Inc.
The initial closing was completed on January 31, 2014, with
All of the above transactions closed in 2014 and the financial
subsequent closings occurring in 2014. For the full year of 2014,
terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the
the company recorded a pre-tax gain of $202 million related to
company recorded a pre-tax gain of $132 million related to these
this transaction.
transactions in 2014.
In the second quarter of 2015, resolution of the final balance
sheet adjustments was concluded. An assessment of the ongoing
contractual terms of the transaction resulted in the recognition of
a pre-tax gain of $7 million in 2015. Through December 31, 2015,
the cumulative pre-tax gain attributed to this transaction was
$209 million.

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2013—In the first quarter of 2013, the company completed the to TeamSystem and the Cognos Application Development Tools
divestiture of its Showcase Reporting product set to Help/Sys- (ADT) business to UNICOM Systems, Inc.
tems. In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company completed two Financial terms of these transactions did not have a material
divestitures, the Applicazioni Contabili Gestionali (ACG) business impact in the consolidated financial results.
NOTE D.
FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis
at December 31, 2015 and 2014.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2015: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certifi cates of deposit $ — $2,856 $— $2,856
Money market funds 2,069 — — 2,069
Other securities — 18 — 18
Total 2,069 2,874 — 4,943 (6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 506 — 506 (6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 6 — 8
Trading security investments (3) 28 — — 28
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 192 — — 192
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 656 — 656
Foreign exchange contracts — 332 — 332
Equity contracts — 6 — 6
Total — 994 — 994 (7)
Total assets $2,290 $4,381 $— $6,671 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 164 $— $ 164
Equity contracts — 19 — 19
Interest rate contracts — 3 — 3
Total liabilities $ — $ 186 $— $ 186 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) Commercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2015 were $292 million and $702 million, respectively.
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2015 were $164 million and $22 million, respectively.
(6) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset
and liability positions would have been reduced by $139 million each.

===== PAGE 102 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2014: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certifi cates of deposit $ — $3,517 $— $3,517
Commercial paper — 764 — 764
Money market funds 662 — — 662
U.S. government securities — 410 — 410
Other securities — 6 — 6
Total 662 4,697 — 5,359 (5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2) 1 8 — 9
Trading security investments (2) 74 — — 74
Available-for-sale equity investments (2) 243 — — 243
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts — 633 — 633
Foreign exchange contracts — 775 — 775
Equity contracts — 24 — 24
Total — 1,432 — 1,432 (6)
Total assets $980 $6,138 $— $7,118 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 177 $— $ 177
Equity contracts — 19 — 19
Total liabilities $ — $ 196 $— $ 196 (6)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2014 were $751 million and $681 million, respectively.
(4) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
at December 31, 2014 were $165 million and $31 million, respectively.
(5) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(6) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset
and liability positions would have been reduced by $97 million each.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the year ended Loans and Long-Term Receivables
December 31, 2015. During the year ended December 31, 2014, Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using cur-
the company transferred trading security investments valued at rent interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar
$74 million from Level 2 to Level 1 due to the expiration of certain credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31,
regulatory restrictions. 2015 and 2014, the difference between the carrying amount and
estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements,
Short-Term Receivables and Payables these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are fair value hierarchy.
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value.
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt Long-Term Debt
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial lia- Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
bilities with carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset
at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
market price is not available, an expected present value technique Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are
similar terms and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is
value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is $33,428 million not materially different from carrying value, in the Consolidated
and $34,991 million and the estimated fair value is $35,220 million Statement of Financial Position.
and $37,524 million at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. If The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent
measured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered
(including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the available-for-sale and recorded at fair value in the Consolidated
fair value hierarchy. Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2015: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 5 $3 $ — $ 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $186 $6 $ 0 $192
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2014: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 7 $3 $ — $ 9
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $272 $2 $ 31 $243
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity ($ in millions)
securities in conjunction with the sale of System x business which For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014
are classified as available-for-sale securities. Based on an evalua- Net unrealized gains/(losses)
tion of available evidence as of December 31, 2015, the company arising during the period $(33) $(18)
recorded an other-than-temporary impairment due to the dura- Net unrealized (gains)/losses
tion and extent of the decline in fair value of these securities. The reclassifi ed to net income* 53 3
impairment charge of $86 million was recorded in other (income) * Includes pre-tax writedowns of $86 million in 2015. There were no writedowns in 2014.
and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The
adjusted cost basis of these securities was $185 million as of The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale
December 31, 2015. debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2015.
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during
the period were as follows: Derivative Financial Instruments
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is
($ in millions) a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 normal course of business, the company is exposed to the impact
Proceeds $8 $21 $41 of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to
Gross realized gains (before taxes) 1 0 13 a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and client
credit risk. The company limits these risks by following estab-
Gross realized losses (before taxes) 1 5 5
lished risk management policies and procedures, including the
use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale
in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest
debt and equity securities that have been included in other com-
rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate move-
prehensive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses
ments between the interest rates associated with the company’s
reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
to net income were as follows:

===== PAGE 104 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
lease and other financial assets and the interest rates associated In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the com-
with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the pany does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master
related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables
are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising from for- recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the
eign exchange rate fluctuations. fair values of the related derivative instruments. No amount was
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2015 and 2014
is exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the coun- in accounts payable for the obligation to return cash collateral
terparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering totaled $90 million and $487 million at December 31, 2015 and
into contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions 2014, respectively. The company restricts the use of cash collateral
based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s established received to rehypothecation, and therefore, reports it in prepaid
policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Statement
transactions include reviewing and establishing limits for credit of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated at Decem-
exposure and continually assessing the creditworthiness of coun- ber 31, 2015 and 2014.
terparties. The right of set-off that exists under certain of these The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the
arrangements enables the legal entities of the company subject volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency
to the arrangement to net amounts due to and from the counter- exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company
party reducing the maximum loss from credit risk in the event of with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as
counterparty default. net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as
The company is also a party to collateral security arrange- the derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon matu-
ments with most of its major derivative counterparties. These rity which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the
arrangements require the company to hold or post collateral (cash underlying hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss
or U.S. Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values exceed potential on an ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these
contractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds can be hedging relationships by de-designating or terminating the deriv-
fixed or can vary based on credit default swap pricing or credit ative instrument in order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not
ratings received from the major credit agencies. The aggregate designated as accounting hedges, the company may utilize deriv-
fair value of all derivative instruments under these collateralized atives to offset the changes in the fair value of the de-designated
arrangements that were in a liability position at December 31, 2015 instruments from the date of de-designation until maturity.
and 2014 was $28 million and $21 million, respectively, for which In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
no collateral was posted at either date. Full collateralization of futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps and
these agreements would be required in the event that the com- options depending upon the underlying exposure. The company
pany’s credit rating falls below investment grade or if its credit is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, as applicable, A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
pursuant to the terms of the collateral security arrangements. by underlying risk, follows.
The aggregate fair value of derivative instruments in net asset
positions as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 was $994 million Interest Rate Risk
and $1,432 million, respectively. This amount represents the max- Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
imum exposure to loss at the reporting date as a result of the The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally
counterparties failing to perform as contracted. This exposure to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-ef-
was reduced by $139 million and $97 million at December 31, fective financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the
2015 and 2014, respectively, of liabilities included in master netting underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, at Decem- overall interest cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to
ber 31, 2015 and 2014, this exposure was reduced by $90 million convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt
and $487 million of cash collateral and $40 million and $31 million (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt
of non-cash collateral in U.S. Treasury securities, respectively, issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At Decem-
received by the company. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the net ber 31, 2015 and 2014, the total notional amount of the company’s
exposure related to derivative assets recorded in the Statement interest rate swaps was $7.3 billion and $5.8 billion, respectively.
of Financial Position was $726 million and $817 million, respec- The weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments
tively. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the net amount related to at December 31, 2015 and 2014 was approximately 7.2 years and
derivative liabilities recorded in the Statement of Financial Position 8.7 years, respectively.
was $47 million and $99 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Forecasted Debt Issuance Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign
debt issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use for- currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company
ward-starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign cur-
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps rency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are
any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding at accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time
December 31, 2015 and 2014. over which the company hedges its exposure to the variability in
At December 31, 2015 and 2014, net gains of less than $1 million future cash flows is approximately seven years. At December 31,
(before taxes), respectively, were recorded in accumulated other 2015 and December 31, 2014, no amounts were outstanding under
comprehensive income/(loss) in connection with cash flow hedges this program.
of the company’s borrowings. Within these amounts, less than At December 31, 2015 and 2014, in connection with cash flow
$1 million of gains, respectively, are expected to be reclassified hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the company
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting recorded net losses of $2 million (before taxes), respectively, in
economic impact against the underlying transactions. accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss). Within these
amounts, less than $1 million of losses, respectively, are expected
Foreign Exchange Risk to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 months, provid-
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries ing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying exposure.
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in for- Asset/Liability Management
eign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the
caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency
functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addi-
the U.S. dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and tion, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to
foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk management pur- economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure
pose. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the total notional amount of of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and
derivative instruments designated as net investment hedges was liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap contracts are gen-
$5.5 billion and $2.2 billion, respectively. The weighted-average erally less than one year. The changes in the fair values of these
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2015 and contracts and of the underlying hedged exposures are generally
2014 was approximately 0.2 years for both periods. offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2015 and
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions 2014, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in eco-
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional cur- nomic hedges of foreign currency exposure was $11.7 billion and
rency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments for $13.1 billion, respectively.
royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S.
Equity Risk Management
subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the cur- The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
rency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward con- certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
tracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
of time over which the company is hedging its exposure to the vari- expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not
ability in future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2015 and designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes deriva-
2014, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as tives, including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge
cash flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was the exposures related to its employee compensation obligations.
$8.2 billion and $9.3 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average The derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad
remaining maturity of 0.7 years for both periods. market indices or the total return on the company’s common stock.
At December 31, 2015 and 2014, in connection with cash flow They are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the company in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At
recorded net gains of $147 million and net gains of $602 million December 31, 2015 and 2014, the total notional amount of deriv-
(before taxes), respectively, in accumulated other comprehensive ative instruments in economic hedges of these compensation
income/(loss). Within these amounts $121 million of gains and obligations was $1.2 billion and $1.3 billion, respectively.
$572 million of gains, respectively, are expected to be reclassified
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting
economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.

===== PAGE 106 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common The company did not have any derivative instruments relating to
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed this program outstanding at December 31, 2015 and 2014.
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement The company is exposed to market volatility on certain invest-
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value ment securities. The company may utilize options or forwards
of these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consol- to economically hedge its market exposure. The derivatives are
idated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other
warrants qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
2015 and 2014. At December 31, 2015 and 2014, the total notional amount of deriv-
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay ative instruments in economic hedges of investment securities was
amounts due under contractual terms. The company may utilize less than $0.1 billion for both periods.
credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the
These derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are derivative and non-derivative instrument-related risk management
recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other activity as of December 31, 2015 and 2014, as well as for the years
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Sheet Balance Sheet
At December 31: Classifi cation 2015 2014 Classifi cation 2015 2014
Designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Interest rate contracts other current assets $ — $ 5 expenses and liabilities $ — $ 0
Investments and
sundry assets 656 628 Other liabilities 3 —
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Foreign exchange contracts other current assets 197 632 expenses and liabilities 70 50
Investments and
sundry assets 5 17 Other liabilities 19 21
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $858 $1,281 derivative liabilities $ 92 $ 72
Not designated as hedging instruments
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Foreign exchange contracts other current assets $ 90 $ 90 expenses and liabilities $ 75 $ 101
Investments and
sundry assets 40 37 Other liabilities — 4
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Equity contracts other current assets 6 24 expenses and liabilities 19 14
Investments and
sundry assets — 0 Other liabilities — 5
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $136 $ 151 derivative liabilities $ 94 $ 125
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ — $ 0
Long-term debt N/A N/A $7,945 $7,747*
Total $994 $1,432 $8,131 $7,944 *
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Attributable to Risk
Consolidated Recognized on Derivatives (1) Being Hedged (2)
Statement of
For the year ended December 31: Earnings Line Item 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (5)
Interest rate contracts Cost of fi nancing $108 $ 231 $(109) $(1) $(127) $202
Interest expense 94 206 (74) (1) (114) 138
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments (1)
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense 127 (776) (328) N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Interest rate contracts and expense (1) 34 — N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense (27) 51 164 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
and expense (9) (9) — N/A N/A N/A
Total $291 $(263) $(347) $(1) $(241) $340
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Ineffectiveness and
Effective Portion Effective Portion Amounts Excluded from
Recognized in OCI Consolidated Reclassifi ed from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
Statement of
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 Earnings Line Item 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Derivative instruments in
cash fl ow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Interest expense $ 0 $ (1) $ — $ — $— $—
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts 618 958 43 and expense 731 98 162 5 (1) 0
Cost of sales 192 (15) (34) — — —
SG&A expense 149 15 39 — — —
Instruments in net investment hedges (4)
Foreign exchange contracts 889 1,136 173 Interest expense — — — 13 0 3
Total $1,507 $2,095 $216 $1,072 $ 97 $167 $18 $ (1) $ 3
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under
these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated
hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
(5) For the years ended December 31, 2015 and December 31, 2014, fair value hedges resulted in a loss of $2 million and a gain of $4 million in ineffectiveness, respectively.
There were no amounts recorded as ineffectiveness on fair value hedges for the year ended December 31, 2013.
N/A—Not applicable
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, there an underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings repre- (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal
senting hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment course of business.
of hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with

===== PAGE 108 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE E. Client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), net
INVENTORIES of allowance for credit losses of $377 million and $396 million
at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, are loans that are
($ in millions) provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware,
At December 31: 2015 2014 software and services. Payment terms on these financing arrange-
Finished goods $ 352 $ 430 ments are generally for terms up to seven years.
Client loan and installment payment financing contracts are
Work in process and raw materials 1,199 1,674
priced independently at competitive market rates. The company
Total $1,551 $2,103
has a history of enforcing these financing agreements.
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as col-
NOTE F.
lateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged
FINANCING RECEIVABLES
as collateral for borrowings were $545 million and $642 million at
December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. These borrowings are
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allow-
included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 111 to 113.
ances for credit losses, including residual values.
The company did not have any financing receivables held for
sale as of December 31, 2015 and 2014.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2015 2014 Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Current The following tables present financing receivables on a gross
Net investment in sales-type basis, excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual
and direct fi nancing leases $ 3,057 $ 3,781 value, by portfolio segment and by class, excluding commercial
Commercial fi nancing receivables 8,948 8,423 financing receivables and other miscellaneous financing receiv-
Client loan and installment ables at December 31, 2015 and 2014. The company determines
payment receivables (loans) 7,015 7,631 its allowance for credit losses based on two portfolio segments:
Total $19,020 $19,835 lease receivables and loan receivables, and further segments the
Noncurrent portfolio into two classes: major markets and growth markets.
Net investment in sales-type
and direct fi nancing leases $ 4,501 $ 4,449 ($ in millions)
Client loan and installment Major Growth
At December 31, 2015: Markets Markets Total
payment receivables (loans) 5,512 6,660
Financing receivables
Total $10,013 $11,109
Lease receivables $ 5,517 $1,524 $ 7,041
Loan receivables 9,739 3,165 12,904
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms Ending balance $15,256 $4,689 $19,945
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales- Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,180 $4,227 $19,406
type and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual Individually evaluated for impairment $ 76 $ 462 $ 539
values of $645 million and $671 million at December 31, 2015 and Allowance for credit losses
2014, respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of
Beginning balance at
$536 million and $517 million, and net of the allowance for credit January 1, 2015
losses of $213 million and $165 million at those dates, respectively.
Lease receivables $ 32 $ 133 $ 165
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding at
Loan receivables 79 317 396
December 31, 2015, expressed as a percentage of the total, are
Total $ 111 $ 450 $ 561
approximately: 2016, 44 percent; 2017, 27 percent; 2018, 18 per-
cent; 2019, 8 percent; and 2020 and beyond, 3 percent. Write-offs (14) (48) (62)
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit Provision 20 122 141
losses of $19 million and $17 million at December 31, 2015 and Other (8) (43) (51)
2014, respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts
Ending balance at
receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM December 31, 2015 $ 109 $ 481 $ 590
products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable Lease receivables $ 25 $ 188 $ 213
financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
Loan receivables $ 83 $ 293 $ 377
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 43 $ 36 $ 79
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 65 $ 445 $ 511

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Impaired Loans
Major Growth The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated
At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets Total
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment,
Financing receivables
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following
Lease receivables $ 5,702 $1,943 $ 7,645
tables present impaired client loan receivables at December 31,
Loan receivables 10,049 4,639 14,687 2015 and 2014.
Ending balance $15,751 $6,581 $22,332
Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,665 $6,156 $21,821 ($ in millions)
Recorded Related
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 86 $ 425 $ 511
At December 31, 2015: Investment Allowance
Allowance for credit losses
Major markets $ 50 $ 47
Beginning balance at
Growth markets 297 284
January 1, 2014
Total $347 $331
Lease receivables $ 42 $ 80 $ 123
Loan receivables 95 147 242
Total $ 137 $ 228 $ 365 ($ in millions)
Write-offs (18) (6) (24) Recorded Related
At December 31, 2014: Investment Allowance
Provision 3 240 243
Major markets $ 54 $ 47
Other (12) (11) (23)
Growth markets 299 293
Ending balance at
Total $353 $340
December 31, 2014 $ 111 $ 450 $ 561
Lease receivables $ 32 $ 133 $ 165
Loan receivables $ 79 $ 317 $ 396 ($ in millions)
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 42 $ 39 $ 81 Interest
Income
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 69 $ 411 $ 480 Average Interest Recognized
Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2015: Investment Recognized Basis
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are Major markets $ 51 $0 $—
evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For indi-
Growth markets 315 0 —
vidually evaluated receivables, the company determines the
Total $367 $0 $—
expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate
of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts
in which the loss is probable, the company records a specific
($ in millions)
reserve. In addition, the company records an unallocated reserve Interest
that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different portfo- Income
Average Interest Recognized
lios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. This Recorded Income on Cash
For the year ended December 31, 2014: Investment Recognized Basis
reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term,
characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history. Major markets $ 68 $0 $—
Growth markets 208 0 —
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status Total $276 $0 $—
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31,
2015 and 2014.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2015 2014
Major markets $ 2 $ 13
Growth markets 63 40
Total lease receivables $ 65 $ 53
Major markets $ 13 $ 27
Growth markets 91 151
Total loan receivables $104 $178
Total receivables $168 $231

===== PAGE 110 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Credit Quality Indicators At December 31, 2015, the industries which made up Global
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on rating Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (36 per-
agency data, publicly available information and information pro- cent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Government (11 percent),
vided by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the relative Services (11 percent), Retail (9 percent), Communications (7 per-
level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system cent), Healthcare (6 percent) and Other (6 percent).
that maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown
below. The company uses information provided by Moody’s, where Lease Receivables
available, as one of many inputs in its determination of customer ($ in millions)
credit rating. Major Growth
At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each
class of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, Credit rating
2015 and 2014. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging Aaa – Aa3 $ 563 $ 46
from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are A1 – A3 1,384 178
considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do
Baa1 – Baa3 1,704 900
not reflect mitigation actions that the company may take to transfer
Ba1 – Ba2 1,154 272
credit risk to third parties.
Ba3 – B1 470 286
Lease Receivables B2 – B3 372 176
Caa – D 55 85
($ in millions)
Major Growth Total $5,702 $1,943
At December 31, 2015: Markets Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 538 $ 39 Loan Receivables
A1 – A3 1,324 162 ($ in millions)
Baa1 – Baa3 1,493 392 Major Growth
At December 31, 2014: Markets Markets
Ba1 – Ba2 1,214 352
Credit rating
Ba3 – B1 513 277
Aaa – Aa3 $ 993 $ 110
B2 – B3 403 215
A1 – A3 2,438 425
Caa – D 33 87
Baa1 – Baa3 3,003 2,148
Total $5,517 $1,524
Ba1 – Ba2 2,034 649
Ba3 – B1 827 683
Loan Receivables B2 – B3 655 420
Caa – D 98 203
($ in millions)
Major Growth Total $10,049 $4,639
At December 31, 2015: Markets Markets
Credit rating
At December 31, 2014, the industries which made up Global
Aaa – Aa3 $ 949 $ 80 Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (40 per-
A1 – A3 2,338 336 cent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Government (13 percent),
Baa1 – Baa3 2,635 813 Services (9 percent), Retail (8 percent), Communications (6 per-
cent), Healthcare (5 percent) and Other (5 percent).
Ba1 – Ba2 2,143 732
Ba3 – B1 905 576
B2 – B3 711 447
Caa – D 59 181
Total $9,739 $3,165

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PPaasstt DDuuee FFiinnaanncciinngg RReecceeiivvaabblleess
(($$ iinn mmiilllliioonnss))
RReeccoorrddeedd
TToottaall TToottaall IInnvveessttmmeenntt
PPaasstt DDuuee FFiinnaanncciinngg >> 9900 DDaayyss
AAtt DDeecceemmbbeerr 3311,, 22001155:: >> 9900 DDaayyss** CCuurrrreenntt* RReecceeiivvaabblleess* aanndd AAccccrruuiinngg
MMaajjoorr mmaarrkkeettss $$ 55 $$ 55,,551122 $$ 55,,551177 $$ 55
GGrroowwtthh mmaarrkkeettss 3300 11,,449944 11,,552244 1133
TToottaall lleeaassee rreecceeiivvaabblleess $$3355 $$ 77,,000066 $$ 77,,004411 $$1199
MMaajjoorr mmaarrkkeettss $$ 77 $$ 99,,773322 $$ 99,,773399 $$ 77
GGrroowwtthh mmaarrkkeettss 3311 33,,113344 33,,116655 1144
TToottaall llooaann rreecceeiivvaabblleess $$3388 $$1122,,886666 $$1122,,990044 $$2222
TToottaall $$7733 $$1199,,887722 $$1199,,994455 $$4400
** DDooeess nnoott iinncclluuddee aaccccoouunnttss tthhaatt aarree ffuullllyy rreesseerrvveedd..
(($$ iinn mmiilllliioonnss))
RReeccoorrddeedd
TToottaall TToottaall IInnvveessttmmeenntt
PPaasstt DDuuee FFiinnaanncciinngg >> 9900 DDaayyss
AAtt DDeecceemmbbeerr 3311,, 22001144:: >> 9900 DDaayyss** CCuurrrreenntt* ** RReecceeiivvaabblleess* ** aanndd AAccccrruuiinngg**
MMaajjoorr mmaarrkkeettss $$ 66 $$ 55,,669966 $$ 55,,770022 $$ 66
GGrroowwtthh mmaarrkkeettss 3322 11,,991111 11,,994433 1144
TToottaall lleeaassee rreecceeiivvaabblleess $$3388 $$ 77,,660077 $$ 77,,664455 $$2200
MMaajjoorr mmaarrkkeettss $$ 99 $$1100,,004400 $$1100,,004499 $$ 99
GGrroowwtthh mmaarrkkeettss 3355 44,,660033 44,,663399 1188
TToottaall llooaann rreecceeiivvaabblleess $$4444 $$1144,,664433 $$1144,,668877 $$2277
TToottaall $$8822 $$2222,,225500 $$2222,,333322 $$4477
* * D Dooeess n noot tin inccluluddee a accccoouunntsts t hthaat ta arere f ufullylly r eresseervrveedd..
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE G.
TThroe ucobmlepdan Dy aesbset sRseeds atlrl urecsttruurcitnurginsgs that occurred on or after NPROOTEP EGR. TY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
TJahneu caorym 1p, a2n0y1 4a sasneds dseetde ramll rineesdtr uthcatut rthinegrse twhaetr eo nccou srirgendif iocna notr taroftue-r PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
Jbalendu adreyb 1t, r2e0s1t4r uacntdu rdinegtesr mfoirn tehde t hyeaat trhse erned weedr eD neoc esimgnbieficr a3n1t, t2r0o1u4- ($ in millions)
banledd 2 d0e1b5t. restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2014 (A$t i nD emcileliomnbse)r 31: 2015 2014
and 2015. ALat Dndec aenmdb learn 3d1 :improvements $ 2505185 $ 2606174
LBaunilddi nagnsd alanndd b imuilpdrionvge immepnrotsvements $ 6 ,555582 $ 9 ,656274
PBluainldti, nlagbso arnadto bryu ialdnidn go fimfi cper oevqeumipemnetsnt 261,,515126 297,,532848
PPllaanntt , alanbdo orathtoerr yp aronpde orftfiy c—eg erqousispment 2218,,121266 2377,,358788
PLelasnst: aAncdc uomthuelra pterodp deerptyr—ecgiarotiossn 2188,,202561 3277,,557080
LPelasnst: aAncdc uomthuelra pterodp deerptyr—ecniaettion 1180,,015716 2170,,500708
PRleanntta al nmda octhhineer sproperty—net 101,,117165 101,,047586
LReesnst:a Al mccaucmhiunleasted depreciation 1,151655 1,475663
RLeesnst:a Al mccaucmhiunleast—edn deetpreciation 556551 766933
RToetnatal—l mneacthines—net $10,575217 $10,679731
Total—net $10,727 $10,771
In 2015, the company retired the assets associated with the dives-
Itnit u2r0e1 5o,f tthhee cMoimcrpoaenleyc rtertoirneidc sth beu assinseestss aimsspoacciatitnegd bwoitthh tphlea ndti vaensd-
toittuhreer opfr othpee rMtyi—crogerolescst raonndic asc bcuumsinuelastse dim dpeapcrteincgia tbioonth. plant and
other property—gross and accumulated depreciation.

===== PAGE 112 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE H. ($ in millions)
INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2014: Amount Amortization Amount
($ in millions) Intangible asset class
At December 31: 2015 2014 Capitalized software $1,375 $ (679) $ 696
Deferred transition and setup costs
Client relationships 2,208 (1,271) 937
and other deferred arrangements* $1,624 $1,527
Completed technology 2,831 (1,533) 1,298
Derivatives—noncurrent 702 681
Patents/trademarks 374 (214) 161
Alliance investments
Other* 18 (6) 12
Equity method 82 98
Total $6,806 $(3,702) $3,104
Non-equity method 393 496
Prepaid software 273 332 * Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems.
Long-term deposits 256 300
Other receivables 516 509 The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased $383 mil-
Employee benefi t-related 273 356 lion during the year ended December 31, 2015, primarily due to
Prepaid income taxes 496 518 intangible asset additions resulting from acquisitions, partially
offset by amortization. There was no impairment of intangible
Other assets 571 705**
assets recorded in 2015 and 2014. The aggregate intangible amor-
Total $5,187 $5,520 **
tization expense was $1,193 million and $1,347 million for the years
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. In addition, in
to Global Services client arrangements. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting
2015 and 2014, respectively, the company retired $1,809 million
Policies,” on page 85 for additional information.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs and $724 million of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting
in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for both the gross carrying amount and accumulated amortization
additional information.
by this amount.
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
NOTE I. relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated
INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at
December 31, 2015:
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset bal- ($ in millions)
ances by major asset class. Capitalized Acquired
Software Intangibles Total
2016 $426 $760 $1,185
($ in millions)
Gross Net 2017 256 650 906
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2015: Amount Amortization Amount 2018 85 492 577
Intangible asset class 2019 — 338 338
Capitalized software $1,348 $ (581) $ 767 2020 — 240 240
Client relationships 1,856 (927) 929
Completed technology 2,960 (1,397) 1,563
Patents/trademarks 335 (142) 193
Other* 44 (10) 35
Total $6,543 $(3,057) $3,487
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business
processes, methodologies and systems.

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2015 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments* 2015
Global Business Services $ 4,555 $ 74 $ 0 $ (1) $ (232) $ 4,396
Global Technology Services 3,530 694 0 — (90) 4,133
Software 21,000 1,413 (2) (25) (741) 21,644
Systems Hardware 1,472 410 0 — (33) 1,848
Total $30,556 $2,590 $ (3) $(26) $(1,096) $32,021
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2014 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments** 2014
Global Business Services* $ 4,855 $ — $ 0 $ (52) $(248) $ 4,555
Global Technology Services* 3,608 11 21 (2) (108) 3,530
Software 21,121 430 $(17) (19) (516) 21,000
Systems Hardware 1,601 — — (110) (19) 1,472
Total $31,184 $442 $ 4 $(183) $(891 ) $30,556
* Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation with $469 million reclassified from GTS to GBS at December 31, 2014 for Global Process Services.
** Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2015 and 2014 were NOTE J.
related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to Decem- BORROWINGS
ber 31, 2014 or December 31, 2013, respectively, and were still
subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of 12 Short-Term Debt
months from the acquisition date or when information becomes
($ in millions)
available. There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded
At December 31: 2015 2014
in 2015 or 2014 and the company has no accumulated goodwill
Commercial paper $ 600 $ 650
impairment losses.
Short-term loans 590 480
Long-term debt—current maturities 5,271 4,601*
Total $6,461 $5,731 *
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs
in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
additional information.
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at
December 31, 2015 and 2014 was 0.4 percent and 0.1 percent,
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term
loans was 5.2 percent and 4.0 percent at December 31, 2015 and
2014, respectively.

===== PAGE 114 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2015 2014
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2015):
2.80% 2016 – 2017 $ 9,351 $ 9,254
3.34% 2018 – 2019 7,591 6,835
1.46% 2020 –2021 3,717 6,555
2.35% 2022 1,900 1,000
3.38% 2023 1,500 1,500
3.63% 2024 2,000 2,000
7.00% 2025 600 600
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.88% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 83 83
5.60% 2039 745 745
4.00% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.00% 2045 27 27
7.13% 2096 316 316
30,319 31,404
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2015, in parentheses):
Euros (1.8%) 2016 – 2025 4,892 5,463
Pound sterling (2.7%) 2017 – 2022 1,555 1,176
Japanese yen (0.4%) 2017 – 2022 1,180 733
Swiss francs (6.3%) 2020 9 162
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 360 432
Other (13.8%) 2016– 2020 506 367
38,820 39,737
Less: net unamortized discount 838 853
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 74 83**
Add: fair value adjustment* 790 792
38,699 39,593**
Less: current maturities 5,271 4,601**
Total $33,428 $34,991 **
* The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the
debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which indebtedness of at least $500 million.
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The
leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s consol- failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an event
idated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply.
merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. The credit If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and interest
facilities also include a covenant on the company’s consolidated on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, immediately due and payable.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2015 2014**
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $25,499 3.41% $27,180 3.09%
Floating-rate debt* 13,199 0.96% 12,412 0.82%
Total $38,699 $39,593
* I ncludes $7,338 million in 2015 and $5,839 million in 2014 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D,
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 101 through 105).
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt out- Lines of Credit
standing at December 31, 2015, are as follows: In 2015, the company extended the term of its five-year, $10 bil-
lion Credit Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) by one year to
($ in millions) November 10, 2020. The total expense recorded by the com-
Total pany related to this global credit facility was $5.3 million in 2015,
2016 $ 5,273 $5.4 million in 2014 and $5.4 million in 2013. The Credit Agreement
2017 5,674 permits the company and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up
to $10 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary
2018 4,691
Borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the company. The
2019 4,003
company may also, upon the agreement of either existing lenders,
2020 4,505
or of the additional banks not currently party to the Credit Agree-
2021 and beyond 14,675 ment, increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement
Total $38,820 up to an additional $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms of the
Credit Agreement, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may
borrow, prepay and reborrow amounts under the Credit Agree-
Interest on Debt ment at any time during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates on
($ in millions) borrowings under the Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 market interest rates, as further described in the Credit Agree-
Cost of fi nancing $ 540 $ 542 $ 587 ment. The Credit Agreement contains customary representations
and warranties, covenants, events of default, and indemnification
Interest expense 481 484 405
provisions. The company believes that circumstances that might
Net investment derivative activity (13) 0 (3)
give rise to breach of these covenants or an event of default, as
Interest capitalized 0 4 22
specified in the Credit Agreement, are remote. As of December 31,
Total interest paid and accrued $1,008 $1,030 $1,011 2015, there were no borrowings by the company, or its subsidiaries,
under the Credit Agreement.
Refer to the related discussion on page 144 in note T, “Segment The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing seg- of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Inter-
ment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 101 through est rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit
105 for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
in the company’s debt risk management program.

===== PAGE 116 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE K.
OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions) accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities, including amounts
At December 31: 2015 2014 classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Income tax reserves $3,150 $3,146 Position, that do not reflect actual or anticipated insurance recov-
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,445 1,658 eries, were $283 million and $254 million at December 31, 2015
and 2014, respectively. Estimated environmental costs are not
Disability benefi ts 590 675
expected to materially affect the consolidated financial position or
Derivative liabilities 22 31
consolidated results of the company’s operations in future periods.
Special restructuring actions 362 431
However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due to
Workforce reductions 407 469 protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental remedi-
Deferred taxes 253 129** ation regulations.
Other taxes payable 89 17 As of December 31, 2015, the company was unable to esti-
Environmental accruals 270 240 mate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are
Warranty accruals 83 91
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is
Asset retirement obligations 134 136
not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and
Acquisition related 200 50
non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate
Divestiture related* 575 1,124 only if it performed major renovations of certain existing buildings.
Other 519 536 Because these conditional obligations have indeterminate settle-
Total $8,099 $8,733 ** ment dates, the company could not develop a reasonable estimate
of their fair values. The company will continue to assess its ability
* Primarily related to the divestiture of the Microelectronics business.
to estimate fair values at each future reporting date. The related
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in
consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for liability will be recognized once sufficient additional information
additional information. becomes available. The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities,
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated State-
In response to changing business needs, the company periodi- ment of Financial Position were $166 million and $180 million at
cally takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent
contractually obligated future payments associated with these
NOTE L.
activities are reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the
EQUITY ACTIVITY
previous table.
In addition, the company executed certain special restructur-
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000
ing-related actions prior to 2006. The previous table provides the
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. Current
965,728,725 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2015 and
liabilities are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities in
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and were imma-
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2015.
terial at December 31, 2015.
The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals related to ter- Stock Repurchases
minated employees who are no longer working for the company
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM
who were granted annual payments to supplement their incomes
common stock. The company repurchased 30,338,647 common
in certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal
shares at a cost of $4,701 million, 71,504,867 common shares at a
requirements, these required payments will continue until the
cost of $13,395 million and 73,121,942 common shares at a cost
former employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes away.
of $13,993 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. These
The company employs extensive internal environmental protec-
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of
tion programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at
differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. At
a number of locations, including operating facilities, previously
December 31, 2015, $5,563 million of Board common stock repur-
owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum
chase authorization was available. The company plans to purchase
exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and
shares on the open market or in private transactions from time to
no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO environmental
time, depending on market conditions.
liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The total amounts

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part company’s stock-based compensation plans, 1,625,820 common
of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock pur- shares at a cost of $248 million, 1,313,569 common shares at a
chase plan: 6,013,875 shares in 2015, 7,687,026 shares in 2014, and cost of $236 million, and 1,666,069 common shares at a cost of
9,961,389 shares in 2013. The company issued 1,155,558 treasury $336 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, were remitted by
shares in 2015, 1,264,232 treasury shares in 2014 and 1,849,883 employees to the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory
treasury shares in 2013, as a result of restricted stock unit releases tax withholding requirements. These amounts are included in the
and exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired treasury stock balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the Position and the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2015: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,379) $ (342) $(1,721)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (54) $ 21 $ (33)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 86 (33) 53
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 32 $ (12) $ 20
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 618 $ (218) $ 399
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (192) 57 (135)
SG&A expense (149) 43 (105)
Other (income) and expense (731) 281 (451)
Interest expense 0 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges $ (454) $ 162 $ (292)
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 6 $ (2) $ 4
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,963) 1,039 (1,925)
Curtailments and settlements 33 (9) 24
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (100) 36 (65)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,304 (1,080) 2,223
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $ 279 $ (17) $ 262
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(1,523) $ (208) $(1,731)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.)

===== PAGE 118 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2014: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,636) $ (438) $(2,074)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (29) $ 11 $ (18)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 5 (2) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (24) $ 9 $ (15)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 958 $ (341) $ 618
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 15 (7) 9
SG&A expense (15) 6 (9)
Other (income) and expense (98) 38 (60)
Interest expense 1 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges $ 861 $ (304) $ 557
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 1 $ 0 $ 1
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (9,799) 3,433 (6,366)
Curtailments and settlements 24 (7) 17
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (114) 41 (73)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,531 (852) 1,678
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $(7,357) $2,615 $(4,742)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(8,156) $1,883 $(6,274)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.)

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2013: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,335) $ (66) $(1,401)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (4) $ 2 $ (3)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense (8) 2 (5)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period 4 (1) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (8) $ 3 $ (5)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 43 $ (15) $ 28
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 34 (14) 21
SG&A expense (39) 14 (25)
Other (income) and expense (162) 62 (99)
Interest expense 0 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash fl ow hedges $ (123) $ 47 $ (76)
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 16 $ 0 $ 16
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 5,369 (1,974) 3,395
Curtailments and settlements (3) 1 (2)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (114) 40 (75)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,499 (1,195) 2,304
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $ 8,767 $(3,128) $ 5,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 7,301 $(3,144) $ 4,157
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefi t For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2012 $ (90) $ 1,733 $(27,406) $ 4 $(25,759)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 28 (1,401) 3,409 0 2,036
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other comprehensive income (103) 0 2,229 (5) 2,121
Total change for the period (76) (1,401) 5,639 (5) 4,157
December 31, 2013 (165) 332 (21,767) (1) (21,602)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 618 (2,074) (6,348) (18) (7,822)
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other comprehensive income (60) 0 1,605 3 1,548
Total change for the period 557 (2,074) (4,742) (15) (6,274)
December 31, 2014 392 (1,742) (26,509) (15) (27,875)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 399 (1,721) (1,897) (33) (3,252)
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other comprehensive income (691) 0 2,158 53 1,520
Total change for the period (292) (1,721) 262 20 (1,731)
December 31, 2015 $ 100 $(3,463) $(26,248) $ 5 $(29,607)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.

===== PAGE 120 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M.
CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with experience that damage amounts claimed in litigation against it
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as plain- are unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such
tiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, are not meaningful indicators of the company’s potential liability.
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time Further, the company is unable to provide such an estimate due
to time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a to a number of other factors with respect to these claims, suits,
leader in the information technology industry and, as such, has investigations and proceedings, including considerations of the
been and will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP procedural status of the matter in question, the presence of com-
rights and associated products and offerings, including claims of plex or novel legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and
copyright and patent infringement and violations of trade secrets development of information important to the matters. The com-
and other IP rights. In addition, the company enforces its own IP pany reviews claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least
against infringement, through license negotiations, lawsuits or oth- quarterly, and decisions are made with respect to recording or
erwise. Also, as is typical for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, adjusting provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses
the company is party to actions and proceedings in various juris- or range of losses (individually or in the aggregate), to reflect the
dictions involving a wide range of labor and employment issues impact and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural
(including matters related to contested employment decisions, and substantive rulings, reviews by counsel and other information
country-specific labor and employment laws, and the company’s pertinent to a particular matter.
pension, retirement and other benefit plans), as well as actions Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in
with respect to contracts, product liability, securities, foreign oper- any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have
ations, competition law and environmental matters. These actions a material effect on the company’s business, financial condition,
may be commenced by a number of different parties, including results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of
competitors, clients, current or former employees, government and variables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or dam-
regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives of the loca- ages; the structure and type of any such remedies; the significance
tions in which the company does business. Some of the actions to of the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have
which the company is party may involve particularly complex tech- in the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts
nical issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under and circumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to
the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. additional factors. While the company will continue to defend itself
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, vigorously, it is possible that the company’s business, financial con-
suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability dition, results of operations or cash flows could be affected in any
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably particular period by the resolution of one or more of these matters.
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 involving the company.
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the com- in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v.
pany provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of IBM). The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah.
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the com- Plaintiff is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX
pany also discloses matters based on its consideration of other IP rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition,
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to
companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of
relations considerations. code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and all
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another suit, the
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for exam- SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury
ple, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights;
the company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to recog-
remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed nize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent
in this Note, except as specifically discussed herein, the company for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the
is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible losses or Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling
range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts accrued, and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June 2013, the Federal
if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations and Court in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen the SCO v. IBM
proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to pre-
dict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
case, and proceedings have resumed in that case. In February benefits plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege con-
2016, the Federal Court ruled in favor of IBM on all of SCO’s remain- structive dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the
ing claims. Employment Tribunal in Southampton UK.
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf On March 24, 2014, in a suit brought by local Works Councils,
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued the Supreme Court of Spain held that IBM Spain’s Defined Con-
one another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the mod- tribution (DC) Plan implemented in 1993 based on the voluntary
ernization of social service program processing in Indiana. The participation of its employees was null and void. The Supreme
State terminated the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, Court also held that current employees could reinstate their rights
and the State is seeking damages. IBM believes the State’s claims to a Defined Benefit (DB) Plan, although with an offset for DC con-
against it are without merit and is seeking payment of termina- tributions paid to date. The Court held that IBM Spain did not
tion amounts specified in the contract. After six weeks of trial, on consult with the Works Councils in seeking to change the pension
July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior Court in Marion County rejected scheme, and recommended that IBM Spain and the Works Coun-
the State’s claims in their entirety and awarded IBM $52 million cils engage in discussions over how to carry out the offset. The
plus interest and costs. On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court Constitutional Court denied IBM Spain’s requested leave to appeal
of Appeals reversed portions of the trial judge’s findings, found the decision. In March 2015, the National Audience Court ruled that
IBM in material breach, and ordered the case remanded to the the Works Council was not entitled to dictate the means by which
trial judge to determine the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana IBM should carry out the offset of DC contributions, but also ruled
Court of Appeals also affirmed approximately $50 million of the trial that the Supreme Court’s judgment could be executed without the
court’s award of damages to IBM. This matter remains pending in need for individual lawsuits by employees, rejecting the position
the Indiana courts. that the judgment was declaratory only. The National Audience
On April 16, 2014, Iusacell SA de C.V. (Iusacell) sued IBM, claim- Court also ruled that IBM should stop making DC contributions,
ing that IBM made fraudulent misrepresentations that induced and that the company should promptly reinstate the DB Plan. IBM
Iusacell to enter into an agreement with IBM Mexico. Iusacell claims Spain appealed that ruling and in May 2015, the National Audience
damages for lost profits. Iusacell’s complaint relates to a contrac- Court dismissed the appeal. In February 2016, IBM Spain and the
tual dispute in Mexico, which is the subject of a pending arbitration Works Councils agreed on a process to resolve their differences
proceeding in Mexico initiated by IBM Mexico against Iusacell for relating to calculating the offset for DC contributions paid to date
breach of the underlying agreement. On November 14, 2014, the and the form of a new alternative DC plan. They also agreed to a
District Court in the Southern District of New York granted IBM’s pay reduction for current employees who elect to remain in the DB
motion to stay Iusacell’s action against the company pending the plan and to close the DB plan to new hires.
arbitration in Mexico between Iusacell and IBM Mexico. In March 2011, the company announced that it had agreed to
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal pro- settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and Exchange
ceedings in May 2010 before the High Court in London against Commission (SEC) relating to alleged violations of the Foreign
the IBM UK Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (FCPA). On July 25, 2013, the court
beneficiaries of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a approved that 2011 settlement and required that for a two-year
declaration that it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the period IBM make reports to the SEC and the court on certain mat-
UK Trust that it was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future ters, including those relating to compliance with the FCPA. The
accruals for most participants and in implementing the company’s two-year period expired in July 2015. In early 2012, IBM notified
new retirement policy. In April 2014, the High Court acknowledged the SEC of an investigation by the Polish Central Anti-Corruption
that the changes made to its UK defined benefit plans were within Bureau involving allegations of illegal activity by a former IBM
IBM’s discretion, but ruled that IBM breached its implied duty of Poland employee in connection with sales to the Polish govern-
good faith both in implementing these changes and in the manner ment. IBM is cooperating with the SEC and Polish authorities in
in which it consulted with employees. Proceedings to determine this matter. In April 2013, IBM learned that the U.S. Department of
remedies were held in July 2014, and in February 2015 the High Justice (DOJ) is also investigating allegations related to the Poland
Court held that for IBM to make changes to accruals under the matter, as well as allegations relating to transactions in Argentina,
plan would require a new consultation of the participants, but other Bangladesh and Ukraine. The DOJ is also seeking information
changes (including to early retirement policy) would not require regarding the company’s global FCPA compliance program and
such consultation. IBM UK has appealed both the breach and rem- its public sector business. The company is cooperating with the
edies judgments. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the Court’s rulings DOJ in this matter.
would require IBM to reverse the changes made to the UK defined In March 2015, putative class action litigation was commenced
benefit plans retroactive to their effective dates. This could result in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New
in an estimated non-operating one-time pre-tax charge of approx- York related to the company’s October 2014 announcement that
imately $250 million, plus ongoing defined benefit related accruals. it was divesting its global commercial semiconductor technology
In addition, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 290 individual business. The company and three of its officers are named as
actions brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined

===== PAGE 122 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
defendants. Plaintiffs allege that defendants violated Sections 20(a) support their working capital needs. In addition, the company has
and 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5 committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection
thereunder. In May 2015, a related putative class action was also with client purchase agreements for $2,097 million and $1,816 mil-
commenced in the United States District Court for the Southern lion at December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively.
District of New York based on the same underlying facts, alleging The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor
violations of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act. The to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of
company, management’s Retirement Plans Committee, and three requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a
current or former IBM executives are named as defendants. description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
In August 2015, IBM learned that the SEC is conducting an The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant
investigation relating to revenue recognition with respect to the to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with
accounting treatment of certain transactions in the U.S., UK and respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the
Ireland. The company is cooperating with the SEC in this matter. context of contracts entered into by the company, under which
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after the company customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York, against losses arising from a breach of representations and cov-
county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The com- enants related to such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP
plaints allege numerous and different causes of action, including rights, specified environmental matters, third-party performance
for negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain income taxes.
Plaintiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring and claim dam- In each of these circumstances, payment by the company is
ages in unspecified amounts for a variety of personal injuries conditioned on the other party making a claim pursuant to the
and property damages allegedly arising out of the presence of procedures specified in the particular contract, the procedures of
groundwater contamination and vapor intrusion of groundwater which typically allow the company to challenge the other party’s
contaminants into certain structures in which plaintiffs reside claims. While typically indemnification provisions do not include a
or resided, or conducted business, allegedly resulting from the contractual maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s
release of chemicals into the environment by the company at its obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time
former manufacturing and development facility in Endicott. These and/or nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may
complaints also seek punitive damages in an unspecified amount. have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by
The parties have settled substantially all of these cases. the company.
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceed- It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
ings brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique
Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties Historically, payments made by the company under these agree-
to participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or own- ments have not had a material effect on the company’s business,
ership of sites. The company is also conducting environmental financial condition or results of operations.
investigations, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
of several current or former operating sites globally pursuant to commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these
permits, administrative orders or agreements with country, state financial guarantees was $34 million and $46 million at Decem-
or local environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and ber 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. The fair value of the guarantees
claims concerning certain current or former operating sites. recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and was immaterial.
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the com- NOTE N.
pany is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities TAXES
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax liti-
gation matters. The total potential amount related to these matters
($ in millions)
for all applicable years is approximately $460 million. The company
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is not
Income from continuing operations
a meaningful indicator of liability.
before income taxes
U.S. operations $ 5,915 $ 7,509 $ 7,577
Commitments
Non-U.S. operations 10,030 12,477 12,667
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
include unused amounts of $5,477 million and $5,365 million at Total income from
continuing operations
December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. A portion of these
before income taxes $15,945 $19,986 $20,244
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to

===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The income from continuing operations provision for income taxes The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconcili-
by geographic operations is as follows: ation labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of foreign
subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory
($ in millions) rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax impacts of non-U.S.
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 earnings repatriation and any net impacts of intercompany trans-
U.S. operations $ 849 $2,093 $1,315 actions. These items also reflect audit settlements or changes in
the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of
Non-U.S. operations 1,732 2,141 2,048
these items.
Total continuing operations
In the fourth quarter of 2015, the U.S. Internal Revenue Ser-
provision for income taxes $2,581 $4,234 $3,363
vice (IRS) concluded its examination of the company’s income
tax returns for 2011 and 2012 and issued a final Revenue Agent’s
The components of the income from continuing operations provi-
Report (RAR). The company has agreed with all of the adjustments
sion for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows:
in the RAR with the exception of the proposed adjustments related
to the tax implications of an internal restructuring undertaken in
($ in millions)
2011. The company disagrees with the IRS on this matter and
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
intends to protest the proposed adjustments. The company has
U.S. federal
redetermined its unrecognized tax benefits for all open years,
Current $ (321) $ 1,134 $1,694 based on the RAR and associated information and analysis.
Deferred 553 105 (708) The 2015 continuing operations effective tax rate decreased
232 1,239 986 5.0 points from 2014 as a result of: the completion of the 2011–2012
U.S. tax audit, including reserve redeterminations (3.9 points),
U.S. state and local
a benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax income in 2015
Current 128 541 277
(3.5 points) and a benefit due to the 2014 tax charge related to the
Deferred 116 (105) (330)
divestiture of the System x business (0.9 points).
244 436 (53) These decreases were partially offset due to the following: a
Non-U.S. reduced benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign tax credits
Current 2,101 2,825 3,067 (2.5 points) and the year-to-year increase in tax charges related
Deferred 4 (266) (637) to intercompany payments made by foreign subsidiaries and the
intercompany licensing of certain IP (0.8 points).
2,105 2,559 2,430
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and lia-
Total continuing operations
bilities did not have a material impact on the company’s effective
provision for income taxes 2,581 4,234 3,363
tax rate.
Discontinued operations
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities
provision for income taxes (117) (1,617) (322)
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position were:
Provision for social security,
real estate, personal property
and other taxes 3,497 4,068 4,198 Deferred Tax Assets
Total taxes included in net income $5,961 $ 6,685 $7,238 ($ in millions)
At December 31: 2015 2014
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the com- Retirement benefi ts $ 4,621 $ 4,795
pany’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is as follows: Share-based and other compensation 963 1,328
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 1,066 858
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 Deferred income 762 957
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35% Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 825 686
Foreign tax differential (17) (14) (13) Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 528 529
State and local 1 1 0 Depreciation 329 329
Domestic incentives (2) (2) (3) Accruals 904 1,176
Other (1) 1 (2) Other 931 1,306
Effective rate 16% 21% 17% Gross deferred tax assets 10,929 11,964
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes. Less: valuation allowance 740 646
Net deferred tax assets $10,189 $11,318

===== PAGE 124 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions) In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of the
At December 31: 2015 2014 Japan Tax Authorities with respect to certain foreign tax losses.
Depreciation $ 919 $ 487 The unrecognized tax benefit of these losses totals $997 million
Retirement benefi ts 252 205 as of December 31, 2015. In April 2011, the company received noti-
Goodwill and intangible assets 1,407 1,263 fication that the appeal was denied, and in June 2011, the company
filed a lawsuit challenging this decision. In May 2014, the Tokyo
Leases 916 912
District Court ruled in favor of the company. The Japanese govern-
Software development costs 554 421
ment appealed the ruling to the Tokyo High Court. In March 2015,
Deferred transition costs 395 374
the Tokyo High Court ruled in favor of the company and, in April
Other 1,177 1,111 2015, the Japanese government appealed the ruling to the Japan
Gross deferred tax liabilities $5,620 $4,773 Supreme Court. See Note U, “Subsequent Event,” for an update
on this matter.
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and The liability at December 31, 2015 of $4,574 million can be
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $742 million, reduced by $850 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with
as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $1,149 mil- the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, U.S.
lion. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at tax credits, state income taxes and timing adjustments. The net
least two years or are available for 10 years or more. amount of $3,724 million, if recognized, would favorably affect the
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2015, 2014 and company’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31,
2013 were $740 million, $646 million and $734 million, respectively. 2014 and 2013 were $4,229 million and $3,902 million, respectively.
The amounts principally apply to certain foreign, state and local Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are
loss carryforwards and credits that, in the opinion of management, included in income tax expense. During the year ended Decem-
are more likely than not to expire unutilized. However, to the extent ber 31, 2015, the company recognized $141 million in interest
that tax benefits related to these carryforwards are realized in the expense and penalties; in 2014, the company recognized $216 mil-
future, the reduction in the valuation allowance will reduce income lion in interest expense and penalties; and, in 2013, the company
tax expense. recognized a benefit of $93 million in interest expense and pen-
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2015 alties. The company has $613 million for the payment of interest
decreased by $530 million in 2015 to $4,574 million. A reconciliation and penalties accrued at December 31, 2015, and had $593 million
of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits accrued at December 31, 2014.
is as follows: Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reason-
ably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
associated with certain positions may be reduced as certain
($ in millions)
foreign issues may be concluded. The company estimates that
2015 2014 2013
the unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2015 could be
Balance at January 1 $ 5,104 $4,458 $ 5,672
reduced by approximately $413 million excluding the Japan matter
Additions based on tax positions
discussed above.
related to the current year 464 697 829
The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various
Additions for tax positions
state and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state
of prior years 569 586 417
and foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no
Reductions for tax positions
longer subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2011. With
of prior years (including impacts
due to a lapse in statute) (1,348) (579) (2,201) limited exception, the company is no longer subject to income tax
Settlements (215) (58) (259) examination of its U.S. federal tax return for years prior to 2013.
The open years contain matters that could be subject to differing
Balance at December 31 $ 4,574 $5,104 $ 4,458
interpretations of applicable tax laws and regulations related to
the amount and/or timing of income, deductions and tax credits.
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the com-
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain
pany believes that adequate amounts of tax and interest have been
tax incentives and credits and state issues. The settlements and
provided for any significant adjustments that are expected to result
reductions to unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions of prior
for these years.
years are primarily attributable to the completion of the IRS exam-
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax
ination for 2011 and 2012, currency, non-U.S. audits and impacts
assessment notice for approximately $866 million (approximately
due to lapses in statutes of limitation.
$810 million at 2015 year-end currency rates) from the Indian
Tax Authorities for 2009. The company believes it will prevail on
these matters and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator

===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
of liability. At December 31, 2015, the company has recorded NOTE O.
$526 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A significant por- RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
tion of this balance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to
protect the company’s right to appeal various income tax assess- RD&E expense was $5,247 million in 2015, $5,437 million in 2014
ments made by the Indian Tax Authorities. and $5,743 million in 2013. In addition, RD&E expense included in
In the first quarter of 2016, the IRS commenced its audit of discontinued operations was $197 million in 2015, $368 million in
the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2013 and 2014. The company 2014 and $483 million in 2013.
anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end of 2017. The company incurred total expense of $5,178 million, $5,595
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $68.1 billion million and $5,959 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively, for
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31, scientific research and the application of scientific advances to
2015, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these the development of new and improved products and their uses,
earnings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company period- as well as services and their application. Within these amounts,
ically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that it software-related expense was $3,064 million, $3,064 million and
does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the $3,077 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested Expense for product-related engineering was $267 million,
earnings is not practicable. $211 million and $267 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively.
NOTE P.
EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based
Basic 978,744,523 1,004,272,584 1,094,486,604
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 3,037,001 4,332,155 6,751,240
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 918,744 1,395,741 1,804,313
Assuming dilution 982,700,267 1,010,000,480 1,103,042,156
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $15,751 $16,881
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (174) (3,729) (398)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $13,190 $12,022 $16,483
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $15,751 $16,881
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares (1) (3) (1)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $13,363 $15,749 $16,880
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic and diluted earnings
per share is calculated (174) (3,729 ) (398 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $13,189 $12,020 $16,483
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 13.60 $ 15.59 $ 15.30
Discontinued operations (0.18) (3.69) (0.36)
Total $ 13.42 $ 11.90 $ 14.94
Basic
Continuing operations $ 13.66 $ 15.68 $ 15.42
Discontinued operations (0.18) (3.71) (0.36)
Total $ 13.48 $ 11.97 $ 15.06

===== PAGE 126 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 41,380 common $1,474 million in 2015, $1,592 million in 2014 and $1,759 million in
shares in 2015, 17,420 common shares in 2014 and 8,797 common 2013. Within these amounts, rental expense reflected in discon-
shares in 2013 were outstanding, but were not included in the com- tinued operations was $29 million, $95 million and $115 million, in
putation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise price 2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Rental expense in agreements
of the options was greater than the average market price of the with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is recorded on
common shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent rentals are
have been antidilutive. included in the determination of rental expense as accruable.
The table below depicts gross minimum rental commitments
NOTE Q. under noncancelable leases, amounts related to vacant space
RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS associated with infrastructure reductions, sublease income com-
mitments and capital lease commitments. These amounts reflect
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and activities primarily related to office space, as well as data centers.
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was
($ in millions)
2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Beyond 2020
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,347 $1,231 $1,107 $985 $776 $988
Vacant space $ 14 $ 4 $ 1 $ — $ — $ —
Sublease income commitments $ 11 $ 7 $ 5 $ 4 $ 1 $ 1
Capital lease commitments $ 7 $ 2 $ 2 $ 2 $ 1 $ —
NOTE R. Incentive Awards
STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
The following table presents total stock-based compensation cost “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen-
included in income from continuing operations. sation and Management Resources Committee of the Board of
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans
($ in millions) principally include restricted stock units, performance share units,
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 stock options or any combination thereof.
Cost $ 100 $ 121 $ 122 The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under
Selling, general and administrative 322 350 435 the company’s existing Plans was 274 million at December 31,
Research, development 2015. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previ-
and engineering 51 54 57 ous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could be
Other (income) and expense* (6) (13 ) — reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million
additional awards were considered authorized to be issued under
Pre-tax stock-based
compensation cost 468 512 614 the company’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2015. There were
111.6 million unused shares available to be granted under the Plans
Income tax benefi ts (156) (174) (213)
as of December 31, 2015.
Net stock-based
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
compensation cost $ 312 $ 338 $ 402
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
* Reflects the one-time effects related to divestitures. approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the
number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price or
The amount of stock-based compensation cost included in dis-
formula for determining the exercise price and the date of grant.
continued operations, net of tax, was immaterial in all periods.
All awards for senior management are approved by the Commit-
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested
tee. All awards for employees other than senior management are
awards at December 31, 2015 and 2014 was $871 million and
approved by senior management pursuant to a series of delega-
$874 million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2015 is
tions that were approved by the Committee, and the grants made
expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of
pursuant to these delegations are reviewed periodically with the
approximately 2.7 years.
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensa-
tion cost at December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.

===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Committee. Awards that are given as part of annual total compen- Stock Awards
sation for senior management and other employees are made on Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units
specific cycle dates scheduled in advance. With respect to awards (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or
given in connection with promotions or new hires, the company’s Performance Share Units (PSUs).
policy requires approval of such awards prior to the grant date, The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the
which is typically the date of the promotion or the date of hire. Plans during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.
RSUs
2015 2014 2013
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $171 7,734,277 $166 8,635,317 $148 9,841,461
RSUs granted 143 4,230,186 172 2,525,947 189 2,541,081
RSUs released 164 (3,567,495) 157 (2,401,761) 131 (2,952,363)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 167 (869,627) 167 (1,025,226) 154 (794,862)
Balance at December 31 $159 7,527,341 $171 7,734,277 $166 8,635,317
PSUs
2015 2014 2013
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $185 3,140,707 $178 2,824,294 $151 3,172,201
PSUs granted at target 153 1,137,242 180 1,430,098 195 869,875
Performance adjustments* 185 (168,055) 157 29,960 118 152,069
PSUs released 185 (840,552) 157 (1,027,181) 118 (1,321,784)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 184 (340,410) 187 (116,464) 170 (48,067)
Balance at December 31** $173 2,928,932 $185 3,140,707 $178 2,824,294
* Represents the change in shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics were above or below specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued will depend on final
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically $606 million, $434 million and $481 million, respectively. The total
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents fair value of RSUs vested and released during the years ended
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $583 million, $378 mil-
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted lion and $386 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2015, 2014
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. and 2013, there was $800 million, $754 million and $871 million,
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs respectively, of unrecognized compensation cost related to non-
at December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 is the same as the period vested RSUs. The company received no cash from employees
over which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, as a result of employee vesting and release of RSUs for the years
which is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.

===== PAGE 128 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ulti- Stock Options
mately received by the employee depends on the company’s Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase
performance against specified targets and typically vest over a shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are
three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid. granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high
The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, based and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards generally
on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of divi- vest in four equal increments on the first four anniversaries of the
dend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets will be grant date and have a contractual term of 10 years.
achieved. Over the performance period, the number of shares of The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the
stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward based date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs
upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. The and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options
ultimate number of shares issued and the related compensation include the grant price of the award, the expected option term, vol-
cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the atility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s
final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict
of PSUs granted at target during the years ended December 31, actual future events or the value ultimately realized by employees
2015, 2014 and 2013 was $174 million, $257 million and $170 million, who receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indic-
respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during ative of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value
the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $156 mil- made by the company.
lion, $161 million and $156 million, respectively. During the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013, the
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the company did not grant stock options.
tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended Decem- The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans
ber 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 were $228 million, $222 million and during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013.
$312 million, respectively.
2015 2014 2013
Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $ 97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951 $94 11,389,721
Options exercised 98 (1,214,109) 97 (3,740,252) 90 (5,585,127)
Options canceled/expired 100 (57,066) 95 (131,750) 86 (181,643)
Balance at December 31 $ 94 479,774 $97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951
Exercisable at December 31 $ 94 479,774 $97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951
The shares under option at December 31, 2015 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Weighted-Average
Weighted- Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$85 and under $ 83 192,959 $10,597,402 0.3
$86 and over 101 286,815 10,376,342 1.2
$ 94 479,774 $20,973,745 0.9
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years company for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $74 million, were $26 million, $107 million and $199 million, respectively.
$323 million and $614 million, respectively. The total cash received The company settles employee stock option exercises pri-
from employees as a result of employee stock option exercises for marily with newly issued common shares and, occasionally,
the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was approxi- with treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31,
mately $119 million, $364 million and $505 million, respectively. In 2015 and 2014 were approximately 1,255 million and 1,225 million
connection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the shares, respectively.

===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisitions U.S. Plans
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was Defined Benefit Pension Plans
an additional 0.4 million shares of stock-based awards, consist- IBM Personal Pension Plan
ing of stock options and restricted stock units, outstanding at IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired
December 31, 2015, as a result of the company’s conversion of prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pen-
stock-based awards previously granted by the acquired entities. sion benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008,
The weighted-average exercise price of these awards was $50 the IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qual-
per share. ified) plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective
January 1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
Personal Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock now referred to as the Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants referred to as the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded by company
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a contributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the
5 percent discount off the average market price on the day of sole benefit of participants and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP,
purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible which is unfunded, provides benefits in excess of IRS limitations
compensation. Eligible compensation includes any compensation for qualified plans.
received by the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated
offering periods during which shares may be purchased and con- using benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The
tinues as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless first method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines
terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Indi- benefits based on salary, years of service, mortality and other par-
vidual ESPP participants are restricted from purchasing more than ticipant-specific factors. The second method is a cash balance
$25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares formula that calculates benefits using a percentage of employees’
in an offering period. annual salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
Employees purchased 1.3 million, 1.3 million and 1.5 million Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, December 31, 2007 for all participants.
2015, 2014 and 2013, respectively. Cash dividends declared and
paid by the company on its common stock also include cash U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be rein- Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
vested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average based on average earnings, years of service and age at termination
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted of employment.
earnings per share. Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased Decem-
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and ber 31, 2007 for all participants.
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides for Defined Contribution Plans
semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and continuing as IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless terminated U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to par-
earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. ticipate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined
Approximately 23.1 million, 24.4 million and 2.3 million shares contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2015, Code. Under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible employees receive a
2014 and 2013, respectively. dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions generally up to 6 per-
cent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to January 1,
2005, and, generally up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for
NOTE S.
those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employ-
RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
ees generally receive automatic contributions from the company
equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of eligible compensation based on
Description of Plans
their eligibility to participate in the PPP as of December 31, 2007.
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contri-
Employees generally receive automatic contributions and match-
bution plans that cover eligible regular employees, a supplemental
ing contributions after the completion of one year of service.
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents.

===== PAGE 130 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire-
invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to
There are no minimum amounts that must be invested in com- eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insur-
pany stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts ance for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company
out of company stock to another investment choice, other than established a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who
excessive trading rules applicable to such investments. Effec- were more than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees
tive January 1, 2013, matching and automatic contributions are who were within five years of retirement eligibility are covered
made once annually at the end of the year. In order to receive under the company’s prior retiree health benefits arrangements.
such contributions each year, a participant must be employed on Under either the FHA or the prior retiree health benefit arrange-
December 15 of the plan year. However, if a participant separates ments, there is a maximum cost to the company for retiree health
from service prior to December 15, and has completed certain ser- benefits. Effective January 1, 2014, the company amended the plan
vice and/or age requirements, then the participant will be eligible to establish a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) for each
to receive such matching and automatic contributions following Medicare-eligible plan retiree, surviving spouse and long-term
separation from service. disability plan participant who is eligible for company-subsidized
coverage and who enrolls in an individual plan under the Medi-
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan care Exchange. The company also amended its life insurance plan.
The IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 401(k)) is an unfunded, Employees retiring on or after January 1, 2015 are not eligible for
nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees whose eligible life insurance.
compensation is expected to exceed the IRS compensation limit Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are
for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the Excess 401(k). not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension postretirement
The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide benefits that would benefits.
be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the com-
pensation limits did not apply. Non-U.S. Plans
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States spon-
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. sor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts eligible regular employees. The company deposits funds under
in investments which mirror the primary investment options various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities under
available under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Benefits
401(k) are also eligible to receive company match and automatic under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on years
contributions (at the same rate as under the 401(k) Plus Plan) on of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during a
eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual
compensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S.
pay limit once they have completed one year of service. Amounts defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments
deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company contributions within the various countries.
are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Finan- In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries
cial Position. Effective January 1, 2013, matching and automatic sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide
contributions are recorded once annually at the end of the year. medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible
In order to receive such contributions each year, a participant dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S.
must be employed on December 15 of the plan year. However, if retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local gov-
a participant separates from service prior to December 15, and ernment sponsored and administered programs.
has completed certain service and/or age requirements, then the
participant will be eligible to receive such matching and automatic
contributions following separation from service.

===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Defi ned benefi t pension plans $(284) $(833) $(223) $1,421 $1,267 $1,396 $1,137 $ 434 $1,173
Retention Plan 23 15 21 — — — 23 15 21
Total defi ned benefi t pension plans (income)/cost $(261) $(818) $(202) $1,421 $1,267 $1,396 $1,160 $ 449 $1,195
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and non-U.S. plans $ 676 $ 713 $ 785 $ 442 $ 526 $ 575 $1,117 $1,239 $1,361
Excess 401(k) 21 14 24 — — — 21 14 24
Total defi ned contribution plans cost $ 697 $ 727 $ 809 $ 442 $ 526 $ 575 $1,138 $1,253 $1,384
Nonpension postretirement benefi t plans cost $ 218 $ 206 $ 218 $ 55 $ 66 $ 79 $ 273 $ 272 $ 298
Total retirement-related benefi ts
net periodic cost $ 654 $ 115 $ 826 $1,918 $1,859 $2,051 $2,572 $1,974 $2,876
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefi t Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualifi ed PPP $51,287 $54,708 $51,716 $55,772 $ 429 $ 1,065
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,522 $ 1,602 $ — $ — $ (1,522) $ (1,602)
Retention Plan 312 334 — — (312) (334)
Nonpension postretirement benefi t plan 4,652 5,053 71 16 (4,582) (5,037)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 6,486 $ 6,989 $ 71 $ 16 $ (6,415) $ (6,973)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualifi ed defi ned benefi t pension plans $16,766 $16,794 $18,070 $17,888 $ 1,304 $ 1,094
Nonpension postretirement benefi t plans 0 11 0 11 0 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $16,766 $16,804 $18,070 $17,898 $ 1,304 $ 1,094
Underfunded plans
Qualifi ed defi ned benefi t pension plans $22,039 $26,278 $17,677 $21,655 $ (4,362) $ (4,623)
Nonqualifi ed defi ned benefi t pension plans 5,911 6,762 — — (5,911) (6,762)
Nonpension postretirement benefi t plans 618 806 59 73 (558) (733)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $28,568 $33,846 $17,737 $21,729 $(10,832) $(12,118)
Total overfunded plans $68,053 $71,512 $69,786 $73,671 $ 1,734 $ 2,159
Total underfunded plans $35,054 $40,836 $17,807 $21,745 $(17,247) $(19,091)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation
and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2015, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 97 percent funded compared to the benefit
obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 101 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s defined benefit pension
plans worldwide were 89 percent funded.

===== PAGE 132 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement
Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 132 represent financial informa- nonpension postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists
tion for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans The tables below present the components of net periodic
under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized
and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined con-
the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-U.S. Plans tribution plans.
consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 454 $ 449 $ 501
Interest cost 2,028 2,211 1,980 1,075 1,533 1,524
Expected return on plan assets (3,953) (4,096) (3,981) (1,919) (2,247) (2,195)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 10 10 10 (98) (111) (119)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,654 1,056 1,790 1,581 1,400 1,600
Curtailments and settlements — — — 35 26 0
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — 293 217 85
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (261) $ (818) $ (202) $ 1,421 $ 1,267 $ 1,396
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Service cost $ 24 $ 26 $ 35 $ 7 $ 7 $10
Interest cost 163 187 164 50 63 60
Expected return on plan assets 0 0 (1) (7) (9) (9)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (7) (7) — (5) (5) (5)
Recognized actuarial losses 39 0 21 10 11 23
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 0 0
Total net periodic cost $218 $206 $218 $55 $66 $79
* The non-U.S. plans amount includes $233 million and $148 million related to the IBM Spain pension litigation for 2015 and 2014, respectively. See page 132 for additional information.

===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014
Change in benefi t obligation
Benefi t obligation at January 1 $56,643 $51,034 $49,834 $ 48,620 $ 5,053 $ 4,633 $ 817 $ 832
Service cost — — 454 449 24 26 7 7
Interest cost 2,028 2,211 1,075 1,533 163 187 50 63
Plan participants’ contributions — — 34 37 52 61 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 39 (90) (8) 0 0 0
Actuarial losses/(gains) (1,920) 6,968 (861) 6,662 (204) 548 (52) 38
Benefi ts paid from trust (3,514) (3,455) (1,784) (1,985) (406) (388) (5) (5)
Direct benefi t payments (117) (114) (402) (465) (23) (37) (26) (26)
Foreign exchange impact — — (3,907) (5,073) — — (174) (91)
Medicare/Government subsidies — — — — 1 23 — —
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 235 146 0 0 0 (1)
Benefi t obligation at December 31 $53,120 $56,643 $44,717 $ 49,834 $ 4,652 $ 5,053 $ 618 $ 817
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $55,772 $53,954 $39,543 $ 39,464 $ 16 $ 177 $ 84 $ 92
Actual return on plan assets (542) 5,274 417 5,579 0 0 7 9
Employer contributions — — 474 465 409 166 0 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 53 (59) 0 0 0 0
Plan participants’ contributions — — 34 37 52 61 — —
Benefi ts paid from trust (3,514) (3,455) (1,784) (1,985) (406) (388) (5) (5)
Foreign exchange impact — — (3,004) (4,049) — — (26) (11)
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other — — 14* 93* — — (1) 0
Fair value of plan assets at December 31 $51,716 $55,772 $35,748 $ 39,543 $ 71 $ 16 $ 59 $ 84
Funded status at December 31 $ (1,405) $ (871) $ (8,969) $(10,291) $(4,582) $(5,037) $(558) $(733)
Accumulated benefi t obligation** $53,120 $56,643 $44,071 $ 47,516 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM.
Return of assets to IBM over a three-year period began June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with approximately $33 million returned in 2015 and $122 million returned
during 2014. The remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2015 is excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of
those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014
Prepaid pension assets $ 429 $ 1,065 $ 1,304 $ 1,095 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities—compensation and benefi ts (116) (111) (297) (326) (320) (381) (11) (13)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefi t obligations (1,718) (1,825) (9,976) (11,060) (4,262) (4,656) (547) (720)
Funded status—net $(1,405) $ (871) $(8,969) $(10,291) $(4,582) $(5,037) $(558) $(733)

===== PAGE 134 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and
the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-
related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014 2015 2014
Net loss at January 1 $18,442 $13,709 $21,676 $19,777 $ 852 $304 $189 $161
Current period loss/(gain) 2,576 5,789 661 3,324 (204) 548 (51) 38
Curtailments and settlements — — (33) (25) — — 0 1
Amortization of net loss included
in net periodic (income)/cost (1,654) (1,056) (1,581) (1,400) (39) 0 (10) (11)
Net loss at December 31 $19,363 $18,442 $20,724 $21,676 $ 609 $852 $128 $189
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 110 $ 120 $ (386) $ (496) $ 23 $ 15 $ (26) $ (32)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — (6) (1) — — 0 0
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 98 111 7 7 5 5
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 101 $ 110 $ (294) $ (386) $ 30 $ 23 $ (21) $ (26)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — 0 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $19,464 $18,552 $20,429 $21,290 $ 639 $875 $106 $163
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net periodic (income)/cost, including
the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2016.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,331 $1,361 $19 $8
Prior service costs/(credits) 10 (96) (7) (4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities — — — —
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. These obliga-
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and tions are reflected in “Non-U.S. Plans—Multi-employer plans/other
defined contribution plans. As a result of the ruling, the company costs” in the table on page 130. See note M, “Contingencies and
recorded pre-tax retirement-related obligations of $233 million in Commitments,” on page 119 for additional information regarding
2015 and $148 million in 2014 in selling, general and administrative pension plan litigation matters.

===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years The table below presents the assumptions used to measure
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan for retirement-related benefit plans.
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.70% 4.50% 3.60% 2.34% 3.32% 3.23%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets 7.50% 8.00% 8.00% 5.67% 6.08% 6.21%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.49% 2.52% 2.51%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefi t obligations at December 31
Discount rate 4.00% 3.70% 4.50% 2.40% 2.34% 3.32%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.40% 2.49% 2.52%
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2015 2014 2013 2015 2014 2013
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net
periodic cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.40% 4.10% 3.30% 7.51% 7.78% 6.43%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A N/A 0.35% 10.17% 10.22% 9.01%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefi t obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.70% 3.40% 4.10% 7.06% 7.51% 7.78%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related ben- In other non-U.S. countries, where the markets for high-quality
efit plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, long-term bonds are not generally as well developed, a portfo-
fixed-income debt instruments at the measurement date. For lio of long-term government bonds is used as a base, to which a
the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-qual- credit spread is added to simulate corporate bond yields at these
ity corporate bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, as the benchmark for
flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation payments developing the respective discount rates.
are then matched to the yield curve to derive the discount rates.

===== PAGE 136 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the expected
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/ long-term rate of return on plan assets for the years ended
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was 7.5 percent, 8 percent and
resulted in a decrease in 2015 net periodic income of $286 mil- 8 percent, respectively. The change in the rate in 2015 resulted in a
lion, an increase in 2014 net periodic income of $275 million and a decrease in 2015 net periodic income of $264 million. For 2016, the
decrease in 2013 net periodic income of $162 million. The changes projected long-term rate of return on plan assets is approximately
in the discount rate assumptions resulted in a decrease in the PBO 7.0 percent.
of $1,621 million and an increase of $4,437 million at December 31, For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the com-
2015 and 2014, respectively. pany maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the payments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31,
changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material impact 2015, 2014 and 2013, the expected long-term return on plan assets
on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and the actual return on those assets were not material.
and 2013, and resulted in a decrease in the APBO of $109 million
and an increase of $256 million at December 31, 2015 and 2014, Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
respectively. The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com-
For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, the pany, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate
change in the discount rate assumptions resulted in a decrease of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined
in the benefit obligation of approximately $2 billion at Decem- benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31,
ber 31, 2015 and an increase of approximately $11 billion at 2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on
December 31, 2014. life expectancy and death rates for different types of participants.
Mortality rates are periodically updated based on actual experi-
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets ence. In the U.S., the Society of Actuaries released new mortality
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic tables in 2014 and updated them in 2015. The company utilized
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan these tables in its plan remeasurements at December 31, 2015 and
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets. 2014. For the U.S. retirement-related plans, the change in mortality
Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long- assumptions resulted in a decrease to the plan benefit obligations
term expectations for future returns and the investment policies of $0.7 billion and an increase of $2.6 billion at December 31, 2015
and strategies as described on page 135. These rates of return and 2014, respectively.
are developed by the company and are tested for reasonableness
against historical returns. The use of expected long-term returns Interest Crediting Rate
on plan assets may result in recognized pension income that is Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a
greater or less than the actual returns of those plan assets in any cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an
given year. Over time, however, the expected long-term returns interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
are designed to approximate the actual long-term returns, and cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting
therefore result in a pattern of income and cost recognition that the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the ben-
more closely matches the pattern of the services provided by the efits that they are expected to receive in the following year and is
employees. Differences between actual and expected returns are based on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S.
recognized as a component of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the For the PPP, the interest crediting rate of 1.1 percent for the year
service lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending ended December 31, 2015 was unchanged from 2014 and, there-
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds fore, had no impact on the decrease in 2015 net periodic income.
provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of The change in the interest crediting rate to 1.1 percent for the year
plan assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets ended December 31, 2014, from 1.2 percent for the year ended
systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on December 31, 2013, resulted in an increase in 2014 net periodic
plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost. income of $8 million. The change in the interest crediting rate to
1.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2013, from 1.1 percent
for the year ended December 31, 2012, resulted in a decrease in
2013 net periodic income of $6 million.

===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate The assets are managed by professional investment firms
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the and investment professionals who are employees of the com-
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for pany. They are bound by investment mandates determined by
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. the company’s management and are measured against specific
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given, but
on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer concentra-
which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The com- tion, investment style and reliance on particular active and passive
pany assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2016 will be investment strategies.
7 percent. In addition, the company assumes that the same trend Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $5,219 million
rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next eight years. A one of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2015 invested
percentage point increase or decrease in the assumed health- in private market assets consisting of private equities and private
care cost trend rate would not have had a material effect on 2015, real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded
2014 and 2013 net periodic cost or the benefit obligations as of securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,547 mil-
December 31, 2015 and 2014. lion in commitments for future investments in private markets to be
made over a number of years. These commitments are expected
Plan Assets to be funded from plan assets.
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve
measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily management strategy. The primary reasons for the use of deriv-
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market atives are fixed income management, including duration, interest
transactions. rate management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
manage currency and commodity strategies.
Investment Policies and Strategies Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-av-
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet erage target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 29 percent equity
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these obli- securities, 58 percent fixed-income securities, 2 percent real
gations will be settled depends on future events, including the estate and 11 percent other investments, which is consistent with
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. the allocation decisions made by the company’s management.
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based The table on page 136 details the actual equity, fixed income,
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors real estate and other types of investments for non-U.S. plans. In
described on pages 133 through 134. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s some countries, a higher percentage allocation to fixed income
investment strategy balances the requirement to generate returns, is required to manage solvency and funding risks. In others, the
using potentially higher yielding assets such as equity securities, responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a
with the need to control risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected
such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among others, by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences
inflation, volatility in equity values and changes in interest rates that compared with the strategies previously described. Generally,
could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby increasing these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their use
its dependence on contributions from the company. To mitigate of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan and mainly for cur-
any potential concentration risk, careful consideration is given to rency hedging, interest rate risk management, credit exposure and
balancing the portfolio among industry sectors, companies and alternative investment strategies.
geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity, depen- The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
dence on economic growth, currency and other factors that affect underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company main-
investment returns. In 2014, the company changed its investment tains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely
strategy, modifying the target asset allocation, primarily by reduc- benefit payments.
ing equity securities and increasing debt securities. This change
was designed to reduce the potential negative impact that equity
markets might have on the funded status of the plan. The Qualified
PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 34 percent equity securities,
56 percent fixed-income securities, 5 percent real estate and
5 percent other investments.

===== PAGE 138 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2015. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $11,210 $ 1 $ — $11,211 $4,631 $ 0 $ — $ 4,631
Equity commingled/mutual funds (2) (3) 99 2,036 — 2,134 90 6,200 — 6,290
Fixed income
Government and related (4) — 9,854 — 9,854 — 7,482 16 7,499
Corporate bonds (5) — 17,088 2 17,090 — 1,896 4 1,899
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 633 10 643 — 219 — 219
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (2) (6) 313 192 401 907 38 9,082 — 9,120
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,079 — 1,079
Cash and short-term investments (7) 244 2,305 — 2,549 142 467 — 610
Hedge funds — 1,419 912 2,331 — 659 — 659
Private equity (8) — — 2,790 2,790 — — 582 582
Private real estate (8) — — 2,429 2,429 — — 661 661
Derivatives (9) (82) 2 — (80) (1) 481 — 480
Other commingled/mutual funds (2) (10) — — — — 115 1,637 317 2,069
Subtotal 11,784 33,531 6,544 51,859 5,016 29,202 1,580 35,798
Other (11) — — — (143) — — — (50)
Fair value of plan assets $11,784 $33,531 $6,544 $51,716 $5,016 $29,202 $1,580 $35,748
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $34 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $14 million, representing 0.04 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(3) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(4) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(5) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $23 million, representing 0.04 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $1 million
representing 0.004 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(6) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(7) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Primarily includes limited partnerships.
(9) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(10) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(11) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $71 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $59 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and
South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in
the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2014. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $11,527 $ 1 $ — $11,528 $5,652 $ — $ — $ 5,652
Equity commingled/mutual funds (2) (3) 85 2,277 — 2,362 126 7,415 — 7,540
Fixed income
Government and related (4) — 7,883 — 7,883 — 8,159 32 8,191
Corporate bonds (5) — 18,828 4 18,832 — 2,063 1 2,063
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 567 20 587 — 238 — 238
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (2) (6) 312 3,118 295 3,725 87 9,715 — 9,802
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,053 — 1,053
Cash and short-term investments (7) 345 2,304 — 2,650 158 393 — 551
Hedge funds — 1,474 889 2,362 — 745 — 745
Private equity (8) — — 3,287 3,287 — — 513 513
Private real estate (8) — — 2,942 2,942 — — 664 664
Derivatives (9) (55) 3 — (53) 2 846 — 848
Other commingled/mutual funds (2) (10) — — — — 33 1,513 220 1,766
Subtotal 12,214 36,455 7,437 56,106 6,056 32,139 1,429 39,625
Other (11) — — — (333) — — — (82)
Fair value of plan assets $12,214 $36,455 $7,437 $55,772 $6,056 $32,139 $1,429 $39,543
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $55 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM common stock of $21 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(3) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(4) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(5) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $10 million, representing 0.02 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million
representing 0.01 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(6) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(7) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Primarily includes limited partnerships.
(9) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(10) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(11) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $16 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hier-
archy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $84 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico
and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2
in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 140 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2015 and 2014 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2015 $— $ 4 $20 $295 $889 $3,287 $2,942 $ 7,437
Return on assets held at end of year — 0 0 9 23 (199) (210) (377)
Return on assets sold during the year — 1 0 0 — 429 460 889
Purchases, sales and settlements, net — (5) (2) 98 — (727) (763) (1,399)
Transfers, net — 2 (8) — — 0 — (6)
Balance at December 31, 2015 $— $ 2 $10 $401 $912 $2,790 $2,429 $ 6,544
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset- Fixed Income
Government Corporate Backed Commingled/ Hedge Private Private
and Related Bonds Securities Mutual Funds Funds Equity Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2014 $ 1 $ 5 $19 $274 $860 $3,771 $3,038 $ 7,968
Return on assets held at end of year — 0 0 21 28 (10) 197 238
Return on assets sold during the year — 0 0 — — 332 199 531
Purchases, sales and settlements, net — 0 (3) — — (807) (492) (1,302)
Transfers, net (1) (1) 4 — — — — 2
Balance at December 31, 2014 $— $ 4 $20 $295 $889 $3,287 $2,942 $ 7,437
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2015 and 2014 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Other
Government Corporate Private Private Commingled/
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Mutual Funds Total
Balance at January 1, 2015 $ 32 $ 1 $513 $664 $220 $1,429
Return on assets held at end of year (2) 0 (25) 45 28 47
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 62 46 — 107
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (10) 3 73 (62) 84 88
Transfers, net — — — — — —
Foreign exchange impact (3) 0 (42) (31) (15) (91)
Balance at December 31, 2015 $ 16 $ 4 $582 $661 $317 $1,580
($ in millions)
Other
Government Corporate Private Private Commingled/
and Related Bonds Equity Real Estate Mutual Funds Total
Balance at January 1, 2014 $42 $ 4 $410 $655 $ — $1,110
Return on assets held at end of year 3 0 26 83 26 138
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 46 (12) — 34
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (8) (3) 75 (13) 104 155
Transfers, net — — 0 — 102 102
Foreign exchange impact (5) 0 (45) (49) (12) (110)
Balance at December 31, 2014 $32 $ 1 $513 $664 $220 $1,429

===== PAGE 141 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Valuation Techniques Expected Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used Defined Benefit Pension Plans
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions
valuation techniques during 2015 and 2014. sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the
the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
IBM common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the The company contributed $474 million in cash to non-U.S.
New York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are defined benefit pension plans and $40 million in cash to multi-em-
typically valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the ployer plans for the year ended December 31, 2015. For the year
administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV ended December 31, 2014, the company contributed $465 million
is based on the value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, in cash to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $54 mil-
minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units out- lion in cash to multi-employer plans. The cash contributions to
standing. These assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 multi-employer plans represent the annual cost included in net
depending on availability of quoted market prices. periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated Statement
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated of Earnings. The company’s participation in multi-employer plans
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar char- has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
acteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified In 2016, the company is not legally required to make any con-
as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price tributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
reported on the major market on which the individual securities depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
are traded. may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their during the year.
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law
Short-term investments represent securities with original matur- in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other
ities of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S.
Level 2. defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of benefit plans. The additional funding requirements by the Act apply
such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are to plan years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was
reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to updated by the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of
determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. 2008, which revised the funding requirements in the Act by clar-
These investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation meth- ifying that pension plans may smooth the value of pension plans
odology is applied consistently from period to period. over 24 months. At December 31, 2015, no mandatory contribution
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price was required for 2016.
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are In 2016, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using $500 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, benefit pension plans in the UK, Japan and Spain. This amount
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial
foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or market performance in 2016 could increase the legally mandated
Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices. minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly
or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could
also elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount
based on market conditions or other factors.

===== PAGE 142 =====
140 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Contribution Plans contribution of marketable securities is considered a non-cash
The company contributed $1,117 million and $1,239 million in cash transaction in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. These
to the defined contribution plans during the years ended Decem- contribution amounts exclude the Medicare-related subsidy dis-
ber 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. In 2016, the company estimates cussed on page 141.
cash contributions to the defined contribution plans to be approx-
imately $1.1 billion. Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans The following table presents the total expected benefit payments
The company contributed $408 million and $144 million to the to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to
December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively. The $408 million measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2015 and include ben-
contribution consisted of $328 million in cash and $80 million in efits attributable to estimated future compensation increases,
marketable securities in the form of U.S. Treasury securities. The where applicable.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefi t
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2016 $ 3,513 $118 $1,756 $ 311 $ 5,698
2017 3,501 118 1,751 306 5,675
2018 3,501 120 1,780 313 5,714
2019 3,496 121 1,814 326 5,757
2020 3,548 122 1,857 341 5,868
2021–2025 17,279 604 9,855 1,888 29,625
The 2016 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pen- Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
sion plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation and nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These pay-
benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of ments have been estimated based on the same assumptions used
Financial Position. to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2015.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefi t
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2016 $ 393 $ 5 $ 26 $ 424
2017 399 6 30 434
2018 401 6 33 439
2019 406 7 35 448
2020 401 7 39 447
2021–2025 1,797 49 240 2,087
The 2016 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.

===== PAGE 143 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Medicare Prescription Drug Act Other Plan Information
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement The following table presents information for defined benefit pen-
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company qualified to receive sion plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess
a federal subsidy through 2013. Due to benefit plan changes effec- of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded
tive January 1, 2014, the company did not qualify for the subsidy status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the
as of that date. The company received total subsidies of $1 million table on page 131.
and $23 million for prescription drug-related coverage during the
years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, respectively, to true
up the final subsidy amounts due to IBM under the Act. These
subsidies were utilized to reduce the company contributions to
the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan.
($ in millions)
2015 2014
Benefi t Plan Benefi t Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $29,784 $17,677 $34,976 $21,655
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 29,135 17,492 33,148 20,680
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 68,053 69,786 71,501 73,660
NOTE T.
SEGMENT INFORMATION
The company’s major operations consist of five business as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length
segments: Global Tech nol ogy Services, Global Business Ser- value of providing the services. The Global Services segments
vices, Software, Systems Hardware and Global Financing. The enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to market rates
segments represent components of the company for which with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of equipment
separate financial information is available that is utilized on a used in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are
regular basis by the chief executive officer in determining how reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
to allocate resources and evaluate performance. The segments The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
are determined based on several factors, including client base, to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a
homogeneity of products, technology, delivery channels and sim- result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the
ilar economic characteristics. segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain
Information about each segment’s business and the products marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting,
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in the Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources and Billing and
“Description of Business” section on pages 25 to 27, and in “Seg- Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
ment Details,” on pages 29 to 34 in the Management Discussion. on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount. When a clear
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the compa-
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that are used ny’s management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated
by Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements are based on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared
primarily sourced internally from Systems Hardware and Software. expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to
For providing IT services that are used internally, Global Technol- the segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination
ogy Services and Global Business Services recover cost, as well of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.

===== PAGE 144 =====
142 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations In January 2015, the company’s business process outsourc-
of the company’s segments consistent with the management and ing business, Global Process Services, which was previously
measurement system utilized within the company. Performance managed within Global Technology Services, was integrated
measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing opera- into Global Business Services, creating an end-to-end business
tions. These results are used, in part, by senior management, both transformation capability for clients and to better leverage the
in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, company’s industry knowledge. The following tables reflect this
each of the segments. reclassification for the prior-year periods.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Hardware Financing Segments
2015
External revenue $32,017 $17,166 $22,932 $ 7,581 $1,840 $ 81,535
Internal revenue 823 499 3,267 451 2,637 7,676
Total revenue $32,840 $17,664 $26,199 $ 8,032 $4,477 $ 89,211
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 5,002 $ 2,634 $ 9,066 $ 604 $2,364 $ 19,670
Revenue year-to-year change (9.7)% (11.9)% (9.4)% (24.5)% (1.0)% (11.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (15.7)% (22.7)% (15.3)% NM 8.0% (11.6)%
Pre-tax income margin 15.2% 14.9% 34.6% 7.5% 52.8% 22.0%
2014*
External revenue $35,442 $19,512 $25,434 $ 9,996 $2,034 $ 92,418
Internal revenue 934 543 3,496 647 2,488 8,108
Total revenue $36,376 $20,055 $28,931 $10,643 $4,522 $100,527
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 5,931 $ 3,408 $10,699 $ 34 $2,189 $ 22,262
Revenue year-to-year change (1.2)% (8.5)% (0.7)% (21.6)% 5.1% (4.9)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (10.8)% (3.9)% (3.7)% (84.1)% 0.8% (6.0)%
Pre-tax income margin 16.3% 17.0% 37.0% 0.3% 48.4% 22.1%
2013*
External revenue $35,737 $21,210 $25,932 $12,988 $2,022 $ 97,889
Internal revenue 1,063 714 3,191 593 2,282 7,843
Total revenue $36,800 $21,924 $29,123 $13,581 $4,304 $105,732
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,649 $ 3,548 $11,106 $ 213 $2,171 $ 23,687
Revenue year-to-year change (4.7)% (0.8)% 1.4% (18.7)% 5.7% (4.0)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (0.3)% 8.4% 2.7% (88.6)% 6.8% (3.9)%
Pre-tax income margin 18.1% 16.2% 38.1% 1.6% 50.4% 22.4%
* Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 145 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
($ in millions) Global Technology Services assets are primarily plant, property
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 and equipment, including the assets associated with the outsourc-
Revenue ing business, goodwill, accounts receivable, deferred services
arrangement transition costs, maintenance parts inventory and
Total reportable segments $89,211 $100,527 $105,732
acquired intangible assets. Global Business Services assets are
Other revenue 206 374 478
primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. Software assets are
Elimination of internal transactions (7,676) (8,108) (7,843) mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets and accounts receiv-
Total IBM consolidated revenue $81,741 $ 92,793 $ 98,367 able. Systems Hardware assets are primarily plant, property and
equipment, goodwill and manufacturing inventory. Global Financ-
ing assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets
($ in millions) under operating leases.
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equip-
Pre-tax income from ment, several segments may share plant, property and equipment
continuing operations:
assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets
Total reportable segments $19,670 $22,262 $23,687 is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user seg-
Amortization of acquired ment. This is consistent with the company’s management system
intangible assets (677) (791) (758) and is reflected accordingly in the table on page 144. In those
Acquisition-related charges (26) (12) (46) cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment
Non-operating retirement- pre-tax income and segment assets.
related (costs)/income (1,050) (353) (1,062) Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
Elimination of internal transactions (1,859) (1,914) (1,480) are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be
Unallocated corporate amounts* (114) 795 (98) consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’
pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income
Total pre-tax income from
continuing operations $15,945 $19,986 $20,244 reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are
not specifically identified by the management reporting system.
* The 2014 and 2013 amounts include the gain related to the Retail Store Solutions
Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment also are
divestiture. The 2014 amount also includes the net gain related to the System x
business divestiture. consistent with the landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
Global Financing amounts for interest income and inter-
Immaterial Items est expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
Investment in Equity Alliances and Equity Alliances associated with the Global Financing business, including the
Gains/(Losses) intercompany financing activities discussed on page 27, as well
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and as the income from investment in cash and marketable securities.
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the seg- The explanation of the difference between cost of financing and
ments did not have a material effect on the financial position or the interest expense for segment presentation versus presentation in
financial results of the segments. the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is included on page 72 of
the Management Discussion.

===== PAGE 146 =====
144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
Global Global
Technology Business Systems Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Services Services Software Hardware Financing Segments
2015
Assets $16,960 $8,327 $26,585 $3,969 $36,157 $91,999
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,811 81 1,071 304 343 3,610
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 2,514 86 583 291 356 3,830
Interest income — — — — 1,720 1,720
Interest expense — — — — 469 469
2014**
Assets $16,209 $8,831 $25,813 $4,235 $38,845 $93,933
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,833 98 1,210 712 455 4,308
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 2,226 79 534 600 482 3,921
Interest income — — — — 1,951 1,951
Interest expense — — — — 518 518
2013**
Assets $16,658 $9,701 $27,101 $4,901 $40,138 $98,499
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,625 117 1,211 435 574 3,963
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 1,889 118 540 395 467 3,410
Interest income — — — — 1,904 1,904
Interest expense — — — — 405 405
* Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.
** Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.

===== PAGE 147 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 145
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Geographic Information
($ in millions) The following provides information for those countries that are
At December 31: 2015 2014 2013 10 percent or more of the specific category.
Assets
Revenue*
Total reportable segments $ 91,999 $ 93,933 $ 98,499
($ in millions)
Elimination of internal transactions (4,709) (5,193) (4,740)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013
Unallocated amounts
United States $30,514 $32,021 $33,427
Cash and marketable securities 6,634 7,182 9,697
Other countries 51,227 60,772 64,941
Notes and accounts receivable 2,333 4,253 2,907
Total IBM consolidated revenue $81,741 $92,793 $98,367
Deferred tax assets 4,693 6,465* 4,030*
Plant, other property * Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
and equipment 2,650 2,169 4,827
Pension assets 1,734 2,160 5,551 Plant and Other Property—Net
Other 5,161 6,303** 4,869** ($ in millions)
Total IBM consolidated assets $110,495 $117,271 * ** $125,641 * ** At December 31: 2015 2014 2013
United States $ 4,644 $ 4,388 $ 6,723
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in
consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for Other countries 5,532 5,690 6,257
additional information.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs Total $10,176 $10,078 $12,979
in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
additional information.
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s
total revenue in 2015, 2014 or 2013.

===== PAGE 148 =====
146 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue by Classes of NOTE U.
Similar Products or Services SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of
products or services within the company’s reportable segments. On January 26, 2016, the company announced that the Board
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.30 per common
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2016 to shareholders of
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software, record on February 10, 2016.
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support On February 16, 2016, the company issued $5.0 billion in bonds
are reported as Software; Software-as-a-Service, consulting, edu- as follows: $900 million of 18-month floating-rate bonds priced at
cation, training and other product-related services are reported as LIBOR plus 45 basis points, $1.2 billion of 3-year fixed-rate bonds
Services; and appliances are reported as Systems. with a 1.8 percent coupon, $900 million of 5-year fixed-rate bonds
with a 2.25 percent coupon, $1.35 billion of 10-year fixed-rate
bonds with a 3.45 percent coupon and $650 million of 30-year
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014* 2013* fixed-rate bonds with a 4.7 percent coupon.
On February 18, 2016, the Japan Supreme Court declined to
Global Technology Services
hear the appeal of the Tokyo High Court ruling related to the deter-
Services $24,575 $27,130 $27,144
mination of certain foreign tax losses incurred by the company.
Maintenance 6,132 6,853 7,111
The Tokyo High Court judgment, in favor of the company, is now
Systems 1,177 1,294 1,322 final. See Note N, “Taxes,” on page 122 for additional information on
Software 132 164 158 this matter. The company will discuss the impact of this decision
Global Business Services as part of its first quarter 2016 earnings in April 2016.
Services $16,851 $19,202 $20,874
Software 164 186 227
Systems 151 124 109
Software
Software $20,080 $22,722 $23,420
Services 2,718 2,657 2,500
Systems 134 55 12
Systems Hardware
Servers $ 5,223 $ 7,320 $ 9,946
Storage 2,358 2,676 3,041
Global Financing
Financing $ 1,386 $ 1,543 $ 1,493
Used equipment sales 454 491 529
* Reclassified to conform with 2015 presentation.

===== PAGE 149 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011
Revenue $ 81,741 $ 92,793 $ 98,367 $102,874 $105,056
Income from continuing operations $ 13,364 $ 15,751 $ 16,881 $ 16,999 $ 16,108
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (174) $ (3,729) $ (398) $ (395) $ (253)
Net income $ 13,190 $ 12,022 $ 16,483 $ 16,604 $ 15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 14,659 $ 16,702 $ 18,356 $ 18,022 $ 16,571
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 13.60 $ 15.59 $ 15.30 $ 14.71 $ 13.27
Discontinued operations $ (0.18) $ (3.69) $ (0.36) $ (0.34) $ (0.21)
Total $ 13.42 $ 11.90 $ 14.94 $ 14.37 $ 13.06
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 13.66 $ 15.68 $ 15.42 $ 14.88 $ 13.46
Discontinued operations $ (0.18) $ (3.71) $ (0.36) $ (0.35) $ (0.21)
Total $ 13.48 $ 11.97 $ 15.06 $ 14.53 $ 13.25
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 14.92 $ 16.53 $ 16.64 $ 15.60 $ 13.65
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 4,897 $ 4,265 $ 4,058 $ 3,773 $ 3,473
Per share of common stock 5.00 4.25 3.70 3.30 2.90
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 3,579 $ 3,740 $ 3,623 $ 4,082 $ 4,108
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 101.1% 72.5% 83.8% 81.6% 71.2%
At December 31: 2015 2014 2013 2012 2011
Total assets $110,495 $117,271 ** + $125,641 ** + $118,965 ** + $116,128 ** +
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 10,727 $ 10,771 $ 13,821 $ 13,996 $ 13,883
Working capital $ 8,235 $ 7,797** $ 9,610** $ 4,413** $ 7,347**
Total debt $ 39,890 $ 40,722+ $ 39,637+ $ 33,209+ $ 31,265+
Total equity $ 14,424 $ 12,014 $ 22,929 $ 18,984 $ 20,236
* Refer to the “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 63 and 151 of the company’s 2014 Annual Report for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2012 and 2011,
respectively. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 41 and 59 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2015, 2014 and 2013.
** Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on deferred taxes in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.
+ Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on debt issuance costs in consolidated financial statements. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 150 =====
148 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2015 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Full Year
Revenue $19,590 $20,813 $19,280 $22,059 $81,741
Gross profi t $ 9,452 $10,390 $ 9,436 $11,407 $40,684
Income from continuing operations $ 2,415 $ 3,526 $ 2,962 $ 4,460 $13,364
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (88) $ (77) $ (12) $ 3 $ (174)
Net income $ 2,328 $ 3,449 $ 2,950 $ 4,463 $13,190
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*** $ 2,890 $ 3,790 $ 3,272 $ 4,707 $14,659
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.44 $ 3.58 $ 3.02 $ 4.59 $ 13.60
Discontinued operations $ (0.09) $ (0.08) $ (0.01) $ 0.00 $ (0.18)
Total $ 2.35 $ 3.50 $ 3.01 $ 4.59 $ 13.42
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.45 $ 3.59 $ 3.04 $ 4.60 $ 13.66
Discontinued operations $ (0.09) $ (0.08) $ (0.01) $ 0.00 $ (0.18)
Total $ 2.36 $ 3.51 $ 3.03 $ 4.60 $ 13.48
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*** $ 2.91 $ 3.84 $ 3.34 $ 4.84 $ 14.92
Dividends per share of common stock $ 1.10 $ 1.30 $ 1.30 $ 1.30 $ 5.00
Stock prices++
High $164.83 $174.40 $173.22 $152.39
Low $151.55 $159.18 $140.96 $131.75
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2014 First Quarter Second Quarter Third Quarter Fourth Quarter Full Year
Revenue $22,236 $24,047 $22,397 $24,113 $92,793
Gross profi t $10,627 $12,044 $10,874 $12,862 $46,407
Income from continuing operations $ 2,530 $ 4,251 $ 3,455 $ 5,515 $15,751
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (146) $ (115) $ (3,437) $ (31) $ (3,729)
Net income $ 2,384 $ 4,137 $ 18 $ 5,484 $12,022
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*** $ 2,790 $ 4,456 $ 3,671 $ 5,785 $16,702
Earnings per share of common stock*
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.43 $ 4.23 $ 3.46 $ 5.54 $ 15.59
Discontinued operations $ (0.14) $ (0.11) $ (3.44) $ (0.03) $ (3.69)
Total $ 2.29 $ 4.12 $ 0.02 $ 5.51 $ 11.90
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.44 $ 4.25 $ 3.48 $ 5.57 $ 15.68
Discontinued operations $ (0.14) $ (0.11) $ (3.46) $ (0.03) $ (3.71)
Total $ 2.30 $ 4.14 $ 0.02 $ 5.54 $ 11.97
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*** $ 2.68 $ 4.43 $ 3.68 $ 5.81 $ 16.53
Dividends per share of common stock $ 0.95 $ 1.10 $ 1.10 $ 1.10 $ 4.25
Stock prices++
High $195.63 $199.21 $196.40 $190.89
Low $172.19 $179.27 $181.70 $150.50
* Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed
using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
++ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.
*** Refer to page 70 of the company’s first-quarter 2015 Form 10-Q filed on April 28, 2015, page 85 of the company’s second-quarter 2015 Form 10-Q filed on July 28, 2015,
page 87 of the company’s third-quarter 2015 Form 10-Q filed on October 27, 2015, and page 48 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP
financial information for the quarterly periods of 2015 and 2014. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 41 and 42 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information
for full-year 2015 and 2014.

===== PAGE 151 =====
Performance Graph 149
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM,
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graph compares the five-year cumulative total or line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index
returns for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative is such an index. IBM is also included in this index.
return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the
that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100
SEC’s rules require the use of that index. Under those rules, the invested on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The com-
second index used for comparison may be a published industry parisons assume that all dividends are reinvested.
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
10 11 12 13 14 15
(U.S. Dollar) 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $127.42 $134.98 $134.73 $118.04 $104.57
S & P 500 Index 100.00 102.11 118.45 156.82 178.29 180.75
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 102.41 117.59 151.03 181.40 192.15

===== PAGE 152 =====
150 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Alain J.P. Belda* Mark Fields** James W. Owens
Managing Director President and Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and
Warburg Pincus LLC Ford Motor Company Chief Executive Officer
Caterpillar Inc.
William R. Brody* Alex Gorsky
Retired President Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Virginia M. Rometty
Salk Institute for Biological Studies Johnson & Johnson Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer
Kenneth I. Chenault Shirley Ann Jackson
IBM
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer President
American Express Company Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Joan E. Spero
Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
Michael L. Eskew Andrew N. Liveris
Columbia University School of
Retired Chairman and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer International and Public Affairs
Chief Executive Officer The Dow Chemical Company
United Parcel Service, Inc. Sidney Taurel
W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chairman
David N. Farr Chairman and Retired Pearson plc
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Chief Executive Officer
Emerson Electric Co. The Boeing Company Peter R. Voser
Chairman
Hutham S. Olayan
ABB Ltd.
Principal, Director and Senior Executive
The Olayan Group
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Colleen F. Arnold*** Martin Jetter Robert J. Picciano
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
IBM Sales and Distribution IBM Global Technology Services IBM Data and Analytics Platforms
Simon J. Beaumont James J. Kavanaugh Michael D. Rhodin
Vice President Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Tax and Treasurer Transformation and Operations IBM Watson Business Development
Michelle H. Browdy John E. Kelly III Virginia M. Rometty
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Chairman, President and
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, IBM Cognitive Solutions and Chief Executive Officer
and General Counsel IBM Research
Thomas W. Rosamilia
Erich Clementi Kenneth M. Keverian Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President IBM Systems
IBM Sales and Distribution Corporate Strategy
Martin J. Schroeter
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen Arvind Krishna Senior Vice President and
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Director Chief Financial Officer
IBM Sales and Distribution IBM Research
Stanley J. Sutula III
Diane J. Gherson Robert J. LeBlanc Vice President and Controller
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Bridget A. van Kralingen
Human Resources IBM Cloud
Senior Vice President
Jon C. Iwata Christina M. Montgomery IBM Global Business Services
Senior Vice President Vice President
Marketing and Communications Assistant General Counsel and Secretary
* Term on the Board ends on April 26, 2016
** Effective on the Board on March 1, 2016
*** Retiring from the company on March 31, 2016

===== PAGE 153 =====
Stockholder Information 151
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services Annual Meeting
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday, April 26,
2016, at 10 a.m. in the Savannah International Trade & Convention Center,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,
Savannah, Georgia.
Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico Literature for IBM Stockholders
should call (781) 575-2727. The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence,
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust should call (781) 575-2727.
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The 10-K
report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by
IBM on the Internet
early May, August and November.
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found on the IBM home
page on the Internet (www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM An audio recording of the 2015 Annual Report will be available for
products, services and other activities can also be found at that address. sight-impaired stockholders in June 2016.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including its
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC. innovative strategies to transforming communities through global
citizenship. The full Corporate Responsibility Report is available online
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of information
at www.ibm.com/responsibility. It is also available in printed form by
about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
downloading the report at www.ibm.com/responsibility.
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments
to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material
General Information
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC (www.ibm.com/investor).
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and
These materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the on the Internet (www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the online through this site.
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental
maintains an Internet site (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States,
information statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM
stock certificates for safe keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations,
New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, the
Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of the
Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the meeting by calling
(914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by
writing to International Business Machines Corporation, New Orchard
Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.

===== PAGE 154 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AlchemyAPI, Aspera, Blekko, Blue Box, Bluemix, Clearleap, Cloudant,
Daeja, Explorys, Fiberlink, FlashSystem, Gravitant, IBM, IBM Watson,
ILOG, Kenexa, OpenPOWER, Phytel, POWER, POWER8, Power Systems,
Rational, Silverpop, Smarter Commerce, SoftLayer, Star Analytics,
StoredIQ, StrongLoop, System z, Tivoli, Trusteer, UrbanCode, Ustream,
Watson, WebSphere, Xtify, z13 and z Systems are trademarks or regis-
tered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation or its
wholly owned subsidiaries. Apple is a registered trademark of Apple, Inc.
in the United States, other countries, or both. DATAPALOOZA is a trade-
mark of AcademyHealth and is used under license. GLOBALFOUNDRIES
is a registered trademark of GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. Jeopardy! is a
registered trademark of Jeopardy Productions, Inc. Lenovo is a trademark
of Lenovo Group Limited in the United States, other countries, or both.
Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States,
other countries, or both. SAP is a registered trademark of SAP SE in
Germany and other countries. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open
Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, product
and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A.
COL03002-USEN-06
Design: VSA
Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 155 =====


===== PAGE 156 =====
2015
IBM
Annual
Report
2015
IBM
Annual
Report