

===== PAGE 1 =====
You, with IBM.
2016
IBM
Annual
Report

2016 IBM Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
You who run our financial and energy systems; who design,
build and fly our planes, run our trains, manage our cities;
who cure us, feed us, clothe us, entertain us and keep us
safe; who teach our children.
As a professional, you are driven always to advance, and
to make a difference through your work. Which is why this
moment is so extraordinary for you.
Every profession in every industry in every part of the
world is changing, simultaneously. You are drawing on a
wealth of new data, knowledge, insights and tools. You are
being equipped to rethink your job, and freed to do your
life’s work.
We have reinvented IBM for this moment—to fuel your
dreams with Watson, with IBM Cloud, with deep expertise,
with trust. We believe in your ambition to be the best in your
profession. And we believe that you can make our world
healthier, safer, more productive, more creative, fairer.
That is a world we all want to live in. The world you’re
building, with IBM.

===== PAGE 4 =====
1.
with IBM:
Oncologists
can find more
targeted cancer
treatment options.
No doctor can keep up with the onrush of
Doctors
oncology studies published every week,
much less determine which apply to each
patient. But Watson can. Trained for 15,000
anywhere can
hours by specialists at Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center in New York,
Watson has ingested nearly 15 million pages
know the latest
from relevant journals and textbooksand
continues to expand its knowledge.
This expertise is now flowing around the
advances
world and informs evidence-based treat-
ment options for clinicians serving patients
globally. Sites include six Manipal Hospitals
everywhere.
in India, Bumrungrad International
Hospital in Bangkok, Jupiter Medical
Center in Florida and Svet zdravia’s net-
work of 16 hospitals in Slovakia and Central
and Eastern Europe–and soon across China.
Healthcare data is growing 48 percent per year—and
Elsewhere, in trials at the University
will likely exceed 2,300 exabytes by 2020. It pours in of North Carolina’s Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Watson
from new research, electronic medical records, imaging,
suggested potential treatment options that
wearables and epidemiological monitoring, along with
the tumor board hadn’t considered in one
all the environmental factors that affect our health. third of cases.
In addition, doctors are better able to
It can be overwhelming for doctors, but in all that data
understand their patients’ unique needs,
lie vital clues to the next medical breakthroughs, cures
right down to the genetic level. Watson for
and efficiencies. And now best practices and advanced Genomics absorbs 10,000 new medical
articles and details from 100 clinical trials
expertise can go global quickly, changing the very
every month.It applies what it learns to
nature of wellness and healthcare.
suggest highly targeted therapies for each
patient’s individual cancer based on its
understanding of a tumor’s molecular
profile, allowing doctors to provide more
Watson Health
personalized treatment for their patients.
This powerful new tool is helping even
100M Electronic those patients who cannot travel to a
health
specialized medical center. Through Quest
records
Diagnostics, it is available to any oncolo-
200M gist in the United States, as an end-to-end
solution. Illumina plans to integrate it with
Claims
a tumor-sequencing workflow to provide
oncologists cognitive information on-site.
30B
Medical
images
02

===== PAGE 5 =====
2. 4. 6.
Medical Researchers Hospital Administrators Veterinarians
can speed discovery of can improve the health of can now be expert
genes that cause diseases. the health system. on every breed.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or ALS (also The Central New York Care Collaborative Medical doctors treat one species:
known as Lou Gehrig’s disease), has no (CNYCC) is working with Watson Health to humans. Veterinarians may treat dozens
effective treatment and typically kills within create one of the first regional cognitive of species and an even greater number
five years. Barrow Neurological Institute population health platforms in the United of cat and dog breeds. And their patients
researchers employed Watson for Drug States. It will connect 2,000 care providers can’t describe their symptoms. That’s
Discovery to study nearly 1,500 genes in in Upstate New York, integrating clinical, why IBM has worked with vets to build an
the human genome, and found five that social and behavioral data to produce online tool that uses Watson. It can scan
had never before been associated with ALS. holistic views of patients—helping doctors hundreds of thousands of pages of med-
Researchers say that such a discovery, and clinicians make more-informed ical resources, helping vets customize
which took months with Watson, would decisions and promote healthier behavior. treatment options, stay current with best
have previously taken years and gives them CNYCC’s goal is value-based care that practices and identify medical differences
a much clearer idea of what to target for reduces emergency room visits and among even very similar breeds.
therapy when developing new drugs. avoidable hospital stays by 25 percent over
five years—improving health while lowering
Medicaid costs.
5.
Endocrinologists
will help people manage their
diabetes between visits.
People with diabetes will benefit from an
app called Sugar.IQ that draws data from
physician-prescribed Medtronic devices.
The app connects to cognitive analysis
3.
in the IBM Cloud to reveal patterns and
Radiologists personalized insights, helping users better
understand in real time how their behaviors
can find secrets hidden
affect glucose levels. With Watson, a future
in every image.
version is expected to incorporate features
that in tests have predicted hypoglycemic
Radiologists review dozens of medical incidents within a 2- to 3-hour window with
images for every patient they see —often nearly 90 percent accuracy.
hundreds in a day. Watson never gets
eyestrain or momentarily distracted, and
has been trained by researchers to rapidly
analyze huge numbers of images and rank 90%
↑
them for potential anomalies. Radiologists Watson can help
can then focus on the ones that matter veterinarians treat
hundreds of dog
and apply their expertise more quickly. Accuracy
and cat breeds with
Watson can also retrieve similar images predicting more confidence.
hypoglycemic
from other cases for comparison to help
incidents
doctors confirm or refine their diagnoses.
2016 Annual Report 03

===== PAGE 6 =====
8.
with IBM:
Stadium Architects
can create winning
experiences for every fan.
Engineers
With IBM, the NFL’s Atlanta Falcons and
MLS’ Atlanta United are building the most
technologically advanced stadium in the
are rebuilding
world. Set to open this summer, the new
Mercedes-Benz Stadium will deliver
personalized experiences for each attendee,
the world.
while giving the stadium an entirely new
feel depending on who’s on the field or on
stage. And fans will be able to find the
refreshment stands and bathrooms with
the shortest lines.
↑
The new
Mercedes-Benz
Stadium will be
the world’s most
advanced.
7. 9.
↑
Pipeline Engineers Cognitive Chemical Engineers
technologies help
can anticipate failures maintain oil and turn social media activity
gas pipelines.
before they happen. into a test lab.
With Watson’s cognitive abilities, Scientists at The Dow Chemical Company
specialists for oil and gas companies are listening to social media to quickly
can now predict and prevent pipeline identify and speed to market new solutions
failures almost a week in advance. IBM that use the company’s advanced polymers.
business partner SparkCognition is With analytics from IBM, these engineers
using Watson to analyze thousands of can anticipate consumer demand for new
pipeline sensors, and monitor cracks, products. These insights allow them to
vibrations, overheating and other improve everything from running shoes to
factors. Engineers are now able to seals for car windows.
predict and address pipeline failures
as early as six days in advance, 24x
better than before.
04

===== PAGE 7 =====
10. 11. 12.
Automotive Engineers Geoscientists Shipbuilders
are building cars know where and can hit the water
that converse with when to drill. more quickly.
drivers, passengers
Halliburton uses the IBM Cloud to run Italy’sFincantieri is speeding the creation
and each other.
sophisticated oil reservoir simulations that of new cruise ships and naval vessels with
help it better understand how complex oil a hybrid cloud solution from IBM. By con-
By 2020, an estimated 83 million cars and gas fields might behave under different necting 13 private distributed data centers
will connect to the Internet—each with development scenarios. With insights from with IBM’s Cloud Data Center in Milan,
hundreds of sensors on board. With this hundreds of models, petroleum engineers Fincantieri now has an IT infrastructure that
future in mind, General Motors, BMW and geoscientists can optimize drilling supports a compute-intensive design and
and Local Motors are now using Watson decisions to reduce costs and increase manufacturing system, allowing designers
to build the world’s first generation of production—shaping how billions of dollars and engineers to more fluidly manage the
cognitive driving machines. may be spent on large oil fields. process from design to deployment.
GM is expanding its OnStar AtYour-
Service offers and deals platform by
launching new capabilities supported
by OnStar Go with IBM Watson. With
customers’ consent, Watson will learn
drivers’ preferences, apply machine
Watson IoT
learning and sift through data to
recognize patterns in their decisions
6,000+
and habits to deliver individualized
location-based interactions. These ca-
Clients
pabilities are expected to be available in
↑
millions of vehicles in the United States 50,000+ Hybrid cloud is
by the end of 2017. speeding up the
design, building and
Olli, a self-driving electric shuttle
Developers deployment of new
from Local Motors, holds natural language vessels.
conversations with passengers, provid-
ing a more engaging user experience.
Watson learns from more than 30 sensors
embedded throughout the vehicle to 13.
enhance its understanding of passengers’ Railway Engineers
needs and preferences.
are going the extra 19,000
The BMW Group has colocated a
miles for commuters.
team of researchers at the Watson IoT
headquarters in Munich to explore future
sstteeppss aanndd ddeevveellooppmmeennttss iinn ccoonntteexxtt ooff tthhee EEvveerryy ddaayy,, 1133..55 million passengers travel
↓↓
IInntteerrnneett ooff TThhiinnggss.. RReesseeaarrcchheerrss,, IIBBMM aanndd BBMMWW aarree wwiitthhSSNNCCFF,, FFrraannccee’’ss major railway system.
ddeevveellooppeerrss aanndd ccoonnssuullttaannttss aarree pprroottoottyypp-- jjjjooooiiiinnnniiiinnnngggg fffooorrrccceeesss ttoo wwoorrkk TToo iimmpprroovvee eefffificciieennccyy and customer
oonn tthhee ffuuttuurree ooff
iinngg aaddvvaanncceedd ccooggnniittiivvee iinntteerrffaacceess uussiinngg ssaattiissffaaccttiioonn,, railway engineers are equip-
ccoonnnneecctteedd ccaarrss..
tthhee IIBBMM CClloouudd aanndd sshhoowwccaassiinngg tthheemm iinn ppiinngg 3300,,000000 kilometers of track, 15,000
tthhee BBMMWW ii88 hhyybbrriidd ssppoorrttss ccaarr.. ttrraaiinnss aanndd 33,,000000 stations with sensors, all
ccoonnnneecctteedd ttoo the Watson IoT Platform. By
mmmmoooonnnniiiittttoooorrrriiiinnnngggg dddaaatttaaa in real time, engineers and
ooppeerraattoorrss ccaann improve quality, security and
aavvaaiillaabbiilliittyy ooff trains.
1133..55MM
22001166 AAnnnnuuaall RReeppoorrtt 05
Editorial_04-05.indd 5 3/2/17 10:58 PM

===== PAGE 8 =====
15.
with IBM:
Music Producers
compose songs in
the key of AI.
Grammy Award-winningAlex Da Kid
created the first “cognitive song” to hit the
top 10 on a Billboard chart. His inspiration
came from understanding the emotional
state of the world, thanks to Watson’s
analysis of five years of natural language
texts from sources as diverse as social
media, The New York Times and United
States Supreme Court rulings, as well as
the lyrics to more than 26,000 Billboard
Artists ↑
Alex Da Kid used Hot 100 hits.
data visualization for
lyrical inspiration.
are finding
their muse in
the machine.
→
Three million people
watched the Morgan
cognitive trailer on
YouTube.
14. 16.
Special Effects Artists Filmmakers
make thrill-seekers part create buzz with cognitive
of the action. movie trailers.
With a new IBM Cloud-based infrastruc- In fall 2016, 20th Century Fox released
ture that includes more than 1,000 the first-ever AI-generated movie trailer.
high-performance servers, special Traditionally, it can take film editors and
effects artists at Prana Studios are marketers up to a month to create trailers
creating some of the most immersive for an upcoming film. With Watson, they
crowd experiences ever seen or heard at did it in days for the horror movie Morgan.
the world’s theme parks. At one popular Watson “watched” trailers from 100 of the
U.S. attraction, Prana’s high-tech scariest horror films of the past few decades
wizards deliver a 3-D stereo show that and then the final cut of Morgan tochoose
projects ultra-high definition imagery the 10 most relevant scenes for promoting
and animation from 12 projectors the movie.
simultaneously across a massive
400-foot-wide U-shaped screen, pulling
park-goers closer to the action than
ever before.
06

===== PAGE 9 =====
17. 18.
Chefs Bartenders
have a new recipe can mix drinks with
for delighting diners. a cognitive twist.
Watson helps great chefs unleash their Virgin Holidays created a custom rum
creativity through its deep understanding blend designed to “taste like a vacation
of the science of food chemistry and the feels.” With IBM Chef Watson Twist,
psychology of taste. Cognitive Cooking with bartenders can bring together flavors
Chef Watson, written with the Institute of that complement one another at the
Culinary Education, contains more than molecular level. Watson also analyzed
65 recipes and was named by Gourmand social posts from more than 15 million
International as one of the “most innovative” people on holiday, helping a master
cookbooks in the United States. blender match their sentiments to
corresponding flavors.
→→ 19.
WWaattssoonn rreevvviieeewwweeeddd
Fashion Designers
images of 200
Marchesa dresses to
create dresses
suggest materials and
colors for the world’s with emotional
first cognitive dress.
intelligence.
For the 2016 Met Gala in New York City,
high-fashion design house Marchesa
literally lit up the red carpet with a
cognitive dress that applied color
psychology to match emotions. The
resulting piece, created with Watson’s
Cognitive Color Tool and worn by
supermodel Karolína Kurková, had 150
connected LED flowers that lit up in
different colors based on real-time
sentiment in the room and on Twitter.
2016 Annual Report 07

===== PAGE 10 =====
20.
with IBM:
Astronauts
are sharing their
view of the world.
Ustream video technology, delivered on
the IBM Cloud, enables NASA TV to air live
and prerecorded programming to space
enthusiasts 24 hours a day, including space
walks, repair missions and other out-of-this-
world experiences. Stargazers can ask
astronauts questions via social channels,
giving viewers real-time, personal connec-
tions with the men and women of NASA
during their missions.
Professionals
everywhere can
reimagine the
ways they work…
21.
Winemakers
can optimize yields
from every vine.
The E. & J. Gallo Winerydeveloped a
precision irrigation system to grow better
grapes and conserve HO in the process.
2
With IBM Research, the winemakers are
using a cognitive irrigation system that can
identify and deliver the specific amount of
water needed to plots as small as 40 vines.
Gallo’s crop yield increased by 26 percent—
and water consumption was cut by a quarter.
08

===== PAGE 11 =====
22. 23. 25.
Meteorologists Cyclists Steelworkers
inform the world can race faster—and rise balance safety
from their backyards. higher on the podium. and efficiency.
Hobbyists can now contribute readings In competitive cycling, a tenth of a second is North Star BlueScope Steel recently
from backyard personal weather stations everything. Ahead of the Rio Olympics, the partnered with Watson IoT on wearable
to improve global forecasts. More than U.S. Women’s Cycling Team tapped IBM safety technology that helps employees
250,000 people worldwide monitor their Analytics and Watson IoT to study every stay safe in dangerous environments. By
own weather stations and participate in a pedal stroke and heartbeat. By analyzing analyzing data collected from IoT sensors
Personal Weather Station Network run by data streaming in from sensors installed in worn by users and embedded in their
Weather Underground, a subsidiary of The the bikes, IBM helped the team calculate personal protective equipment, supervi-
Weather Company, an IBM company. These the optimal energy output of each rider at sors can continuously monitor workers’
amateurs—and the data that they collect— certain points in the race. The team ended skin temperatures, heart rates and levels
now help inform the up to 45 billion weather up beating their own American record, of activity to correlate health conditions
inquiries that The Weather Company handles shaving two full seconds off their time from with sensor data on ambient temperature
every day. Their contributions complement the 2016 London World Championships and and humidity. The data can then be used to
more than 400 terabytes of data drawn daily ascending the podium in Rio with the 2016 provide personalized safety guidelines,
from 800+ diverse data sources, including silver medal. advising workers when to take a break if
pollen counts, turbulence, radar, satellite temperatures rise to unsafe levels.
imagery, traffic and smartphone pressure
sensors. More than a quarter billion people
use The Weather Company’s app and
website each month, and thanks in part to
these amateur meteorologists, the forecasts
the world sees are now hyper-accurate and
hyper-local, updated every 15 minutes for
2.2 billion locations.
The Weather Company 24. 26.
Store Managers Flight Attendants
45B Weather are fighting back against help passengers find their
inquiries
online competitors. connecting gates.
daily
With Watson Customer Engagement and With IBM’s MobileFirst for iOS, United
2.2B
Location MobileFirst for iOS, shoppers get a unique Airlines is deploying a new set of apps for
forecasts blend of virtual and physical service. Macy’s more than 50,000 iOS devices now in the
On-Call, developed with IBM partner Satisfi hands of its front-line employees, including
Labs, is an in-store, Watson-powered flight attendants, who will be better able
250M
Users shopping assistant that enables smartphone to advise connecting passengers about
monthly users to find real-time information about their gates upon arrival. Customer service
product availability, store layouts and items representatives are no longer tethered to
on sale. Boots will be launching Sales Assist, gate podiums, allowing them to move freely
800+ Different
types of data another MobileFirst for iOS app, across its about the concourse to assist customers.
analyzed 2,500 U.K. stores in an effort to make it
easier and simpler for customers to find the
products they need.
2016 Annual Report 09

===== PAGE 12 =====
27.
with IBM:
Pilots
can outmaneuver
the wind.
Not only is turbulence unpleasant to
sit through, it costs airlines more than
$100 million every year due to crew and
passenger injuries, operational delays and
unscheduled aircraft maintenance. Now
American Airlines, Alaska Airlines, Cathay
Dragon and United Airlines are using Total
Turbulence from The Weather Company to
analyze sensor data from more than 3,000
flights daily. It identifies patches of rough
air and delivers real-time alerts to operation
centers and pilots, enabling them to react
quicker and take appropriate action to
minimize bumpy rides.
…and how they
make a difference
in the world.
10

===== PAGE 13 =====
28. 30. 32.
College Professors Farmers Lawyers
can respond to students are harvesting data spend less time on research
24 hours a day. for bumper crops. and more time with clients.
The newest digital learning tools are Farmers in established growing regions One of the major impediments to affordable,
helping students and professors work have traditionally relied on static climate quality legal representation is the high cost
smarter in the classroom. One professor datasets collected by existing government, of legal research. A recent study found
at Georgia Tech deployed Jill Watson, city or airport weather stations. Now, with that new associates spend a third of their
the world’s “first AI teaching assistant,” a global network of distributed weather time poring over laws, prior cases and legal
to join 30 human teaching assistants stations in the field, and with hyper-local journals to support arguments on behalf of
in answering questions and providing forecasts from The Weather Company, a plaintiff or defendant. ROSS Intelligence
guidance to nearly 1,000 graduate Farmers Edge is providing real-time data is a digital research adviser that uses
students. Available at any hour of the day, and highly precise predictive models that Watson’s natural language query
Jill was so good that students couldn’t tell enable growers to make more accurate capabilities to enable law firms to sift
the difference between her counsel and decisions on how to manage their time, through more than one million legal
that of human counterparts. Students also resources and costs. documents per second and return relevant
will be able to ask questions and engage in passages and citations for a case.
dialogue about courses with Pearson’s new
digital learning products, just as they would
1,000,000
their professors. Instructors will receive
real-time insights on student progress,
allowing them to better manage courses
legal documents
and flag students who need additional help.
per second
29. 31. 33.
Digital Merchandisers Copywriters Sanitation Workers
can satisfy the most can turn advertising into can nearly double
demanding shoppers. personal conversations. their input.
With XPS and Watson Customer The world’s first cognitive ads listen In fast-growing Nairobi, potholes and traffic
Engagement, 1-800-Flowers.com built and react to individual consumer needs, jams hinder delivery of public services. IBM
GWYN (Gifts When You Need), a virtual giving relevant, context-sensitive researchers equipped the city’s fleet of
gift concierge that can look through responses tailored just for them. With garbage trucks with mobile phone trackers
1-800-Flowers.com’s 75,000+ products Watson machine learning and natural to monitor truck movements and allow fleet
and find the best choices for each shopper. language, theCampbell Soup Company supervisors to track data on location and
Shoppers explain what they’re looking and Toyota are pioneering Watson speed in real time. Department supervisors
for in their own words. GWYN then sifts Ads on weather.com and The Weather could identify problems on roadways as
through structured and unstructured data Channel apps. soon as drivers experienced them and
on product descriptions, prices, varieties, suggest more efficient routes on the spot.
categories, delivery options and more As a result, garbage collection nearly doubled,
to identify the most appropriate gifts to from 800 to 1,400 metric tons per day.
feature. Eighty percent of the shoppers
who have used the service say they would
use it again, and 65 percent click through
to the products offered.
2016 Annual Report 11

===== PAGE 14 =====
with IBM:
IT Specialists
are embracing a
cognitive future.
12

===== PAGE 15 =====
34. 36.
Chief Information Developers
Security Officers can build applications
are calling in cognitive that think.
reinforcements.
IBM Security serves 12,000 clients in 133 The world is being rewritten in code, and
countries, employing a global network of its new builders—21 million software
8,000 security professionals that monitor developers—are transforming entire
more than 35 billion events per day. Now industries. Already, 8.2 million of them
the team has Watson for Cyber Security to are using cognitive computing, tapping
help clients analyze quickly and at scale IBM’s cloud, data analytics and Watson
vast amounts of unstructured data capabilities to create whatever they can
previously inaccessible to traditional envision. By 2018, it is expected that
security tools, including an estimated 35. more than half of developers will embed
10,000 security research papers published IT Managers cognitive services into their applications.
per year and 60,000 monthly security blogs. A Stanford University student’s
can easily integrate public
IBM X-Force Exchange, launched in 2016, DoNotPay app identified legal precedents
and private clouds.
allows companies to contribute to and to help overturn parking tickets and save
draw from a shared pool of security motorists $5 million in fines. Bitly moved
information, with 700 terabytes of The partnership between IBM and VMware 25 billion links to the IBM Cloud to give
data captured on cyber threats. And in now enables IT managers to more quickly developers faster, more responsive ways
Massachusetts, IBM just built the first and seamlessly extend their on-premises to understand online behavior and
commercial “cyber range,” a state-of-the- VMware workloads from private data consumer interactions with their brands.
art, immersive training facility that enables centers to the IBM Cloud. A unique and Staples’ Easy System allows business
companies to prepare for cyberattacks by flexible hybrid approach allows enterprise customers to order supplies via voice,
mimicking the way the military prepares– CIOs to customize their cloud adoption, text or email.
simulating every likely scenario in advance. maintaining investments while modernizing Cognitive developers are transforming
their technology strategy to compete in industries and shifting decision-making
today’s transforming landscape. power within organizations. Only IBM
provides all the services, tools, training
and certifications necessary to help
IBM Security
developers become next-generation
builders. With Watson, IBM Cloud and
data, developers are bringing together a
12,000+
set of tools that can infuse intelligence
into all digital solutions.
Clients
35B+
Security events monitored daily
133
Countries
2016 Annual Report 13

===== PAGE 16 =====
39.
with IBM:
Insurers
can prevent damage
rather than pay for it.
Hailstorms cost car insurers more than $1
billion every year. Meteorologists are now
teaming up with leading insurance compa-
Financial
nies to help car owners avoid damage and
reduce claims. The Weather Company’s
hyper-local prediction system can pinpoint
Professionals
the path of an imminent hailstorm down to
500 square meters, an area slightly larger
than a basketball court. Policyholders are
are making the
sent smartphone alerts to notify them when
they are in harm’s way, urging them to move
their vehicles under cover.
smart money
smarter.
38.
Compliance Officers
can save billions on
regulatory costs.
By 2020, there may be more than 300
million pages of banking regulations
worldwide. Keeping pace is daunting and
expensive: Banks spend about $100 billion
per year on compliance efforts, and $150
billion more on fines and penalties.
37. 40.
Promontory Financial Group, an IBM
Tax Preparers company, is training Watson on these Customer Service
complex financial compliance laws, giving it
can find hidden Professionals
the ability to provide decision support on
credits. can handle more questions.
everything from reporting requirements for
derivatives to consumer protection for
Weighing in at 74,000 pages—with mortgages—helping to safeguard banks, No matter how simple a customer’s ques-
thousands of new changes each year— their customers and the global economy. tion, if an agent at one of Banco Bradesco’s
the United States tax code is complex 5,000 branches had a query about any of
and voluminous, even for the savviest the bank’s 59 products, the agent needed to
tax preparer. With Watson, H&R Block’s call the company’s contact center. But now
70,000 professionals can now draw Watson Engagement Advisor can answer
connections between tax laws, insights these agents’ written or spoken questions in
from the company’s deep database of $250B Portuguese, mining structured and unstruc-
720 million tax returns over the past 60 tured data on everything from customer
years, and personal financial documents accounts to internal bank documents.
to maximize outcomes for customers. Watson has improved response accuracy by
Annual expenses
More than 10 million tax filers are 85 percent, leading to more satisfied clients
related to
expected to benefit this year. compliance for and freeing up branch agents to focus on
global banks more complex customer issues.
14

===== PAGE 17 =====
41, 42, 43.
Bankers, Diamond
Brokers and Shippers
can transact with trust.
The global digital economy depends on
trust, not faith. Transactions—from real
estate and securities to supply chains
and logistics—often have dozens of
participants, multiplying the chances for
error, delay and fraud. Fortunately, a new
technology has arrived that will do for
trusted transactions what the Internet
did for information.
Blockchain brings together shared
ledgers with smart contracts, enabling
the secure transfer across any network
of any asset—whether physical (like a
shipping container), financial (like a bond)
or digital (like music).
With blockchain, researchers, retailers
and traders around the world are ensur-
ing that all parties can transact with trust.
With IBM, Maersk is creating solutions
to digitize global trade, including a collab-
oration on blockchain to build trust and
transparency into global supply chains.
Thanks to an application that start-
up Everledger runs on IBM’s z Systems
Cloud, blockchain can track a diamond’s
provenance from mine to finger.
For Walmart China, a blockchain pilot
is following the journey of pork from farm
to table, enabling tracking of details such
as farm origins, factory data, expiration
dates, storage temperatures and shipping
information to better ensure food trace-
ability, transparency and safety.
CLSis partnering with IBM to build
distributed ledger technology to reduce
risk and improve liquidity across the
$5-trillion-per-day global foreign
Blockchain exchange market. The Depository Trust
and Clearing Corporation is using the
100+
technology to permanently record and
automate the sharing of secured data
records of financial agreements.
Companies, including IBM, support The U.S. Food and Drug
the Hyperledger Project to Administration is exploring the use of
accelerate open development blockchain for the secure exchange of
and commercial adoption. sensitive medical data such as electronic
patient records, clinical trial data and
health data from mobile devices.
2016 Annual Report 15

===== PAGE 18 =====
44.
with IBM:
Educators
can adapt to every
student’s learning
style and need.
With Watson, learning can be personalized
to allow students to learn at their own pace
and in the ways that best suit them. Sesame
Civic
Workshop is creating a new educational
TM and © 2017 Sesame Workshop
platform that will adapt learning programs
to each preschooler’s individual learning
Leaders
preferences and aptitude. Teachers in
↑
Sesame Workshop is Texas’ Coppell Independent School
looking to once again District are using a holistic view of an
are ushering
transform early
individual child’s data to personalize the
learning, this time
with Watson. ways in which they approach each of the
district’s 12,300 students. Hundreds of
in a new
third-grade teachers in the United States
are piloting Teacher Advisor with Watson,
created with the American Federation of
urban age.
Teachers and other partners, to provide
customized math lessons and expert
teaching strategies that strengthen
instruction.
45.
Environmental
Scientists
are improving the quality of
life through air quality.
With IBM Research, environmental scien-
tists in Beijing have built Green Horizons,
a cognitive system that can accurately
determine where air pollution is coming
from, where it will go and what effect it
might have on citizens. Drawing from myriad
sources—including industrial production,
coal shipments, transportation patterns
and weather forecasts—Beijing can make
adjustments such as closing factories or
limiting traffic during risk periods. Ultra-fine
↑ particulate matter was reduced by 20
Green Horizons is percent in 2015. Environmental agencies
helping to improve air
in Delhi and Johannesburg also adopted
quality in Beijing, Delhi
and Johannesburg. these technologies in 2016 to address clean
air initiatives.
16

===== PAGE 19 =====
46. 47. 49.
Building Managers Helpline Operators Police Officers
are listening to their can give answers in a can stay one step
structures—and saving New York minute. ahead of criminals.
millions.
With Watson IoT, building managers and With Watson, New York’s 311 citizen Police work is shifting from reactive
operators can make smarter decisions. helpline will use artificial intelligence crime-fighting to proactively managing
Siemens Building Technologies to help people navigate life in the city. public safety—working across boundaries
Division’s cloud-based solution captures The system will help provide more to analyze data, spot patterns and avert
data generated by more than 70,000 user-friendly, up-to-the-minute and crimes before they happen. With IBM, 6,000
connected buildings to spot energy usage practical responses to 100,000 daily police departments around the world can
and equipment problems in advance, saving complaints, inquiries and calls for now access more than a billion shareable
millions of dollars and reducing carbon service–nearly 36 million a year. documents from the cloud. They apply
emissions by two million tons every year. intelligent analytics to predict and prevent
KONEenables one billion people to crime in ways never before possible,
move on more than one million elevators leading to reductions in violent crime of up
and escalators worldwide. The Watson IoT to 40 percent in some U.S. cities.
Cloud lets KONE connect sensors in these
conveyances to improve people flow and
performance. With this data, KONE can pre-
dict potential outages, follow performance
in real time, run tests remotely and dispatch
technicians with better customer insight.
Clean, well-stocked restrooms make good
impressions with customers, employees and
tenants of any building. Delivered through the
IBM Cloud, new technology from Kimberly-
48. 50.
Clark Professionalallows restroom
attendants to monitor conditions remotely Principals Food Inspectors
from any device or location, alerting them to
are preparing “new can thwart epidemics
potential issues before complaints come in.
collar workers” using supermarket
Sensors embedded into towel, tissue and
soap dispensers, as well as door counters, for high-tech jobs. scanners.
send real-time alerts to managers regarding
supply usage levels, jams and overall traffic. A four-year college degree is no longer From Salmonella to norovirus, foodborne
Cleaning staff can then be assigned to those the only route to a good job. High school illnesses afflict almost 1 in 10 people every
areas that most need service. Supplies are students from diverse backgrounds are year. The only way to prevent more from
better managed, costs are lowered and getting a great education, building their getting sick is to trace the problem back to
tenants are happier. skills and landing the “new collar” jobs the source of the contaminated food, which
of the emerging cognitive era. Pathways normally can take months. With IBM
in Technology Early College High School Research, public health officials can now
(P-TECH), created by IBM with leading use the data from simple supermarket
educational partners, offers a unique six- scanners to analyze grocery receipts
year curriculum (grades 9–14) resulting in connected with as few as 10 reported cases
an associate degree. Dozens have already of illness to find tainted sources within 12
graduated ahead of schedule, prepared hours or less.
for jobs in high demand at IBM and many
other companies. P-TECH will soon be
available in 100 schools across six U.S.
states and Australia.
2016 Annual Report 17

===== PAGE 20 =====
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer
18
Editorial_18-23.indd 18 3/1/17 11:37 PM

===== PAGE 21 =====
Dear
IBM Investor:
It can be hard to assess the progress of a This is why it’s so encouraging that Our strategic imperatives have reached
major transformation from a single year’s employee engagement scores continue critical mass. At $33 billion, they now
results. And yet, when you look back after to rise year after year. contribute 41 percent of IBM’s revenue.
a few years, it becomes clear just how much With double-digit growth, we’re on pace
has changed. But understanding IBM at the start of to achieve our goal of growing these
2017 requires a longer view—in particular, businesses to $40 billion by 2018. Most
Before I offer a broader perspective, let remembering why we embarked on this importantly, within these businesses we
me describe how your company performed journey of transformation. It had nothing have built unique and powerful platforms
in 2016. We made substantial progress to do with economic downturn or fixing with Watson and the IBM Cloud:
last year: something broken. Rather, our experience
over more than a century has trained us • Watson has become the AI platform
• We achieved operating earnings per to be vigilant. We began to see that the IT for business. I will have much more to
share of $13.59 and free cash flow of industry would radically reorder, driven by say about Watson, but just consider
$11.6 billion. the phenomenon of data, the maturation of that, through our clients and ecosystem
• We invested heavily for our long-term cloud computing and the emergence of what partners, we expect Watson to touch one
competitiveness—nearly $6 billion in many call artificial intelligence or AI. We billion people this year.
research and development, nearly $4 were convinced that the source of value— • IBM is now the global leader in cloud
billion in capital expenditures and nearly for our clients and for our owners—would for the enterprise. In 2016, our cloud
$6 billion to make 15 acquisitions, adding shift, and that the convergence of these business grew an outstanding 35 percent,
to our capabilities in the high-growth innovations would usher in a new era in to $13.7 billion (adjusted for the effects
areas of cognitive, cloud and security. both technology and business. of currency, as are all revenue growth
• We returned $8.8 billion to you, our numbers in this letter). Cloud by itself is
shareholders, including dividends of $5.3 We didn’t wait. We got out of commoditizing now more than 17 percent of our total
billion and $3.5 billion in gross share businesses—trimming $8 billion from our revenues. Our as-a-Service exit run rate
repurchases. We raised our dividend for top line (and nothing from our bottom line) was $8.6 billion, up 63 percent.
the 21st consecutive year—and it was over the past five years. We redoubled
IBM’s 101st straight year of providing our efforts to reinvent our core hardware, I am so proud of the teams who have
one. We are proud of both milestones. software and services franchises, while incubated and scaled these businesses.
• IBM’s technical community outdid itself. investing to create new ones—in cloud, data, They are the IBM investor’s “unicorns.” At
For the 24th year in a row, IBM led in cognitive, security and the other businesses the same time, we have transformed much
U.S. patents earned, becoming the first that comprise our strategic imperatives. We of IBM’s core—the other 59 percent of our
company to break the 8,000 mark did this not simply to manage a portfolio company.
in one year. of businesses, but to build the integrated
• All of this and more is due to the work capability that our clients would need for Global Technology Services (GTS) is the
and passion of 380,000 IBMers. They are the new era. market leader in IT services. The next time
our greatest competitive advantage and you use your credit or debit card, take
the most important reason for confidence While our transformation continues, a strong out an insurance policy, board a plane or
in IBM’s prospects in the years ahead. foundation is now in place. drive your car, chances are you are being
2016 Annual Report 19

===== PAGE 22 =====
“Watson has
become the AI
platform for
business.”
touched by GTS. Their services run the because our mainframe team continues to problems. We are creating domain-specific
infrastructure that powers 60 percent of the create new capabilities for new workloads. datasets that we either own or partner
banking industry’s daily card transactions, Our latest mainframe runs Linux, processes to access, and we’re applying our deep
61 percent of the automobile industry’s mobile payments instantly, supports hybrid industry expertise to build vertical solutions
production of passenger vehicles and nearly clouds and is becoming preferred as the and to train Watson in specific professional
half of mobile connections worldwide. And most secure platform for the important new fields.
while our GTS team is superb at managing technology blockchain. This is why I call this
infrastructure, they are innovators at heart. part of IBM our youngest oldest business. In short, to win in the cognitive era,
In recent years, they have built strong data matters. Client control of their data
capabilities in hybrid cloud and are applying and insights matters. Public, hybrid and
automation and Watson wherever and as Leading a new era enterprise-strength cloud matters.
fast as they can. This unique combination Industry expertise matters. Trust and
of innovation and trust enables GTS to grow With Watson’s victory on Jeopardy! in 2011, security matter. That is what sets apart
signings and revenue, and win new clients. IBM ended the latest so-called “AI winter” Watson on the IBM Cloud—and why
and led our industry and the world into the thousands of clients, partners and IBM
Global Business Services continues to cognitive era. Today, we’re no longer alone: itself are building powerful solutions and
reinvent itself and is growing robustly where The land rush into AI is on—including a lot of businesses on it:
we have created new practices. Last year, hype. But we expect to maintain and extend
our cloud practice was up more than 60 our lead in cognitive business, because we • IBM Watson Health leverages broad
percent, mobile more than 40 percent and uniquely serve the needs of the enterprise. datasets, including 100 million electronic
analytics 10 percent. That’s good—though health records, 200 million healthcare
not enough yet to offset declines in some Enterprises need cognitive solutions that claims records and millions of images.
traditional practices, such as enterprise turn vast amounts of data into insights and You also need clinical data, payer data
resource planning. But I remain confident competitive advantage. They need access to and images, all of which are created
in our ability to transform this business, a cloud platform not only for IT capability, and owned by clients. (Consider that an
and we will continue to invest in these but for speed and agility. Its architecture estimated 80 percent of the world’s data
new areas. For example, we created a new must be hybrid, spanning both public and cannot be accessed by search engines.)
Watson IoT (Internet of Things) consulting private clouds, because businesses will We capture and integrate all this data,
practice that will include 1,500 consultants, want to leverage their existing investments because publicly available data alone is
data scientists and security experts. in applications, IT infrastructure and, most not sufficient for work like transforming
of all, their data. And they need a partner healthcare or making advances in
When it comes to our ability to reinvent they trust, who understands their industry cancer. What’s more, you need deep
large, significant businesses, I must say and process flows, and whose platform is domain expertise. Watson Health’s 7,000
a word about the mainframe. Installed secure, scalable, global in scope and local employees include doctors, nurses,
mainframe capacity has increased 20-fold in presence. health policy experts and data scientists.
in the past 20 years—and is still growing, as Finally, we provide a quality management
you saw in our fourth-quarter 2016 results. IBM provides this powerful AI cloud system that is HIPAA-compliant. Only
Why do clients love the mainframe? Because platform, and we are using it to build IBM Watson Health offers all of this
no other system can do what it can do, and industry-based solutions to real-world capability.
20

===== PAGE 23 =====
97% 80%
IBM is already essential to
global business…
of the world’s largest banks use of the world’s travel reservations are
IBM has helped design, build IBM products to run their systems processed on IBM systems
and run the systems that underpin
90% 83%
global business.
of global credit card transactions are of the world’s largest communications
processed on IBM mainframes service providers are IBM clients
80%
of global retailers are powered
by IBM retail solutions
As we build what modern Strategic Imperatives Revenue
business requires...
We have invested in and built
the capabilities—cloud, analytics,
cognitive, mobile, security—to power
$33B
the emerging needs of modern $29B
$25B
business. Our strategic imperatives
grew by 14 percent adjusting for
currency, generating $33 billion in
revenue last year, representing 41
percent of our total revenue. 2014 2015 2016
Our growth is fueled 8,088
by innovation... patents in 2016
Our ability to create high value 97,040
is powered by the prolific inventors total patents since 1993
of IBM. For the 24th year in a row,
IBM led in U.S. patents earned.
In 2016, we were the first company
ever to be granted more than
8,000 U.S. patents in one year.
1993 ’94 ’95 ’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01 ’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10 ’11 ’12 ’13 ’14 ’15 2016
$15B $8.8B
Enabling us to generate
high returns. invested returned
Our model allows us to continuously
invest in our growth while simultaneously in 2016 in 2016
returning value to our shareholders.
Across research and Dividends: $5.3B
development, capital Gross Share Repurchase: $3.5B
expenditures, and acquisitions
2016 Annual Report 21

===== PAGE 24 =====
• IBM Watson IoT has similar unique It is also becoming clear that as IT moves New roads and new rules
advantages. The number of new clients to the cloud, transactions must be trusted for a cognitive future
and developers using our platform more by all parties involved. That is why we are
than doubled last year. Our new global building a complete blockchain platform. As 2017 begins, our industry stands at
Watson IoT center in Munich opened in Blockchain brings together shared ledgers an inflection point. The next few years
2017, including the first-ever Cognitive with smart contracts to allow the secure will be critical for information technology
IoT Collaboratories, where clients and transfer of any asset—whether a physical providers, as businesses and institutions
IBMers work together to drive innovation asset like a shipping container, a financial around the world will make key architectural
in automotive, electronics, manufacturing, asset like a bond or a digital asset like decisions—about cloud, about data,
healthcare and insurance. music—across any business network. about AI.
• Late last year, we launched Watson Blockchain will do for trusted transactions
Financial Services. And because top what the Internet did for information. IBM is well positioned to help clients make
industry specialists are needed to wise choices—and to lead our competition.
train Watson in the risk management IBM is already working with more than 400 We take seriously our responsibility to
requirements of financial services, we clients to pioneer blockchain for business. ensure that new technology is adopted in
acquired Promontory Financial Group, a They include clients who manage foreign ways that are both ethical and enduring—
leader in regulatory compliance and risk exchange settlements, smart contracts, never more essential than in times of rapid
management consulting. identity management and trade finance—but economic and societal change. We will
the potential goes well beyond financial continue to engage across our industry and
IBM is changing industries around the services. For instance, we are collaborating society, and to advocate for a business and
world. Watson on the IBM Cloud is available with Walmart to ensure transparency in the policy environment that is open, inclusive,
to more than 200 million consumers to way food is tracked, transported and sold global and equitable. And we will do more
answer questions, find what they need to consumers across China and the United than advocate. We will innovate.
online and make recommendations. Half a States. And Everledger is using a cloud-
million students can choose courses and based blockchain to track the provenance An example of such innovation is IBM’s
master a subject with Watson, which also of diamonds and other high-value goods as “Principles for Transparency and Trust in the
helps teachers address each student’s they move through the supply chain. Cognitive Era,” which we issued in January
unique learning needs. IBM Security—which of this year. Its main tenets:
monitors 35 billion security events a day This is the real world of cognitive business.
for 12,000 clients spanning 133 countries— Unlike the AI we see in movies and pop • We believe AI’s purpose is to augment
launched the world’s first commercial culture—which depict machines achieving human intelligence.
“cyber range,” where clients can simulate consciousness or independent agency— • We will be transparent about when and
and prepare for real-world attacks and draw the true promise of this revolutionary where AI is being applied, and about
on the power of Watson to fight cybercrime. technology comes not from replacing but the data and training that went into its
With Watson, buildings are reducing from augmenting human intelligence. It recommendations.
CO emissions by 10 million tons a year; comes from embedding cognitive capability • We believe our clients’ data and insights
2
businesses are accelerating hiring cycles in the processes, systems, products and are theirs.
by 75 percent; and airlines are improving services that permeate business, society • We are committed to helping students,
maintenance efficiency by 80 percent. and our daily lives. workers and citizens acquire the skills to
22

===== PAGE 25 =====
“IBM is now the
global leader in
cloud for the
enterprise.”
engage safely, securely and effectively creating a world that is fairer, more diverse,
with cognitive systems, and to do the more tolerant, more just; and to creating
new kinds of work that will emerge in a long-term value for you. Our strategy to
cognitive economy. reinvent our company is being validated
by our clients around the world, and has
These principles will be our touchstone for the support of our Board of Directors. I’m
everything we do to build this new world. grateful to them and to you, our owners, for
We will practice them with our clients, and your continued support. Most of all, I am
we believe they can form an important deeply proud of the IBM team for bringing
foundation for business and society at large. us here and for what they do every day for
our great company.
A world with Watson
Last October, IBM hosted more than 15,000
entrepreneurs, innovators and other leaders
from business, government, healthcare and Virginia M. Rometty
civil society who are working with Watson Chairman, President and
to transform their industries and sectors. Chief Executive Officer
Their work showed that Watson has, indeed,
entered the world at scale.
But this signature gathering did something
more than showcase the reality and reach
of Watson. It also presented a vision of
the world with Watson. In example after
example, we saw a world that is healthier,
more secure, less wasteful, more productive,
more personalized, more sustainable.
That is a world my colleagues and I want to
live in. Indeed, this is, in the end, why we
are IBMers—and why we remain so deeply
committed to the hopeful future that is now
In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s
within our grasp. financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP), these materials contain certain non-GAAP financial
measures on a continuing operations basis, including revenue at constant currency,
strategic imperatives revenue at constant currency, as-a-Service run rate at constant
As IBM has done throughout its history, we currency, operating earnings per share and free cash flow. The rationale for man-
agement’s use of this non-GAAP information is included on pages 26, 27 and 69 of
remain dedicated to leading the world into a the company’s 2016 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K submitted
with the SEC on February 28, 2017. For reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial
more prosperous and progressive future; to measures to GAAP and other information, please refer to pages 28, 48, 50 and 69 of
the company’s 2016 Annual Report.
2016 Annual Report 23
Editorial_18-23.indd 23 3/1/17 11:37 PM

===== PAGE 26 =====
24 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015
Revenue $ 79,919 $ 81,741
Net Income $ 11,872 $ 13,190
Income from continuing operations $ 11,881 $ 13,364
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 13,031 $ 14,659
Earnings per share of common stock (continuing operations)
Assuming dilution $ 12.39 $ 13.60
Basic $ 12.44 $ 13.66
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 13.59 $ 14.92
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 16,958 $ 17,008
Capital expenditures, net 3,726 3,780
Share repurchases 3,502 4,609
Cash dividends paid on common stock 5,256 4,897
Per share of common stock $ 5.50 $ 5.00
At December 31: 2016 2015
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 8,527 $ 8,195
Total assets $ 117,470 $ 110,495
Working capital $ 7,613 $ 8,235
Total debt $ 42,169 $ 39,890
Total equity $ 18,392 $ 14,424
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 946 966
Market capitalization $ 157,832 $ 133,507
Stock price per common share $ 165.99 $ 137.62
* See pages 48 and 49 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Report of Financials 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Overview 26 A Significant Accounting Policies 90
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 27 B Accounting Changes 99
Management Discussion Snapshot 27 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 101
Description of Business 30 D Financial Instruments 107
Year in Review 36 E Inventories 114
Prior Year in Review 56 F Financing Receivables 114
Other Information 67 G Property, Plant and Equipment 118
Looking Forward 67 H Investments and Sundry Assets 119
Liquidity and Capital Resources 68 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 119
Critical Accounting Estimates 71 J Borrowings 120
Currency Rate Fluctuations 74 K Other Liabilities 123
Market Risk 74 L Equity Activity 123
Cybersecurity 75 M Contingencies and Commitments 127
Employees and Related Workforce 76 N Taxes 129
Global Financing 76 O Research, Development and Engineering 132
P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 132
Report of Management 82 Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 133
Report of Independent Registered R Stock-Based Compensation 133
Public Accounting Firm 83
S Retirement-Related Benefits 136
T Segment Information 150
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS U Subsequent Events 154
Earnings 84
Comprehensive Income 85
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 155
Financial Position 86
Selected Quarterly Data 156
Cash Flows 87
Performance Graph 157
Changes in Equity 88
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 158
Stockholder Information 159

===== PAGE 28 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW • In October 2014, the company announced a definitive
The financial section of the International Business Machines agreement to divest its Microelectronics business. The
Cor por ation (IBM or the company) 2016 Annual Report includes assets and liabilities of the Microelectronics business
the Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial were reported as held for sale at December 31, 2014 and
State ments and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State ments. the operating results of the Microelectronics business
This Over view is designed to provide the reader with have been reported as discontinued operations. The
some perspective regarding the information contained in the transaction closed on July 1, 2015.
financial section.
• In January 2016, the company made a number of
changes to its organizational structure and management
Organization of Information
system. These changes impacted the company’s
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers
reportable segments, but did not impact the company’s
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the
Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to Note T,
company’s financial results and certain factors that may
“Segment Information,” on pages 150 to 154 for additional
affect its future prospects from the perspective of the
information on the changes in reportable segments. The
company’s management. The “Management Discussion
company’s reportable segments are: Cognitive Solutions,
Snap shot,” beginning on page 27, presents an overview
Global Business Services, Technology Services & Cloud
of the key performance drivers in 2016.
Platforms, Systems, and Global Financing. The company
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 36, filed a recast 2015 Annual Report in a Form 8-K on June
the Manage ment Discussion contains the results of 13, 2016 to recast its historical segment information
operations for each reportable segment of the business to reflect these changes.
and a discussion of the company’s financial position and
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant
cash flows. Other key sections within the Management
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include
Discussion include: “Looking Forward” on page 67, and
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in
“Liquidity and Capital Resources” on page 68, which
foreign currency rates. When the company refers to growth
includes a description of management’s definition and
rates at constant currency or adjusts such growth rates for
use of free cash flow.
currency, it is done so that certain financial results can
• Global Financing is a reportable segment that is be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign
measured as a stand-alone entity. A separate “Global currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-
Financing” section is included in the Management period comparisons of its business performance.
Discussion beginning on page 76. Financial results adjusted for currency are calculated by
translating current period activity in local currency using
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented
the comparable prior year period’s currency conversion
on pages 84 through 89. These statements provide an
rate. This approach is used for countries where the
overview of the company’s income and cash flow
functional currency is the local currency. Generally,
performance and its financial position.
when the dollar either strengthens or weakens against
• Subsequent to the company’s press release and Form other currencies, the growth at constant currency rates
8-K filing on January 19, 2017, announcing 2016 fourth- or adjusting for currency will be higher or lower than
quarter and full-year financial results, the company revised growth reported at actual exchange rates. See “Currency
the classification of certain financing receivables on a full- Rate Fluctuations” on page 74 for additional information.
year basis increasing net cash provided by operating
• Within the financial statements and tables in this
activities and net cash used in investing activities in the
Annual Report, certain columns and rows may not add
amount of $441 million. As adjusted, net cash provided
due to the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
by operating activities for the three months and twelve
Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying
months ended December 31, 2016 is $3,968 million
whole-dollar numbers.
and $16,958 million, respectively, and, net cash used in
investing activities is $3,687 million and $10,976 million
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
for the same periods. There was no impact to total GAAP
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational
cash flows or free cash flow.
results of the business, the company separates business results
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure that
accounting policies (pages 90 to 99), acquisitions and excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges,
divestitures (pages 101 to 106), detailed information on retirement-related costs, discontinued operations and related
specific items within the financial statements, certain tax impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings exclude the
contingencies and commitments (pages 127 to 129) and amortization of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-
retirement-related plans information (pages 136 to 150). related charges such as in-process research and development,
transaction costs, applicable restructuring and related expenses
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes
and tax charges related to acquisition integration. These charges
have been prepared in accordance with accounting
are excluded as they may be inconsistent in amount and timing
principles generally accepted in the United States (GAAP).
from period to period and are dependent on the size, type and

===== PAGE 29 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
frequency of the company’s acquisitions. For retirement-related FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
costs, the company characterizes certain items as operating and Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may
others as non-operating. The company includes defined benefit constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of
plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan service cost, the Private Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any
amortization of prior service cost and the cost of defined forward-looking statement in this Annual Report speaks only as
contribution plans in operating earnings. Non-operating of the date on which it is made; the company assumes no
retirement-related cost includes defined benefit plan and obligation to update or revise any such statements. Forward-
nonpension postretirement benefit plan interest cost, expected looking statements are based on the company’s current
return on plan assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the assumptions regarding future business and financial
impacts of any plan curtailments/settlements and multi- performance; these statements, by their nature, address
employer plan costs, pension insolvency costs and other costs. matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking
Non-operating retirement-related costs are primarily related statements involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other
to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied factors that could cause actual results to be materially different,
to financial market performance and the company considers as discussed more fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in
these costs to be outside of the operational performance of the company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange
the business. Commission (SEC), including the company’s 2016 Form 10-K
filed on February 28, 2017.
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a
view of operating earnings as described above provides
increased transparency and clarity into both the operational
results of the business and the performance of the company’s
pension plans; improves visibility to management decisions and
their impacts on operational performance; enables better
comparison to peer companies; and allows the company to
provide a long-term strategic view of the business going forward.
The company’s reportable segment financial results reflect
operating earnings from continuing operations, consistent with
the company’s management and measurement system.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Revenue $ 79,919 $ 81,741 (2.2)%*
Gross profi t margin 47.9% 49.8% (1.9)pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 25,964 $ 24,740 4.9%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 32.5% 30.3% 2.2 pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 12,330 $ 15,945 (22.7)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 449 $ 2,581 (82.6)%
Income from continuing operations $ 11,881 $ 13,364 (11.1)%
Income from continuing operations margin 14.9% 16.3% (1.5) pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (9) $ (174) (95.1)%
Net income $ 11,872 $ 13,190 (10.0)%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ 12.39 $ 13.60 (8.9)%
Consolidated earnings per share—assuming dilution $ 12.38 $ 13.42 (7.7)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 958.7 982.7 (2.4)%
Assets** $ 117,470 $ 110,495 6.3%
Liabilities** $ 99,078 $ 96,071 3.1%
Equity** $ 18,392 $ 14,424 27.5%
* (1.6) percent adjusted for currency
** At December 31

===== PAGE 30 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides the company’s (non-GAAP) operating earnings for 2016 and 2015
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Net income as reported $11,872 $13,190 (10.0)%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (9) (174) (95.1)
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $13,364 (11.1)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 735 562 30.9
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 415 734 (43.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $13,031 $14,659 (11.1)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 13.59 $ 14.92 (8.9)%
* See pages 48 and 49 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
In 2016, the company reported $79.9 billion in revenue, The 2016 results reflect the success the company is having in
$11.9 billion in income from continuing operations and its strategic imperatives and the investments made to drive that
$13.0 billion in operating (non-GAAP) earnings, resulting in shift. The company had continued strong revenue growth
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $12.39 in cloud, analytics and engagement, which together grew
as reported and $13.59 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The 13 percent year to year as reported and 14 percent adjusted
results of continuing operations exclude a net loss from for currency. In 2016, the strategic imperatives generated
discontinued operations of $9 million in 2016 and $174 million $32.8 billion in revenue, which represented 41 percent of the
in 2015 related to the divestiture of the Microelectronics company’s revenue, an increase of 6 points from 2015. Total
business. On a consolidated basis, net income in 2016 was Cloud revenue of $13.7 billion increased 35 percent both as
$11.9 billion, with diluted earnings per share of $12.38. reported and adjusted for currency, with cloud as-a-Service
The company generated $17.0 billion in cash from operations revenue up 55 percent as reported and 57 percent adjusted for
and $11.6 billion in free cash flow and shareholder returns of currency. The company exited 2016 with an annual run rate for
$8.8 billion in gross common stock repurchases and dividends. cloud as-a-Service revenue of $8.6 billion, up from $5.3 billion
at the end of 2015. Analytics revenue of $19.5 billion increased
There are significant opportunities and shifts occurring in the IT
9 percent as reported and adjusted for currency. Mobile revenue
industry, and the company believes that to be successful with
increased 34 percent year to year as reported (35 percent
enterprise clients, it needs to bring together cognitive
adjusted for currency) and Security revenue increased 13 percent
technologies on cloud platforms that create industry-based
as reported (14 percent adjusted for currency).
solutions to solve real-world problems. In 2016, the company
continued to: From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue
increased 1.9 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for
• Deliver strong results in the strategic imperatives;
currency with growth in Solutions Software, led by an increase
• Make progress in building new businesses and creating in Analytics and Security revenue; partially offset by a decline
new markets; in Transaction Processing Software. Global Business Services
(GBS) revenue decreased 2.7 percent as reported and 3 percent
• Deliver innovation in the more traditional businesses and
adjusted for currency primarily driven by a decline in Consulting
monetize core technologies; and
revenue. Revenue performance continued to be impacted by the
• Return capital to shareholders. company’s shift away from traditional businesses, such as ERP
implementations. GBS strategic imperatives revenue had
Total consolidated revenue in 2016 decreased 2.2 percent as double-digit growth year to year as reported and adjusted for
reported and 1.6 percent year to year adjusted for currency. currency. Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue
Annuity revenue increased as reported and adjusted for increased 0.6 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for
currency while transactional revenue declined year to year. currency led by growth in Infrastructure Services as the
In addition, acquisitions completed in the past 12 months company assists clients in modernizing and transforming their
contributed to revenue growth. infrastructures. Technology Services & Cloud Platforms strategic
imperatives revenue was up 39 percent (40 percent adjusted for
currency) year to year. Systems revenue decreased 19.2 percent
(19 percent adjusted for currency) with z Systems down
27.1 percent (27 percent adjusted for currency) and Power
Systems down 27.1 percent (27 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 31 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue decreased pre-tax income from continuing operations of $13.9 billion
2.5 percent as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) with decreased 21.3 percent year to year and the operating (non-
the U.S. down 0.9 percent. Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing operations decreased
revenue decreased 5.0 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted 4.2 points to 17.4 percent. Operating (non-GAAP) income from
for currency). Asia Pacific revenue increased 2.6 percent as continuing operations of $13.0 billion decreased 11.1 percent
reported, but decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency with and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing
Japan up 10.5 percent as reported, but down 1 percent adjusted operations of 16.3 percent decreased 1.6 points. The operating
for currency. (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations in
2016 was 6.5 percent versus 17.2 percent in 2015.
The consolidated gross profit margin of 47.9 percent decreased
1.9 points year to year and reflects the impact of the company’s Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of
investments, including acquisitions, and mix in as-a-Service $12.39 in 2016 decreased 8.9 percent year to year. In 2016, the
which is not yet at scale. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin company repurchased 23.3 million shares of its common stock
of 48.9 percent decreased 1.9 points compared to 2015 driven at a cost of $3.5 billion and had $5.1 billion remaining in
primarily by the same factors. the share repurchase authorization at December 31, 2016.
Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $13.59
Total expense and other (income) increased 4.9 percent in 2016
decreased 8.9 percent versus 2015. Diluted earnings per share
compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense
from discontinued operations was ($0.01) in 2016 compared to
and other (income) increased 5.6 percent compared to 2015.
($0.18) in 2015.
The key year-to-year drivers were:
At December 31, 2016, the company continued to have the
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term.
Total Operating
Consolidated (non-GAAP) Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2016 were
• Currency* 2 points 2 points $8.5 billion, an increase of $0.3 billion from December 31, 2015.
Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows were:
• Acquisitions** 5 points 4 points
• Base (2) points 0 points Total assets increased $7.0 billion ($7.7 billion adjusted for
currency) from December 31, 2015 driven by:
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating • Increases in goodwill ($4.2 billion), retirement plan assets
(non-GAAP) is net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. ($1.3 billion), net intangible assets ($1.2 billion), deferred
taxes ($0.4 billion) and cash and marketable securities
The increase in expense was driven primarily by the impact of ($0.3 billion).
acquisitions completed in the prior 12 months and an impact
from currency. Base expense performance reflects a higher level Total liabilities increased $3.0 billion ($3.9 billion adjusted
of intellectual property (IP) income ($950 million) year to year for currency) from December 31, 2015 driven by:
driven primarily by the company’s software licensing
arrangements. Base expense also includes charges in 2016 for • Increases in total debt ($2.3 billion), retirement-related
actions taken to accelerate the transformation of the company’s liabilities ($0.6 billion) and taxes ($0.4 billion).
workforce and shift its skill base, as well as increased
investments in the strategic areas of cognitive, security and Total equity of $18.4 billion increased $4.0 billion from
cloud. This included a higher level of workforce rebalancing December 31, 2015 as a result of:
charges ($451 million) year to year and real estate capacity
• Increases from net income ($11.9 billion) and stock-based
charges ($291 million) related to the workforce transformation.
compensation ($0.5 billion); partially offset by
The company continued to invest at a high level in 2016 and
remixed skills in support of the strategic imperatives. • Decreases from dividends ($5.3 billion) and share
repurchases ($3.5 billion).
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $12.3 billion
decreased 22.7 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin
The company generated $17.0 billion in cash flow provided by
was 15.4 percent, a decrease of 4.1 points versus 2015.
operating activities, essentially flat compared to 2015, driven
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2016 was
primarily by operational performance; offset by lower income
3.6 percent, a decrease of 12.5 points versus 2015. The tax rate
tax payments. Net cash used in investing activities of
in 2016 was primarily the result of a refund ($1.0 billion) of
$11.0 billion was $2.8 billion higher than 2015, primarily driven
previously paid non-U.S. taxes plus interest in the first quarter
by an increase in cash used related to acquisitions ($2.3 billion).
of 2016. Income from continuing operations of $11.9 billion
Net cash used in financing activities of $5.8 billion decreased
decreased 11.1 percent and the net income margin was
$3.4 billion compared to the prior year, driven primarily by higher
14.9 percent, a decrease of 1.5 points versus 2015. Losses from
net debt issuances ($2.7 billion) and a decline in cash used for
discontinued operations, net of tax, were $9 million in 2016
common share repurchases ($1.1 billion).
compared to $174 million in 2015. Net income of $11.9 billion
decreased 10.0 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP)

===== PAGE 32 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In January 2017, the company disclosed that it is expecting Cloud Platform: IBM Cloud is the leading cloud platform for the
GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations of at least enterprise, providing what enterprises need for speed, agility
$11.95 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at least $13.80 and, combined with Watson, for cognitive capability.
per diluted share for 2017. The company expects 2017 free cash
Industry Focus: As IBM brings higher levels of value to its
flow realization to be in excess of 90 percent of GAAP net income
clients, as its offerings are being built for the needs of individual
and free cash flow to be essentially flat year to year. Refer to
industries. Healthcare and Financial Services are two examples
page 69 in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section for
of the company’s initial cognitive focus.
additional information on this non-GAAP measure. Refer to the
Looking Forward section on pages 67 and 68 for additional Cognitive Solutions
information on the company’s expectations. Since IBM’s Watson was introduced in 2011, the company has
been developing a new generation of cognitive systems that can
see and analyze the massive amounts of data that have
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
previously been invisible to computers and enterprises. IBM’s
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the cognitive systems have the capability to inject a kind of thinking
SEC on February 28, 2017 for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.” ability into every digitized object, process and service, and learn
The company creates value for clients through integrated from interactions. IBM is on the forefront of deploying these
solutions and products that leverage: data, information systems and helping clients to embrace the cognitive era.
technology, deep expertise in industries and business Cognitive systems are not programmed; like humans, they learn
processes, and a broad ecosystem of partners and alliances. from experts and from every interaction, and they are uniquely
IBM solutions typically create value by enabling new capabilities able to find patterns in big data. They learn by using advanced
for clients that transform their businesses and help them engage algorithms to sense, predict and infer. Doing so, they augment
with their customers and employees in new ways. These human intelligence, allowing individuals to make faster and more
solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting informed decisions.
and IT implementation services, cloud and cognitive offerings,
and enterprise systems and software; all bolstered by one of the Since Watson’s debut, many technologies have entered the
world’s leading research organizations. market under the banner of artificial intelligence. However,
IBM’s approach to cognitive systems is quite unique:
Strategy • Highly adaptable intelligence systems: Watson has broad
IBM has a history of continuous re-invention, transforming itself applicability and can help clients tackle challenges ranging
throughout its 100-plus year history. In the past five decades from oncology to customer support.
alone, IBM has ushered in the eras of the mainframe, the
• Protect and respect client data: Watson learns through
personal computer, IT services and enterprise software. In its
data, both public data as well as clients’ private data.
current transformation, IBM is once again leading the reordering
Clients choose whether their data or insights are shared.
of the technology industry.
IBM respects the clients’ ownership and control of their
A number of years ago, the company declared its focus on the own data.
strategic forces behind the “digital” revolution; data, cloud and
• Easy entry points: Watson’s open APIs offer easy on-ramps
engagement, driven by mobile and social, and underpinned by
to experiment with speech, vision and other data.
security. Since 2010, IBM has invested approximately $40 billion
in these areas, built out the IBM Cloud on a global scale and • Trained in domain depth: Watson is trained to be an
extended cognitive systems to numerous enterprises and expert in industries and functional specialties. It augments
industries. The company made 55 acquisitions and has formed the knowledge of professionals, giving them access to
partnerships with organizations that are leading players in the insights of their best colleagues and the world’s
key industries. leading experts.
Because of this transformation, IBM today is much more than a • Transformational services: IBM’s Cognitive Solutions and
hardware, software and services company; IBM is a cognitive Watson Internet of Things (IoT) practices help clients build
solutions and cloud platform company, with a focus on industry their cognitive strategies. GBS provides outcome-focused
capabilities and expertise: methodologies, domain skills and deep industry expertise.
Cognitive Solutions: With the highest level of intelligence that
exists in technology systems, these solutions tackle challenges
ranging from answering client inquiries to helping physicians
fight cancer.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud Platform • IBM continues to partner with financial services clients
Cloud represents more than a new architecture for delivering to build a robust infrastructure addressing increasingly
infrastructure and applications as services; it is also a catalyst complex and fast-changing demands. From preventing
for innovation, speed and agility. Cloud enables companies to fraud to supporting cybersecurity efforts, IBM is becoming
focus on differentiating their strategies, capabilities and ever-more essential to the financial industry.
business models rather than on the underlying technology.
• IBM offers analytics to help clients assess their risk and
The IBM Cloud brings a unique set of characteristics to clients: compliance against industry guidelines, and uses a
cognitive approach to provide deeper and faster findings.
• It is a world-class cloud platform designed for enterprises,
In late 2016, the company acquired Promontory Financial
where security, reliability, scalability and performance
Group, LLC (Promontory), one of the world’s leading
are critical.
regulatory consulting firms. Promontory is training Watson
• It is the industry-leading hybrid cloud, enabling clients to to be a market-leading expert in the regulatory field, which
extend their existing IT investments, connecting valuable will allow the company to deliver services at new levels of
data and applications across public and private clouds. efficiency and transparency.
• It is a world-class cognitive cloud platform with • IBM is committed to blockchain to provide a highly secure
IBM Watson services that developers can embed into method of facilitating multi-step transactions, reducing
their applications to create differentiating customer the number of disputes and points of friction, including
experiences and powerful insights. its participation in the Hyperledger Project. This cross-
industry consortium is working to build the blockchain
The IBM Cloud has a strong global presence, with more than network in the cloud, doing for trusted transactions
50 cloud data centers around the world giving clients the what the Internet did for information, and setting industry
flexibility to optimize the deployment of data and application, standards for years to come. Blockchain will enable
for performance, security and compliance. financial institutions to settle securities in minutes instead
of days; manufacturers to reduce product recalls by sharing
production logs along their supply chain; and businesses of
The IBM Cloud is also continually expanding its base of advanced
all types to more closely manage the flow of goods and
capabilities including cloud data services, cloud object storage,
payments. IBM is working with companies ranging from
cloud video services, as well as Internet of Things, blockchain
retailers, banks and shippers to apply this technology to
and analytics services. In 2016, IBM brought new cognitive
transform their ecosystems through open standards and
solutions to professionals in marketing, commerce, supply chain
open platforms.
and human resources, extending industry clouds to further
differentiate its cloud offerings. • IBM’s Global Business Services consulting business,
with broad expertise across industries and a strong global
Industry Focus
footprint and scale, provides a unique combination of
To bring higher value to clients, IBM is providing solutions that
technologies and services to help clients achieve their
are specific and tailored to challenges clients face in their
business outcomes.
industry, using the power of IBM’s advanced cognitive computing
capabilities built on the IBM Cloud. In 2016, IBM deepened its
commitment to delivering higher value in several key ways:
• In the healthcare industry, IBM Watson Health combines
the power of cloud and cognitive with value-based
solutions to optimize performance, engage consumers,
enable effective care and manage population health.
Significant investment in the healthcare space, including
the acquisition of Merge and Truven, has enabled the
company to expand the scope of solutions aimed at solving
some of the most pressing health challenges.

===== PAGE 34 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Transforming Core Businesses The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously
While the company is focused on cognitive solutions, cloud changing industry and economic environment, including the
platform and industry, it is important to note cognitive, cloud company’s transformation into cloud and as-a-Service delivery
and industry are being embedded across IBM’s offerings. These models. The company continues to strengthen its position
core businesses continue to run clients’ most critical business through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-
processes. IBM’s hardware systems are being designed from value areas, strengthening its industry expertise and applying
the ground up to power the cloud and cognitive systems of the advanced analytics across virtually all its offerings. In addition,
future. The company’s technology services help clients move to the company is transforming into a more agile enterprise to drive
the cloud, embedding cognitive capabilities tailored for their innovation and speed, as well as helping to drive productivity,
industry. The company’s software offerings are simultaneously which supports investments for participation in markets with
being made available for the cloud as well as being connected significant long-term opportunity.
to the cloud where our clients choose to keep them on premises.
This business model, supported by the company’s financial
Additionally, cognitive capabilities are being added to these
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash
offerings to provide new levels of innovation. In short, all of IBM
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
is transforming to support the way its clients are transforming.
Summary Business Segments and Capabilities
Each transformation of IBM ushers in a new capability to the The company’s major operations consist of five business
world. More than 50 years ago, IBM introduced the program- segments: Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services,
mable era and transformed the world’s transactions through the Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Systems and
mainframe. In the decades that followed, IBM commercialized Global Financing.
the personal computer, created an industry around IT services
and a software market around middleware. Each of these Cognitive Solutions comprises a broad portfolio of capabilities
innovations remains essential to business and the world today. that help IBM’s clients to identify actionable new insights and
inform decision-making for competitive advantage. Leveraging
The company’s current chapter is ushering in an entirely new era IBM’s research, technology and industry expertise, this business
of human-computer interaction, embodied in cognitive solutions delivers a full spectrum of capabilities, from descriptive,
and the cloud platform for the needs of industries. The company predictive and prescriptive analytics to cognitive systems.
is embarking on an era where it will create new capabilities at Cognitive Solutions includes Watson, the first commercially
speeds and depth never previously witnessed. available cognitive computing platform that has the ability to
interact in natural language, process vast amounts of big data,
Business Model and learn from interactions with people and computers. These
The company’s business model is built to support two principal solutions are provided through the most contemporary delivery
goals: helping enterprise clients to become more innovative, methods including through cloud environments and “as-a-
efficient and competitive through the application of business Service” models. Cognitive Solutions consists of Solutions
insight and IT solutions; and providing long-term value to Software and Transaction Processing Software.
shareholders. The business model has been developed over
Cognitive Solutions Capabilities
time through strategic investments in capabilities and
Solutions Software: provides the basis for many of the
technologies that have superior long-term growth and
company’s strategic areas including analytics, security and
profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
social. IBM has established the world’s deepest portfolio of data
The company’s global capabilities as a cognitive solutions and and analytics solutions, including analytics and data
cloud platform company include services, software, systems, management platforms, cloud data services, enterprise social
fundamental research and related financing. The broad mix of software, talent management solutions, and solutions tailored
businesses and capabilities are combined to provide integrated by industry. Watson Platform, Watson Health and Watson
solutions and platforms to the company’s clients. Internet of Things capabilities are included in Solutions
Software. IBM’s world-class security platform delivers
integrated security intelligence across clients’ entire operations,
including their cloud, applications, networks and data, helping
them to prevent, detect and remediate potential threats.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Transaction Processing Software: includes software that Technology Services & Cloud Platforms provides
primarily runs mission-critical systems in industries such as comprehensive IT infrastructure services creating business
banking, airlines and retail. Most of this software is on-premise value for clients through integrated services that incorporate
and annuity in nature. unique intellectual property within its global delivery model. By
leveraging insights and experience drawn from IBM’s global
Global Business Services (GBS) provides clients with
scale, skills and technology, with applied innovation from
consulting, application management services and global process
IBM Research, clients gain access to leading edge, high-quality
services. These professional services deliver business value and
services with improved productivity, flexibility, cost
innovation to clients through solutions which leverage industry,
and outcomes.
technology and business process expertise. GBS is the digital
reinvention partner for IBM clients, combining industry Technology Services & Cloud Platforms Capabilities
knowledge, functional expertise, and applications with the Infrastructure Services: delivers a portfolio of cloud, project-
power of design, cognitive and cloud. The full portfolio of GBS based, outsourcing and other managed services focused on
services is backed by its globally integrated delivery network clients’ enterprise IT infrastructure environments to enable
and integration with IBM solutions and services including digital transformation and deliver improved quality, flexibility,
Watson, cloud, blockchain, and Technology Services. To deepen risk management and financial value. The portfolio includes a
its capabilities, in 2016 IBM acquired four consulting and design comprehensive set of hybrid cloud services and solutions to
firms to enhance the GBS global network of 35 digital experience assist clients in building and running enterprise IT environments
design studios. IBM also announced Watson IoT Consulting that utilize public and private clouds and traditional IT. The IBM
Solutions, a new practice that brings together IBM’s industry Cloud Platform offers leading edge services to developers and
and technical expertise to help clients introduce IoT innovation IBM’s Cloud Infrastructure-as-a-Service covers a wide variety
into their businesses. of workloads with unprecedented performance. These offerings
integrate long-standing expertise in service management and
GBS Capabilities
technology with the ability to utilize the power of new
Consulting: provides business consulting services focused on
technologies, including those from other IBM business
bringing to market solutions that help clients shape their digital
segments. The portfolio is built around a key set of predictive
blueprints and customer experiences, define their cognitive
and proactive solutions addressing systems, mobility, resiliency,
operating models, set their next-generation talent strategies
networking, cloud and security. The company’s capabilities,
and create new technology visions and architectures in a cloud-
including IBM Cloud, cognitive computing and hybrid cloud
centric world.
implementation, can help to deliver high-performance, end-to-
Application Management: delivers system integration, end innovation and an improved ability to achieve business
application management, maintenance and support services for objectives.
packaged software, as well as custom and legacy applications.
Technical Support Services: delivers a comprehensive line of
Value is delivered through advanced capabilities in areas such
support services to maintain and improve the availability of
as security and privacy, application testing and modernization,
clients’ IT infrastructures. These offerings include maintenance
cloud application migration and automation.
for IBM products and other technology platforms, as well as
Global Process Services: GBS’ business process outsourcing software and solution support.
service line, delivers finance, procurement, HR, and industry-
Integration Software: delivers industry-leading hybrid cloud
specific business processes. These services deliver improved
solutions that empower clients to achieve rapid innovation,
business results to clients through the strategic change and/or
hybrid integration, and process transformation with choice and
operation of the client’s business processes, applications and
consistency across public, dedicated and local cloud
infrastructure. GBS is redefining the efficiency and cost profiles
environments, leveraging IBM’s Bluemix Platform-as-a-Service
of clients’ core processes through the application of the power
solution. Integration Software offerings and capabilities help
of Watson, cognitive and deep analytics.
clients address the digital imperatives to create, connect and
optimize their applications, data and infrastructure on their
journey to become cognitive businesses.

===== PAGE 36 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems provides clients with innovative infrastructure Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of
technologies to help meet the new requirements of hybrid cloud information technology systems, software and services by
and cognitive workloads—from deploying advanced analytics, providing financing solutions in the areas where the company
to moving to digital service delivery with the cloud, and securing has the expertise. The financing arrangements are predom-
mobile transaction processing. Approximately half of Systems inantly for products or services that are critical to the end users’
Hardware’s server and storage sales transactions are through business operations. These financing contracts are entered into
the company’s business partners, with the balance direct to end- after a comprehensive credit evaluation and are secured by legal
user clients. IBM Systems also designs advanced semiconductor contracts. As a captive financier, Global Financing has the
and systems technology in collaboration with IBM Research, benefit of both deep knowledge of its client base and a clear
primarily for use in the company’s systems. insight into the products and services financed. These factors
allow the business to effectively manage two of the major risks,
Systems Capabilities
credit and residual value, associated with financing
Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to
while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financing
address computing capacity, security and performance needs
also maintains a long-term partnership with the companies’
of businesses, hyperscale cloud service providers and scientific
clients through various stages of IT asset life cycle—from
computing organizations. The portfolio includes z Systems,
initial purchase and technology upgrades to asset
a trusted enterprise platform for integrating data, transactions
disposition decisions.
and insight, and Power Systems, a system designed from
the ground up for big data and analytics, optimized for Global Financing Capabilities
scale-out cloud and Linux, and delivering open innovation Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan
with OpenPOWER. financing to end users and internal clients for terms up to seven
years. Assets financed are primarily new and used IT hardware,
The company is a founding member of the OpenPOWER
software and services where the company has expertise.
foundation, a group of industry-leading companies developing
Internal financing is predominantly in support of Technology
high-performance compute technologies and solutions based
Services & Cloud Platforms’ long-term client service contracts.
on the IBM POWER architecture.
All internal financing arrangements are at arm’s-length rates
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients and are based upon market conditions.
to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts
information and to fuel data-centric cognitive applications.
receivable financing to suppliers, distributors and remarketers
These solutions address critical client requirements for
of IBM and OEM products. This includes internal activity where
information retention and archiving, security, compliance and
Global Financing factors a selected portion of the company’s
storage optimization including data deduplication, availability
accounts receivable primarily for cash management purposes,
and virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of
at arm’s-length rates.
software-defined storage solutions, flash storage, disk and tape
storage solutions. Remanufacturing and Remarketing: assets include used
equipment returned from lease transactions, or used and
Operating Systems Software: The company’s z/OS is a security-
surplus equipment acquired internally or externally. These
rich, scalable, high-performance enterprise operating system
assets may be refurbished or upgraded and sold or leased to
for z Systems. Power Systems offers a choice of AIX or Linux
new or existing clients both externally or internally. Externally
operating systems. These operating systems leverage POWER
remarketed equipment revenue represents sales or leases to
architecture to deliver secure, reliable and high- performing
clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equipment revenue
enterprise-class workloads across a breadth of server offerings.
primarily represents used equipment that is sold internally to
Systems and Technology Services & Cloud Platforms. Systems
may also sell the equipment that it purchases from Global
Financing to external clients.

===== PAGE 37 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Worldwide Organizations data-centric systems and more—applying these technologies
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s across industries including healthcare, Internet of Things,
delivery of value to its clients: education and financial services.
• Global Markets (formerly Sales and Distribution) In 2016, IBM was awarded more U.S. patents than any other
company for the 24th consecutive year. IBM’s 8,088 patents
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property
awarded in 2016 represent a diverse range of inventions in
• Integrated Supply Chain artificial intelligence and cognitive computing, cognitive health,
cloud, cybersecurity and other strategic growth areas for
Global Markets the company.
IBM has a global presence, operating in more than 175 countries The company continues to actively seek intellectual property
with a broad-based geographic distribution of revenue. The (IP) protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on
company’s Global Markets organization manages IBM’s global other initiatives designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of
footprint, working closely with dedicated country-based IBM’s technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM
operating units to serve clients locally. These country teams products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM
have client relationship managers who lead integrated teams of
products and/or the products of the licensee. As part of its
consultants, solution specialists and delivery professionals to business model, the company licenses certain of its intellectual
enable clients’ growth and innovation. These local teams property, which is high-value technology, but may be in more
develop deep relationships with their clients to bring together mature markets. The licensee drives the future development of
capabilities from IBM and its network of Business Partners to the IP and ultimately expands the customer base. This generates
develop and implement solutions. IP income for the company both upon licensing, and with
By complementing local expertise with global experience and ongoing royalty arrangements between it and the licensee. While
digital capabilities, IBM builds broad-based client relationships. the company’s various proprietary IP rights are important to its
This local management focus fosters speed in addressing new success, IBM believes its business as a whole is not materially
markets and making investments in emerging opportunities. The dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular
Global Markets organization serves clients with expertise in their group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a
industry as well as through the products and services that IBM number of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its
and partners supply. IBM is also expanding its reach to smaller products.
clients through digital marketing, digital marketplaces, inside
sales and local Business Partner resources. Integrated Supply Chain
IBM has an extensive integrated supply chain, procuring
IBM continues to invest to capture opportunities in key growth
materials and services globally. Additionally, growth in client
markets around the world—India, China and Southeast Asia;
spend managed by IBM’s procurement organization continues
Eastern Europe; the Middle East and Africa; and Latin America.
to demonstrate clients’ faith that IBM can reduce clients’ cost
Major IBM markets include the G7 countries of Canada, France,
through the transformation of source-to-pay operations. The
Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States (U.S.) and the United
supply, manufacturing and logistics operations are seamlessly
Kingdom (U.K.), as well as Austria, the Bahamas, Belgium, the
integrated and have optimized inventories over time. Simplifying
Caribbean, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland,
and streamlining internal processes has improved sales force
Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden
productivity and operational effectiveness and efficiency.
and Switzerland.
Supply chain resiliency enables IBM to reduce its risk during
marketplace changes.
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate The company continues to derive business value from its own
the company from its competitors. IBM annually invests 6 to 7 globally integrated supply chain providing a strategic advantage
percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth, high- for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages its
value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and the supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain
company’s business units through global labs on near-term and business transformation outsourcing service to optimize and
midterm innovations. It contributes many new technologies to help operate clients’ end-to-end supply chain processes, from
IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients address their most procurement to logistics. Utilizing analytics, mobile, cloud and
difficult challenges. IBM Research scientists are conducting social—with numerous projects, has allowed the integrated
pioneering work in artificial intelligence, analytics, security, supply chain to drive positive business outcomes for the
nanotechnology, cloud computing, blockchain, quantum company and its clients.
computing, silicon and post-silicon computing architectures,

===== PAGE 38 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2016 versus 2015 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent
Percent/ Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $ 18,187 $ 17,841 1.9% 2.7%
Gross margin 81.9% 85.1% (3.3) pts.
Global Business Services 16,700 17,166 (2.7)% (2.5)%
Gross margin 27.0% 28.2% (1.2) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 35,337 35,142 0.6% 1.4%
Gross margin 41.9% 42.7% (0.8) pts.
Systems 7,714 9,547 (19.2)% (18.9)%
Gross margin 55.7% 55.8% (0.1) pts.
Global Financing 1,692 1,840 (8.0)% (6.9)%
Gross margin 38.7% 45.6% (6.9) pts.
Other 289 206 40.4% 41.3%
Gross margin (293.9)% (253.0)% (41.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $ 79,919 $ 81,741 (2.2)% (1.6)%
Total consolidated gross profi t $ 38,294 $ 40,684 (5.9)%
Total consolidated gross margin 47.9% 49.8% (1.9) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 494 373 32.6%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 316 469 (32.7)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $ 39,104 $ 41,526 (5.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 48.9% 50.8% (1.9 )pts.
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue $ 18,187 $ 17,841 1.9% 2.7%
Solutions Software $ 12,589 $ 12,021 4.7% 5.5%
Transaction Processing Software 5,598 5,819 (3.8) (3.1)
Cognitive Solutions revenue of $18,187 million grew 1.9 percent Watson offerings such as Watson Health. Security also
as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency in 2016 contributed to year-to-year growth, as the company continues
compared to the prior year. On an as reported and constant to invest to build its security platform. There was strong
currency basis, growth in Solutions Software, which addresses Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) performance during the year with
many of the company’s strategic areas, was partially offset by double-digit growth in revenue as reported and adjusted for
declines in Transaction Processing Software. currency. In 2016, five acquisitions, including The Weather
Company and Truven, added substantial new capabilities to the
Solutions Software revenue of $12,589 million grew 4.7 percent
Solutions Software portfolio.
as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
prior year. This growth was led by analytics and security Throughout the year, the Watson platform, which underpins the
offerings. Analytics, which is the largest portion of the Solutions company’s cognitive strategy, continued to gain momentum, as
Software portfolio, continued to grow in key areas including the company expanded cognitive capabilities in the IBM Cloud.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company broadened the reach of Watson, with new
($ in millions)
capabilities, partnerships and engagement to accelerate
Yr.-to-Yr.
adoption. Focus continues on scaling Watson Health and Percent/
bringing real world benefits to researchers and clinicians. For the year ended Margin
December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Watson IoT is growing and clients are using the power of Watson
Cognitive Solutions
across the immense data pool created by the Internet of Things.
The company is expanding its industry differentiation and focus External gross profi t $14,890 $15,189 (2.0)%
on building industry verticals including the acquisition of External gross profi t
Promontory in the fourth quarter. margin 81.9% 85.1% (3.3) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 6,352 $ 7,245 (12.3)%
Transaction Processing Software revenue of $5,598 million
Pre-tax margin 30.5% 36.1% (5.6) pts.
declined 3.8 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted for
currency) compared to the prior year. Most of this software is
on-premise and annuity in nature which is not a growing part of Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin decreased 3.3 points to
the software opportunity. 81.9 percent in 2016. Pre-tax income of $6,352 million
decreased 12.3 percent compared to the prior year with a pre-
Within Cognitive Solutions, total 2016 strategic imperatives tax margin decline of 5.6 points to 30.5 percent. This overall
revenue of $11.7 billion grew 7 percent as reported (8 percent margin performance for the year reflects impacts of the
adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud revenue of $2.1 billion company’s continued investment into strategic areas, including
grew 53 percent as reported (54 percent adjusted for currency), acquisition content, and the mix toward the SaaS business which
with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.8 billion. is not yet at scale, partially offset by the impact of IP partnership
agreements entered into during the year.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $16,700 $17,166 (2.7)% (2.5)%
Consulting $ 7,332 $ 7,678 (4.5)% (4.8)%
Global Process Services 1,388 1,435 (3.3) (2.0)
Application Management 7,980 8,053 (0.9) (0.5)
Global Business Services revenue of $16,700 million decreased to respond to clients looking to create new business models with
2.7 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency in cognitive technologies. There was continued revenue growth in
2016 compared to the prior year. Digital practices, which made 2016, both as reported and adjusted for currency, in enterprise
up more than half of GBS revenue in 2016, grew strong double mobility solutions that are helping clients redesign workflows
digits as reported and adjusted for currency including double- with specific industry content. The company’s growing collection
digit growth in cloud, analytics and mobile. This growth was of MobileFirst for iOS applications can now be integrated with a
more than offset by declines in the more traditional areas broad set of Watson technologies to increase productivity. The
that the company is shifting away from, such as large company is scaling the industry’s first cognitive consulting
ERP implementations. practice which draws on the expertise of consulting
professionals spanning machine learning, advanced analytics,
Consulting revenue of $7,332 million declined 4.5 percent as
data science and development. During 2016, six acquisitions
reported (5 percent adjusted for currency). Global Process
added substantial new capabilities in digital design, cloud
Services (GPS) revenue of $1,388 million decreased 3.3 percent
consulting and other skill areas.
as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
prior year. Application Management revenue of $7,980 million
($ in millions)
decreased 0.9 percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency).
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Within GBS, total 2016 strategic imperatives revenue of For the year ended Margin
$8.9 billion grew 16 percent as reported and adjusted for December 31: 2016 2015 Change
currency year to year. Cloud revenue of $3.0 billion grew Global Business Services
68 percent as reported (66 percent adjusted for currency), External gross profi t $4,501 $4,837 (6.9)%
with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.1 billion.
External gross profi t
The company continues to aggressively shift the business to the margin 27.0% 28.2% (1.2) pts.
strategic imperatives, or digital practices in GBS. The IBM Pre-tax income $1,732 $2,602 (33.4)%
Interactive Experience, the largest global digital agency, now Pre-tax margin 10.1% 14.7% (4.6) pts.
has more than 30 studios worldwide. The company continues

===== PAGE 40 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GBS gross profit margin decreased 1.2 points to 27.0 percent The company continues to invest and shift resources to higher
compared to the prior year, with declines in Consulting and GPS. value services around digital and cognitive. The company is
Overall, this reflects the company’s investments to grow the investing in enablement, hiring top talent and bringing in new
digital practices, additional spending in certain accounts to skills through acquisitions and focusing on integrating and
deliver on client commitments, and price and profit pressure in scaling these new skills. While this impacts near-term profit, this
more traditional engagements. These dynamics are also investment has added important capabilities as the company
reflected in the pre-tax margin for the year. In 2016, pre-tax continues to expand the digital practices.
income of $1,732 million decreased 33.4 percent and the
pre-tax margin declined 4.6 points to 10.1 percent.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue $35,337 $35,142 0.6% 1.4%
Infrastructure Services $23,543 $23,075 2.0% 2.7%
Technical Support Services 7,272 7,426 (2.1) (1.0)
Integration Software 4,521 4,641 (2.6) (1.5)
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue of contributing to growth in as-a-Service content. The company
$35,337 million grew 0.6 percent as reported and 1 percent continues to expand its cloud infrastructure and now has
adjusted for currency in 2016 compared to the prior year. As the 50 cloud centers around the world, enabling low latency
business shifts from systems integration to services integration, connectivity to cloud infrastructure.
there is continuing momentum in new offerings. Infrastructure
Although revenue declined year to year, Technical Support
Services revenue grew as reported and adjusted for currency,
Services continues to generate substantial revenue and profit.
partially offset by declines in Technical Support Services and
There was year-to-year revenue growth as reported and
Integration Software. In 2016, four acquisitions have expanded
adjusted for currency in multi-vendor services, which is
capabilities and strengthened the company’s portfolio.
leveraging the company’s global scale and deep technical skills.
Infrastructure Services revenue of $23,543 million grew
In Integration Software, there was revenue growth in Connect
2.0 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted for currency)
products that integrate applications, data and processes for
compared to the prior year. Technical Support Services revenue
on-premise and cloud environments. There was also a continued
of $7,272 million decreased 2.1 percent as reported (1 percent
shift of the portfolio to an as-a-Service model through IBM’s
adjusted for currency). Integration Software revenue of
Bluemix cloud platform which continues to scale across a broad
$4,521 million decreased 2.6 percent as reported (1 percent
catalog of high value services.
adjusted for currency) in 2016 compared to the prior year.
Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, total 2016
In Infrastructure Services, clients continue to turn to the
strategic imperatives revenue of $8.7 billion grew 39 percent as
company as the trusted partner to modernize and transform
reported (40 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud
their most critical IT systems and navigate the complexities of
revenue of $5.9 billion grew 49 percent as reported (50 percent
the hybrid cloud environment. The company’s hybrid cloud
adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run rate of
strategy is resonating with clients as they move to enterprise-
$5.8 billion.
grade cloud solutions that are secure, agile and leverage
the data and investments in their core systems. Enterprise
workloads on the company’s public cloud continue to scale,

===== PAGE 41 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin
Yr.-to-Yr. decreased 0.8 points to 41.9 percent in 2016 compared to the
Percent/ prior year. While partially due to mix within the segment, there
For the year ended Margin
December 31: 2016 2015* Change was improvement in the Infrastructure Services margin offset
by declines in Technical Support Services and Integration
Technology Services &
Cloud Platforms Software. The margin improvement in Infrastructure Services
reflects the benefits from delivery transformation and ongoing
External Technology
Services gross productivity actions related to automation, process optimization
profi t $10,969 $11,008 (0.4)% and leveraging the company’s scale, technology and talent. The
company is investing in cognitive capabilities to further improve
External Technology
Services gross its delivery model and drive efficiencies. The Technical Support
profi t margin 35.6% 36.1% (0.5) pts. Services margin decline reflects the mix to multi-vendor support
External Integration offerings. The Integration Software margin declined as the shift
Software gross of the portfolio to an as-a-Service model continues.
profi t $ 3,830 $ 4,005 (4.4)%
Pre-tax income of $4,707 million decreased 17.0 percent and
External Integration
pre-tax margin declined 2.8 points year to year to 13.1 percent.
Software gross
The pre-tax margin reflects the dynamics impacting gross profit
profi t margin 84.7% 86.3% (1.6) pts.
and the continued investments to build out the cloud platform,
External total gross
partially offset by the impact of IP partnership agreements
profi t $14,800 $15,014 (1.4)%
entered into during the year.
External total gross
profi t margin 41.9% 42.7% (0.8) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 4,707 $ 5,669 (17.0)%
Pre-tax margin 13.1% 15.8% (2.8) pts.
* Recast to conform with 2016 presentation
Services Backlog and Signings
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Total backlog $118.7 $122.6 (3.2)% (1.8)%
The estimated total services backlog at December 31, 2016 was no third-party standards or requirements governing the
$119 billion, a decrease of 3.2 percent as reported, and calculation of signings. The calculation used by management
2 percent adjusted for currency, with an increase in GTS more involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a
than offset by a decline in GBS as reported and adjusted for client’s commitment, including the type and duration of the
currency, compared to the December 31, 2015 balance. agreement, and the presence of termination charges or wind-
down costs.
Total services backlog includes Infrastructure Services,
Consulting, Global Process Services, Application Management Signings include Infrastructure Services, Consulting, Global
and Technical Support Services. Total backlog is intended to be Process Services and Application Management contracts.
a statement of overall work under contract for these businesses Contract extensions and increases in scope are treated as
and therefore includes Technical Support Services. It does not signings only to the extent of the incremental new value.
include as-a-Service offerings that have flexibility in contractual Technical Support Services is not included in signings as the
commitment terms. Backlog estimates are subject to change maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
and are affected by several factors, including terminations, revenues equal renewals.
changes in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations,
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjustments
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
for currency.
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will
Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the value be recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental
of a client’s commitment under a services contract. There are or coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Total signings $44,645 $46,432 (3.8)% (2.7)%

===== PAGE 42 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $7,714 $9,547 (19.2)% (18.9)%
Systems Hardware $5,926 $7,574 (21.8)% (21.6)%
z Systems (27.1) (26.8)
Power Systems (27.1) (26.8)
Storage Systems (10.0) (10.0)
Operating Systems Software 1,788 1,973 (9.4) (8.7)
Systems revenue of $7,714 million decreased 19.2 percent as continues to be the market leader, partially offset by growth in
reported (19 percent adjusted for currency) in 2016 compared the expanding Linux market. During the year, there was success
to the prior year reflecting market shifts and product cycle with HANA where the company is bringing in new clients. The
dynamics. Systems Hardware revenue of $5,926 million UNIX market remains a high-value space for clients, and in 2016
decreased 21.8 percent as reported (22 percent adjusted for new midrange and high-end systems were introduced. These
currency) year to year. Operating Systems Software revenue of systems are designed for hybrid cloud computing and flexible
$1,788 million decreased 9.4 percent as reported (9 percent consumption models to transform on-premise IT to the cloud.
adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year. In Power, the company is shifting to Linux while continuing to
serve the UNIX space, but this is a long transition.
Within Systems Hardware, z Systems revenue decreased
27.1 percent as reported (27 percent adjusted for currency) year Storage Systems revenue decreased by 10.0 percent as reported
to year reflecting product cycle dynamics. However, eight and adjusted for currency year to year reflecting the weakness
quarters into the z13 cycle at the end of 2016, the company in the traditional disk storage market. In 2016, the company
continues to add new clients to the platform, drive innovation introduced new products and transitioned to a full suite of flash
and introduce new technologies. During 2016, 29 new clients array offerings to improve its competitive position, and this
were added, with a total of 80 since introduction of the z13, portfolio grew revenue in the fourth quarter of the year as
validating its value and ongoing commitment to the company’s reported and adjusted for currency. While not reported within
platform. Throughout the year, the company continued to the Systems segment, Software-Defined Storage had revenue
optimize z Systems to drive new workloads such as blockchain growth as reported and adjusted for currency in 2016.
and instant payments. The acquisition of EZSource, which helps
Within Systems, total 2016 strategic imperatives revenue of
clients modify applications for their digital transformation while
$3.4 billion decreased 15 percent as reported and adjusted for
supporting agility and hybrid cloud, also drove innovation in the
currency year to year. Cloud revenue of $2.7 billion decreased
z Systems platform.
11 percent as reported and adjusted for currency as a result of
Power Systems revenue decreased 27.1 percent as reported a strong 2015 with the mainframe cycle.
(27 percent adjusted for currency) year to year reflecting the
underlying dynamics of a declining market for UNIX, where IBM

===== PAGE 43 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) The company has reinvented its core systems for work in a new
Yr.-to-Yr. era of computing. It has optimized systems to drive new types
Percent/ of workloads and is expanding its footprint, building new
For the year ended Margin
December 31: 2016 2015* Change capabilities and solving new types of problems for its clients.
While facing some shifting market dynamics and product
Systems
transitions, the Systems portfolio remains optimized to address
External Systems
the demands of the cognitive era and cloud computing.
Hardware gross
profi t $2,720 $3,536 (23.1)%
Global Financing
External Systems
See pages 76 through 81 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
Hardware gross
profi t margin 45.9% 46.7% (0.8) pts. segment results.
External Operating
Systems Software Total Software
gross profi t $1,577 $1,790 (11.9)% Under the company’s new segment structure, total software no
External Operating longer exists as a segment. Given the focus on IBM’s software
Systems Software revenue performance, the company continued to report total
gross profi t margin 88.2% 90.7% (2.5) pts. software revenue performance through 2016. The company’s
External total gross software revenue is reported discretely within the Cognitive
profi t $4,298 $5,326 (19.3)% Solutions, Technology Services & Cloud Platforms and Systems
External total gross segments and can be added together to calculate total software.
profi t margin 55.7% 55.8% (0.1) pts. The company has a broad software portfolio, from solutions that
Pre-tax income $ 933 $1,722 (45.8)% provide cognitive, analytics and security solutions, to core
Pre-tax margin 11.0% 16.7% (5.7) pts. transaction processing, to connecting on-premises data and
processes to private and public cloud environments. This
* Recast to conform with 2016 presentation software is open, running on IBM and non-IBM environments.
Total software revenue, which includes Cognitive Solutions,
The Systems gross profit margin decreased 0.1 points to
Integration Software and Operating Systems Software, of
55.7 percent in 2016 compared to the prior year with declines
$24,496 million increased 0.2 percent as reported and 1 percent
in Power and Storage partially offset by expansion in z Systems
adjusted for currency in 2016 compared to 2015. From a
margins. Pre-tax income of $933 million decreased 45.8 percent
business area perspective, there was growth in Cognitive
and the pre-tax margin declined 5.7 points year to year to
Solutions as reported and adjusted for currency, while
11.0 percent, consistent with the product cycle and portfolio
Integration Software and Operating Systems Software were
transition dynamics impacting revenue and profit.
down year to year as reported and adjusted for currency. Across
software, annuity revenue grew year to year as reported and
adjusted for currency led by SaaS offerings. Transactional
revenue declined as reported and adjusted for currency.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic
basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Total revenue $79,919 $81,741 (2.2)% (1.6)%
Geographies $79,594 $81,430 (2.3)% (1.6)%
Americas 37,513 38,486 (2.5) (1.4)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 24,769 26,073 (5.0) (2.1)
Asia Pacifi c 17,313 16,871 2.6 (1.2)

===== PAGE 44 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total geographic revenue of $79,594 million in 2016 decreased Total Expense and Other (Income)
2.3 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency
($ in millions)
compared to the prior year.
Yr.-to-Yr.
Americas revenue of $37,513 million decreased 2.5 percent as Percent/
For the year ended Margin
reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency with declines in December 31: 2016 2015 Change
North America and Latin America as reported and adjusted for Total consolidated expense
currency. Within North America, the U.S. decreased 0.9 percent and other (income) $25,964 $24,740 4.9%
and Canada decreased 6.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for Non-operating adjustments
currency). In Latin America, Brazil decreased 10.5 percent
Amortization of acquired
(7 percent adjusted for currency) and Mexico decreased intangible assets (503) (304) 65.7
14.5 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency).
Acquisition-related charges (5) (26) (81.0)
EMEA revenue of $24,769 million decreased 5.0 percent as Non-operating retirement-
reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency. Within EMEA, related
revenue declined in the UK, Germany and France, as reported (costs)/income (282) (581) (51.4)
and adjusted for currency, while revenue grew in Italy as Operating (non-GAAP)
reported and adjusted for currency. The UK decreased expense and other
12.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). Germany (income) $25,174 $23,830 5.6%
decreased 5.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency). Total consolidated
Revenue declined in France 3.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for expense-to-revenue ratio 32.5% 30.3% 2.2 pts.
currency). Italy increased 4.0 percent (4 percent adjusted for Operating (non-GAAP)
currency) year to year. The Middle East and Africa region grew expense-to-revenue ratio 31.5% 29.2% 2.3 pts.
0.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), while there was
a decline in the Central and Eastern European region as reported The key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and
and adjusted for currency including a year-to-year decline in other (income) were approximately:
Russia of 27.1 percent.
Total Operating
Asia Pacific revenue of $17,313 million grew 2.6 percent as Consolidated (non-GAAP)
reported, but declined 1 percent adjusted for currency. Japan • Currency* 2 points 2 points
grew 10.5 percent as reported, but declined 1 percent adjusted • Acquisitions** 5 points 4 points
for currency. India grew 5.2 percent as reported and 10 percent
• Base (2) points 0 points
adjusted for currency. China decreased 2.4 percent as reported,
but was flat on an adjusted for currency basis. Australia * Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs
decreased 9.7 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). ** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating
(non-GAAP) is net of non-operating acquisition-related charges.
For additional information regarding total expense and other
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following
analyses by category.

===== PAGE 45 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent For the year ended Percent
December 31: 2016 2015 Change December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Selling, general and Total consolidated
administrative research,
expense development and
Selling, general and engineering $5,751 $5,247 9.6%
administrative—other $16,971 $16,643 2.0% Non-operating adjustment
Advertising and Non-operating retirement-
promotional expense 1,327 1,290 2.8 related
Workforce rebalancing (costs)/income (29) (48) (38.6)
charges 1,038 587 76.7 Operating (non-GAAP)
Retirement-related costs 742 1,052 (29.5) research,
development and
Amortization of acquired
engineering $5,722 $5,200 10.1%
intangible assets 503 304 65.7
Stock-based
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense was
compensation 401 322 24.3
7.2 percent of revenue in 2016 and 6.4 percent of revenue
Bad debt expense 87 231 (62.3)
in 2015.
Total consolidated
selling, general and RD&E expense increased 9.6 percent in 2016 versus 2015
administrative expense $21,069 $20,430 3.1% primarily driven by:
Non-operating
• Higher expense due to acquisitions (7 points); and
adjustments
Amortization of acquired • Increased base spending (4 points); partially offset by
intangible assets (503) (304) 65.7
• The effects of currency (1 point).
Acquisition-related
charges 2 (21) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased 10.1 percent
Non-operating retirement-
in 2016 compared to the prior year, driven primarily by the same
related (costs)/income (253) (533) (52.6)
factors.
Operating (non-GAAP)
selling, general and
administrative expense $20,315 $19,573 3.8% Intellectual Property and Custom Development
Income
NM—Not meaningful
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense
For the year ended Percent
increased 3.1 percent in 2016 versus 2015, driven primarily by December 31: 2016 2015* Change
the following factors: Licensing of intellectual
property including
• Acquisition-related spending (4 points); and
royalty-based fees $1,390 $407 241.8%
• Higher workforce rebalancing charges (2 points); partially Custom development
offset by income 214 262 (18.4)
Sales/other transfers of
• The effects of currency (1 point); and
intellectual property 27 13 113.4
• A year-to-year decrease in charges for pension obligations Total $1,631 $682 139.3%
related to litigation in Spain (1 point).
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation
Operating (non-GAAP) expense increased 3.8 percent year
to year driven primarily by the same factors excluding the year- Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based fees
to-year decrease in charges for pension obligations increased in 2016 compared to the prior-year period, primarily
related to litigation which is not reflected in operating due to licensing of certain intellectual property in 2016 within the
(non-GAAP) expense. company’s Integration Software and Cognitive Solutions software
portfolio, which included four transactions each with period
Bad debt expense decreased $144 million in 2016 compared to
income greater than $100 million. The company is licensing IP
2015. The receivables provision coverage was 2.0 percent at
to partners who are allocating their skills to extend the value of
December 31, 2016, a decrease of 60 basis points from
assets that are high value, but may be in mature markets. There
December 31, 2015 due to write-offs of previously reserved
were no significant individual IP transactions in 2015. The
receivables in 2016.

===== PAGE 46 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
timing and amount of licensing, sales or other transfers of IP The increase in interest expense in 2016 versus 2015 was
may vary significantly from period to period depending upon the primarily driven by higher average debt levels and higher average
timing of licensing agreements, economic conditions, industry interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing
consolidation and the timing of new patents and know-how in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related
development. external borrowings are to support the Global Financing external
business. Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized
Other (Income) and Expense interest) in 2016 was $1,206 million, an increase of $197 million
year to year.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent Stock-Based Compensation
December 31: 2016 2015 Change Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $544 million
Other (income) and increased $76 million compared to 2015. This was due primarily
expense to increases related to performance share units ($72 million)
Foreign currency and the conversion of stock-based awards previously issued by
transaction acquired entities ($15 million); partially offset by decreases
losses/(gains) $ (116) $ 414 NM related to restricted stock units ($15 million). Stock-based
(Gains)/losses on compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected
derivative instruments 260 (853) NM in the following categories: Cost: $88 million, down $13 million;
Interest income (108) (72) 49.1% SG&A expense: $401 million, up $78 million and RD&E expense:
$55 million, up $5 million.
Net (gains)/losses from
securities
and investment assets 23 47 (50.5) Retirement-Related Plans
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retire -
Other 85 (260) NM
ment-related plans. These amounts are included in the
Total consolidated other
Consolidated Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g.,
(income) and expense $ 145 $(724) NM
Cost, SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan
Non-operating adjustment participants.
Acquisition-related
charges (7) (5) 35.2 ($ in millions)
Operating (non-GAAP) Yr.-to-Yr.
other (income) and For the year ended Percent
December 31: 2016 2015 Change
expense $ 138 $(729) NM
Retirement-related
NM—Not meaningful plans—cost
Service cost $ 443 $ 484 (8.6)%
Total consolidated other (income) and expense was expense of Amortization of prior
$145 million in 2016 compared to income of $724 million in service costs/
2015. The decrease in income of $869 million year over year (credits) (107) (100) 7.0
was primarily driven by: Cost of defi ned
contribution
• Lower net exchange gains ($593 million); and
plans 1,070 1,138 (6.0)
• Real estate capacity charges related to the first-quarter Total operating costs/
2016 workforce transformation ($291 million). (income) $1,405 $1,522 (7.7)%
Interest cost $3,300 $3,316 (0.5)%
Interest Expense Expected return on plan
assets (5,563) (5,879) (5.4)
($ in millions)
Recognized actuarial
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent losses 2,751 3,283 (16.2)
December 31: 2016 2015 Change Curtailments/
Interest expense settlements (16) 36 NM
Total $630 $468 34.4% Multi-employer plan/
other costs 126 293 (57.0)
Total non-operating
costs/(income) $ 598 $1,050 (43.0)%
Total retirement-related
plans—cost $2,003 $2,572 (22.1)%
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 47 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2016, total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost decreased Earnings Per Share
by $569 million compared to 2015, primarily driven by a Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the
decrease in recognized actuarial losses ($532 million), a weighted-average number of shares of common stock
decrease in pension obligations related to litigation in Spain outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is
($177 million) and lower defined contribution plans cost computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of
($68 million); partially offset by lower expected return on plan shares of common stock outstanding plus the effect of dilutive
assets ($316 million). potential common shares outstanding during the period using
the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section
include outstanding stock options and stock awards.
on pages 26 and 27, the company characterizes certain
retirement-related costs as operating and others as non-
operating. Utilizing this characterization, operating Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent
retirement-related costs in 2016 were $1,405 million, a
December 31: 2016 2015 Change
decrease of $117 million compared to 2015, primarily driven by
Earnings per share of
lower defined contribution plans cost ($68 million) and lower
common stock from
service cost ($42 million). Non-operating costs of $598 million continuing operations
decreased $452 million in 2016 compared to the prior year,
Assuming dilution $12.39 $13.60 (8.9)%
driven primarily by a decrease in recognized actuarial losses
Basic $12.44 $13.66 (8.9)%
($532 million) and a decrease in pension obligations related to
Diluted operating
litigation in Spain ($177 million); partially offset by lower
(non-GAAP) $13.59 $14.92 (8.9)%
expected return on plan assets ($316 million).
Weighted-average shares
outstanding (in millions)
Income Taxes
Assuming dilution 958.7 982.7 (2.4)%
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2016 was
3.6 percent, a decrease of 12.5 points versus the prior year. The Basic 955.4 978.7 (2.4)%
benefit resulting from the favorable resolution of a long standing
tax matter related to the determination of certain foreign tax Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2016 and 2015
losses incurred by the company in Japan drove a 9.5 point were 945.9 million and 965.7 million, respectively. The average
reduction in the rate. Without that discrete item, the continuing number of common shares outstanding assuming dilution
operations effective tax rate for 2016 would have been 13.1 was 24.0 million shares lower in 2016 versus 2015. The
percent, with the remaining change in the rate year to year driven decrease was primarily the result of the common stock
by the following factors: repurchase program.
• A benefit due to the year-to-year decrease in tax charges
Results of Discontinued Operations
related to intercompany payments made by foreign
The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $9 million
subsidiaries and the intercompany licensing of certain IP of
in 2016 and $174 million in 2015. The discontinued operations
5.7 points; and
effective tax rate in 2016 was 21.7 percent compared to
• A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax earnings in 40.3 percent in 2015.
2016 of 0.3 points; partially offset by
• A reduced benefit year to year related to audit settlements
of 2.3 points; and
• The decreased benefit year to year in the utilization of
foreign tax credits of 0.6 points.
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
rate was 6.5 percent, a decrease of 10.7 points versus 2015
principally driven by the same factors described above. Without
the Japan benefit, the continuing operations (non-GAAP)
effective tax rate would have been 14.9 percent.

===== PAGE 48 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Position The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing
Dynamics business are a significant part of the company’s financial
At December 31, 2016, the company continued to have the position. The financial position amounts appearing on page 86
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. are the consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The
Cash and marketable securities at year end were $8,527 million. amounts appearing in the separate Global Financing section,
During the year, the company continued to manage the beginning on page 77, are supplementary data presented to
investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation and facilitate an understanding of the Global Financing business.
liquidity objectives.
Total debt of $42,169 million increased $2,279 million from Working Capital
prior year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at ($ in millions)
December 31, 2016, was $899 million, an increase of At December 31: 2016 2015
$299 million from the prior year end. Within total debt,
Current assets $43,888 $42,504
$27,859 million was in support of the Global Financing business
Current liabilities 36,275 34,269
which is leveraged at a 7.3 to 1 ratio. The company continues to
Working capital $ 7,613 $ 8,235
have substantial flexibility in the debt markets. During 2016, the
company completed bond issuances totaling $7,873 million, Current ratio 1.21:1 1.24:1
with terms ranging from 1.5 to 30 years, and interest rates
ranging from 0.50 to 4.70 percent depending on maturity. The Working capital decreased $622 million from the year-end 2015
company has consistently generated strong cash flow from position. The key changes are described below:
operations and continues to have access to additional sources
Current assets increased $1,383 million ($1,920 million
of liquidity through the capital markets and its $10.25 billion
adjusted for currency), as a result of:
global credit facility, with 100 percent of the facility available on
a same day basis. • An increase of $690 million ($1,013 million adjusted for
currency) in receivables driven by trade receivables; and
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at • An increase of $359 million ($457 million adjusted for
December 31. At December 31, 2016, the overall net under- currency) in prepaid expenses and other current assets;
funded position was $14,840 million, a decrease of $674 million and
from December 31, 2015 driven by asset returns partially offset
• An increase of $332 million ($427 million adjusted for
by a decrease in discount rates. At year end, the company’s
currency) in cash and marketable securities.
qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and the cash
requirements related to these plans remain stable going
Current liabilities increased $2,006 million ($2,471 million
forward at approximately $500 million per year through 2020.
adjusted for currency), as a result of:
In 2016, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets
was 6.2 percent and the plan was 102 percent funded at • An increase in short-term debt of $1,052 million
December 31. Overall, global asset returns were 8.5 percent ($1,033 million adjusted for currency); and
and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were
• An increase in taxes of $388 million ($442 million adjusted
98 percent funded at December 31, 2016.
for currency) primarily driven by the reclass from non-
During 2016, the company generated $16,958 million in cash current liabilities based on the anticipated settlement of
from operations, a decrease of $49 million compared to 2015. various U.S. and non-U.S. tax audits; and
In addition, the company generated $11,574 million in free cash
• An increase in other accrued expenses and liabilities of
flow, a decrease of $1,501 million versus the prior year. See
$352 million ($571 million adjusted for currency); and
page 69 for additional information on free cash flow. The
company returned $8,758 million to shareholders in 2016, with • An increase in accounts payable of $181 million
$5,256 million in dividends and $3,502 million in gross share ($244 million adjusted for currency).
repurchases. In 2016, the company repurchased 23.3 million
shares and had $5.1 billion remaining in share repurchase
authorization at year end. The company’s cash generation
permits the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with
the most attractive long-term opportunities.

===== PAGE 49 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and
($ in millions)
financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement
At December 31: 2016 2015
of Cash Flows on page 87 are summarized in the table below.
Noncurrent assets $73,582 $67,991
These amounts include the cash flows associated with the
Global Financing business. Long-term debt $34,655 $33,428
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $28,147 $28,374
($ in millions)
The increase in noncurrent assets of $5,591 million
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 ($5,788 million adjusted for currency) was driven by:
Net cash provided by/(used in)
continuing operations • An increase in intangible assets and goodwill of
$5,379 million ($5,420 million adjusted for currency)
Operating activities $ 16,958 $17,008
resulting from acquisitions during the year; and
Investing activities (10,976) (8,159)
Financing activities (5,791) (9,166) • An increase in prepaid pension assets of $1,301 million
Effect of exchange rate changes on ($1,427 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by
cash and cash equivalents (51) (473) the expected returns on plan assets partially offset by
interest costs and plan remeasurements; partially offset by
Net change in cash and cash
equivalents $ 140 $ (790) • A decrease of $993 million ($1,054 million adjusted for
currency) in long-term financing receivables primarily
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by due to lower volumes.
$49 million in 2016 driven by the following key factors:
• Performance-related declines within net income; offset by Long-term debt increased $1,227 million ($1,595 million
adjusted for currency) driven by:
• A decline in cash income tax payments ($1,579 million).
• Bond issuances of $7,873 million; partially offset by
Net cash used in investing activities increased $2,817 million • Reclassification of $6,239 million to short-term debt to
driven by: reflect upcoming maturities.
• An increase in cash used related to acquisitions of
$2,330 million. Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, decreased
$227 million ($195 million adjusted for currency) primarily
driven by:
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $3,375 million
as compared to the prior year driven by the following factors: • A decrease of $622 million ($769 million adjusted
for currency) in other liabilities driven by the reclass to
• An increase in net cash sourced from debt transactions of
current taxes based on the anticipated settlement of
$2,744 million driven by a higher level of issuances in the
various U.S. and non-U.S. tax audits; partially offset by
current year; and
• An increase in retirement and nonpension postretirement
• A decrease of $1,107 million of cash used for gross share
liabilities of $567 million ($706 million adjusted for
repurchases; partially offset by
currency) driven by plan remeasurements.
• An increase in dividend payments of $358 million.

===== PAGE 50 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt Given the significant leverage, the company also presents a
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored debt-to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and debt and equity as management believes this is more
liability profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient representative of the company’s core business operations. This
flexibility to access global funding sources as needed. ratio can vary from period to period as the company manages
its global cash and debt positions. “Core” debt-to-capitalization
ratio (excluding Global Financing debt and equity) was
($ in millions)
49.5 percent at December 31, 2016 compared to 54.3 percent
At December 31: 2016 2015 at December 31, 2015.
Total company debt $ 42,169 $ 39,890
Total Global Financing segment debt $ 27,859 $ 27,205 Equity
Debt to support external clients 24,034 23,934 Total equity increased by $3,968 million from December 31,
Debt to support internal clients 3,825 3,271 2015 as a result of an increase in retained earnings of
Non-Global Financing debt 14,309 12,684 $6,634 million, an increase in common stock of $673 million and
lower accumulated other comprehensive losses of $209 million;
partially offset by an increase in treasury stock of $3,532 million
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the
mainly due to gross common stock repurchases.
company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under
contract by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, generate long-term, GAAP Reconciliation
stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing asset The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s
portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Technology Services income statement results as reported under GAAP to its
& Cloud Platforms assets are leveraged with the balance of the operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure.
Global Financing asset base. The debt analysis above is further The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings,
detailed in the Global Financing section on page 80. as presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported
by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP)
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2016
Earnings” section on pages 26 and 27 for the company’s
was 69.6 percent versus 73.4 percent at December 31, 2015.
rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2016: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $ 38,294 $ 494 $ 316 $39,104
Gross profi t margin 47.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 48.9%
SG&A $ 21,069 $ (501) $ (253) $20,315
RD&E 5,751 — (29) 5,722
Other (income) and expense 145 (7) — 138
Total expense and other (income) 25,964 (508) (282) 25,174
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 12,330 1,003 598 13,931
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 15.4% 1.3 pts. 0.7 pts. 17.4%
Provision for income taxes* $ 449 $ 268 $ 183 $ 900
Effective tax rate 3.6% 1.7 pts. 1.2 pts. 6.5%
Income from continuing operations $ 11,881 $ 735 $ 415 $13,031
Income margin from continuing operations 14.9% 0.9 pts. 0.5 pts. 16.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 12.39 $ 0.77 $ 0.43 $ 13.59
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 51 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $40,684 $ 373 $ 469 $41,526
Gross profi t margin 49.8% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.8%
SG&A $20,430 $(324) $(533 ) $19,573
RD&E 5,247 — (48) 5,200
Other (income) and expense (724) (5) — (729)
Total expense and other (income) 24,740 (330) (581) 23,830
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 15,945 703 1,050 17,697
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 19.5% 0.9 pts. 1.3 pts. 21.6%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,581 $ 141 $ 316 $ 3,037
Effective tax rate 16.2% 0.2 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.2%
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $ 562 $ 734 $14,659
Income margin from continuing operations 16.3% 0.7 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 13.60 $0.57 $0.75 $ 14.92
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2016 2015 Change
Revenue $21,770 $22,059 (1.3)%*
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 51.7% (1.7) pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 5,907 $ 6,308 (6.4)%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 27.1% 28.6% (1.5 )pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 4,986 $ 5,098 (2.2)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 480 $ 638 (24.7)%
Income from continuing operations $ 4,505 $ 4,460 1.0%
Income from continuing operations margin 20.7% 20.2% 0.5 pts.
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (4) $ 3 NM
Net income $ 4,501 $ 4,463 0.9%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ 4.73 $ 4.59 3.1%
Consolidated earnings per share—assuming dilution $ 4.72 $ 4.59 2.8%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 952.7 972.8 (2.1)%
* (0.7) percent adjusted for currency
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 52 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for the fourth quarter of 2016 and 2015.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2016 2015 Change
Net income as reported $4,501 $4,463 0.9%
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (4) 3 NM
Income from continuing operations 4,505 4,460 1.0
Non-operating adjustments
(net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 193 110 75.8
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 77 137 (43.8)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $4,776 $4,707 1.5%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)
earnings per share $ 5.01 $ 4.84 3.5%
* See page 55 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings.
NM—Not meaningful
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2016, the company delivered $21.8 billion Platform and Watson IoT. Mobile revenue increased 16 percent
in revenue, $4.5 billion in income from continuing operations as reported (17 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
and $4.8 billion in operating (non-GAAP) earnings, resulting prior year. Security revenue increased 7 percent as reported
in diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of (8 percent adjusted for currency).
$4.73 as reported and $5.01 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis.
From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue
The company generated $4.0 billion in cash from operations
increased 1.4 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for
and $4.7 billion in free cash flow in the fourth quarter of 2016
currency led by growth in Solutions Software. Technology
with shareholder returns of $2.2 billion in gross common
Services & Cloud Platforms revenue increased 1.7 percent as
stock repurchases and dividends. In the quarter, the
reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency with growth in
company continued to deliver strong revenue growth in the
Infrastructure Services as clients focus on enabling their digital
strategic imperatives.
businesses and building their hybrid cloud environments. Global
Total consolidated revenue decreased 1.3 percent as reported Business Services revenue decreased 4.1 percent as reported
and 1 percent year to year adjusted for currency in the fourth and 4 percent adjusted for currency and continues to reflect a
quarter of 2016, with a sequential decline of 1.0 point as shift in the segment’s business away from large ERP
reported but flat adjusted for currency from the third quarter implementations towards digital practices. Systems revenue
growth rates. Clients are focused on becoming cloud-based, decreased 12.5 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency)
cognitive and digital businesses which is reflected in the reflecting declines in Power Systems and Storage Systems
company’s strong revenue growth in the strategic imperatives partially offset by growth in z Systems.
across cloud, mobile, analytics and security in the fourth quarter
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue was flat year
2016 versus 2015. Cloud as-a-Service continues to deliver
to year as reported and adjusted for currency. There was
strong revenue growth across software and services. Annuity
sequential improvement compared with the third quarter of
revenue grew in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to 2015.
2016 on both an as reported and adjusted for currency basis.
In addition, acquisitions completed over the past 12 months
EMEA revenue decreased 8.0 percent as reported and 3 percent
continued to contribute to revenue performance in the quarter.
adjusted for currency in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to
The fourth quarter results reflect the success the company is 2015. Asia Pacific revenue increased 5.1 percent as reported
having in the strategic areas and the investments it has been and 1 percent adjusted for currency.
making to drive that shift. In the fourth quarter, the strategic
The consolidated gross profit margin of 50.0 percent decreased
imperatives–cloud, analytics and engagement, grew
1.7 points year to year. The decline was driven primarily by
11.4 percent year to year as reported and 12 percent adjusted
continued investment in strategic areas, including acquisitions,
for currency. Total Cloud revenue of $4.2 billion increased
and the shift toward an as-a-Service business which is not yet
33 percent as reported and adjusted for currency in the fourth
at scale. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 51.0 percent
quarter, with cloud as-a-Service revenue up 61 percent
decreased 1.8 points compared to the prior year driven primarily
(63 percent adjusted for currency). The company exited the
by the same factors.
fourth quarter of 2016 with an annual run rate for cloud as-a-
Service revenue of $8.6 billion, up from $7.5 billion in the third Total expense and other (income) decreased 6.4 percent in the
quarter of 2016. Analytics revenue of $5.6 billion in the fourth fourth quarter of 2016 compared to the prior year. Total
quarter increased 9 percent as reported and adjusted for operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased
currency with contribution from the core analytics platform as 6.8 percent year to year.
well as the cognitive offerings including Watson Health, Watson

===== PAGE 53 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The key year-to-year drivers were approximately: was approximately 16 percent, the fourth-quarter 2016 rate
reflected benefits from the year-to-year decrease in tax charges
related to intercompany payments and the intercompany
Total Operating
licensing of certain IP. Income from continuing operations of
Consolidation (non-GAAP)
$4.5 billion increased 1.0 percent and the net income margin
• Currency* 1 point 1 point
was 20.7 percent, an increase of 0.5 points versus the fourth
• Acquisitions** 5 points 4 points
quarter of 2015. Losses from discontinued operations, net of
• Base (12) points (12) points tax, were $4 million in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to
$3 million of income in the fourth quarter of 2015. Net income
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs
** Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period; operating of $4.5 billion increased 0.9 percent year to year. Operating
(non-GAAP) is net of non-operating acquisition-related charges. (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations of
$5.4 billion decreased 2.1 percent year to year and the operating
Base expense performance reflects a higher level of IP income (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing operations of
(5 points) in the fourth quarter year to year consistent with the 24.8 percent was essentially flat year to year. Operating (non-
company’s revitalized efforts in this area. The base expense GAAP) income from continuing operations of $4.8 billion
decline also reflected the yield from workforce rebalancing increased 1.5 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) income
actions occurring earlier in the year. The business continued to margin from continuing operations of 21.9 percent increased
invest in areas such as cognitive and cloud through acquisitions. 0.6 points. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from
The decrease in operating (non-GAAP) expense was driven continuing operations in the fourth quarter of 2016 was
primarily by the same factors. 11.5 percent versus 14.7 percent in the prior year.
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $5.0 billion in the In the fourth quarter of 2016, the company repurchased
fourth quarter of 2016 decreased 2.2 percent year to year and 5.5 million shares of its common stock at a cost of $0.9 billion.
the pre-tax margin was 22.9 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points. Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $4.73
The continuing operations effective tax rate for the fourth in the fourth quarter of 2016 increased 3.1 percent year to year.
quarter of 2016 was 9.6 percent compared to an effective tax Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of
rate of 12.5 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015, down $5.01 increased 3.5 percent versus the fourth quarter of 2015.
2.9 points year to year. While the underlying effective tax rate
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2016 versus the fourth quarter of 2015 reportable segment external revenue
and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an
arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent
Percent/ Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $ 5,297 $ 5,225 1.4% 2.2%
Gross margin 82.7% 85.7% (3.0) pts.
Global Business Services 4,121 4,297 (4.1)% (3.6)%
Gross margin 26.9% 28.2% (1.3) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 9,308 9,149 1.7% 2.4%
Gross margin 42.9% 44.3% (1.4) pts.
Systems 2,530 2,892 (12.5)% (12.1)%
Gross margin 56.9% 55.8% 1.1 pts.
Global Financing 447 454 (1.5)% (2.1)%
Gross margin 36.2% 39.9% (3.6) pts.
Other 66 43 51.3% 52.0%
Gross margin (289.7)% (312.7)% 23.0 pts.
Total consolidated revenue $21,770 $22,059 (1.3)% (0.7)%
Total consolidated gross profi t $10,893 $11,407 (4.5)%
Total consolidated gross margin 50.0% 51.7% (1.7) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 124 105 18.3%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 78 119 (34.6)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $11,095 $11,630 (4.6)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 51.0% 52.7% (1.8 ) pts.

===== PAGE 54 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions Within GBS, total fourth quarter strategic imperatives revenue
In the fourth quarter of 2016, Cognitive Solutions revenue of of $2.4 billion grew 18 percent as reported (19 percent adjusted
$5,297 million grew 1.4 percent as reported and 2 percent year for currency) year to year. Cloud revenue of $0.9 billion grew
to year adjusted for currency. On an as reported and constant 78 percent as reported (77 percent adjusted for currency),
currency basis, Solutions Software revenue grew, partially offset with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.1 billion.
by declines in Transaction Processing Software.
In the fourth quarter, the GBS gross profit margin decreased
In the fourth quarter, Solutions Software revenue of 1.3 points to 26.9 percent compared to the prior year, with
$3,747 million grew 4.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for declines in Consulting, Application Management and GPS.
currency), while Transaction Processing Software revenue of Margins declined in Consulting and Application Management as
$1,550 million declined 4.3 percent (4 percent adjusted for the business shifts to digital platforms and continues to add
currency). Within Solutions Software, growth was driven by highly skilled enablement resources, impacting productivity in
Analytics and Security, which both grew as reported and on a the near term. In addition, the company continues to incur
constant currency basis. Within the Analytics portfolio, the additional spending to improve delivery efficiency and meet
company continued to innovate the Watson platform and extend commitments in the more traditional engagements. These
cognitive across the solution offerings. The Watson platform, dynamics are also reflected in the pre-tax margin for the quarter.
which underpins the company’s cognitive strategy, continues to In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income of $522 million decreased
gain momentum in the marketplace. There was strong Software- 26.1 percent and the pre-tax margin declined 3.6 points to
as-a-Service performance in the quarter with double-digit 12.4 percent.
growth in revenue as reported and adjusted for currency.
Within Cognitive Solutions, total fourth quarter 2016 strategic Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
imperatives revenue of $3.5 billion grew 6 percent (7 percent In the fourth quarter of 2016, Technology Services & Cloud
adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud revenue of $0.6 billion Platforms revenue of $9,308 million grew 1.7 percent as
grew 52 percent (53 percent adjusted for currency), with an reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency compared to the
as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.8 billion. prior year. The business continues to invest in hybrid cloud
capabilities across services and software to help clients build
The Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin decreased 3.0 points their cloud infrastructures.
to 82.7 percent in the fourth quarter 2016 versus 2015 primarily
due to investments in strategic areas, such as SaaS, and Infrastructure Services revenue of $6,085 million grew
acquisition content. In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income of 2.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
$2,313 million increased 0.8 percent year to year, however, quarter. The company’s enterprise workloads on the public
pre-tax margin declined 1.4 points to 38.6 percent. Performance cloud continue to scale, which enables clients to grow their new
continued to reflect the company’s higher level of investment digital businesses. As a services integrator, the company is a
in the strategic growth areas, including Watson. premier partner in hybrid cloud services integration and delivers
end-to-end infrastructure services solutions that continue to
resonate with clients. Technical Support Services revenue of
Global Business Services
$1,827 million increased 0.2 percent (flat adjusted for currency).
In the fourth quarter of 2016, Global Business Services revenue
Integration Software revenue of $1,396 million declined
of $4,121 million decreased 4.1 percent as reported and
0.1 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted for
4 percent adjusted for currency. Digital practices continued to
currency compared to the fourth quarter of 2015. In Integration
grow at double digits year to year as reported and adjusted
Software, there was continued strength in WebSphere
for currency, including strong growth in cloud, mobile and
Application Server and hybrid cloud integration capabilities
analytics. This growth was more than offset by declines in the
and Bluemix is now one of the largest open public cloud
traditional areas.
deployments globally.
In the fourth quarter of 2016, Application Management revenue
Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, total fourth
of $1,969 million decreased 2.8 percent (2 percent adjusted for
quarter strategic imperatives revenue of $2.6 billion grew
currency), compared to the prior year. Consulting revenue of
36 percent (37 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud
$1,813 million declined 5.3 percent (5 percent adjusted for
revenue of $1.8 billion grew 48 percent as reported (50 percent
currency) and GPS revenue of $340 million decreased
adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run rate
4.8 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). Revenue declines
of $5.8 billion.
across the businesses reflect the shift away from the traditional
large enterprise implementations and the continued investment The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin
in digital practices. The company continues to focus on providing decreased 1.4 points to 42.9 percent in the fourth quarter with
the solutions enterprises are demanding to create new business declines in Technical Support Services and Integration Software.
models with cognitive technologies. During the fourth quarter, The margin decline in Technical Support Services was driven by the
a new global Watson IoT consulting practice was announced global investment in technical skills within multi-vendor services.
which will help clients introduce IoT innovation into The decline in margin in Integration Software reflects the dynamics
their businesses by leveraging IBM’s deep domain and of the shift in capabilities to Software-as-a-Service and royalty cost
industry expertise. from the growth in intellectual property partnerships.

===== PAGE 55 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Fourth-quarter pre-tax income of $1,882 million increased Systems and Storage Systems. Pre-tax income of $579 million
4.1 percent and pre-tax margin improved 0.4 points to decreased 14.1 percent and the pre-tax margin declined
19.8 percent. The pre-tax margin reflects licensing income from 0.2 points to 21.6 percent, consistent with the product cycle and
the intellectual property partnerships offset by the continued portfolio transition dynamics impacting revenue and gross profit.
investment in strategic areas and innovation to drive productivity
in the more traditional business. Global Financing
Global Financing revenue of $447 million was down 1.5 percent
Systems as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency due primarily
In the fourth quarter of 2016, Systems revenue of $2,530 million to decreases in financing revenue partially offset by increases
decreased 12.5 percent as reported (12 percent adjusted for in used equipment sales revenue. The Global Financing fourth
currency) compared to the prior year reflecting shifting market quarter pre-tax income decreased 33.5 percent to $448 million
dynamics and product cycle transitions. and the pre-tax margin decreased 6.1 points to 49.3 percent.
The decrease in pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in
Systems Hardware revenue of $2,074 million decreased
gross profit ($250 million) and an increase in SG&A expenses
12.5 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
($19 million); partially offset by decreases in financing receiv-
quarter. Operating Systems Software revenue of $456 million
able provisions ($42 million).
decreased 12.6 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency)
compared to the prior year.
Total Software
Across Systems, product cycle transitions in Power Systems and Total software revenue, which includes Cognitive Solutions,
Storage Systems contributed to the decline in revenue, while the Integration Software and Operating Systems Software, of
overall portfolio remains optimized to meet client demands in $7,149 million was flat as reported and increased 1 percent
the era of cognitive and cloud computing. adjusted for currency in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to
Within Systems Hardware, z Systems revenue increased the prior-year period. From a business area perspective, there
3.8 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) year was growth in Cognitive Solutions as reported and adjusted for
to year reflecting continued success in driving innovation in the currency and Integration Software revenue was flat as reported,
company’s core systems. The mainframe continues to deliver a but grew adjusted for currency. Operating Systems Software
high-value, secure and scalable platform that is constantly being revenue declined year to year as reported and adjusted for
redesigned for new workloads, such as blockchain and instant currency, in line with the longer term secular trend. Across
payment, and is optimized for mobile and security. software, annuity revenue grew low-single digits year to year as
reported and adjusted for currency. This growth was led by the
Power Systems revenue decreased 34.5 percent (34 percent SaaS offerings which grew both on an organic basis and from
adjusted for currency) year to year reflecting the company’s acquisitions. Transactional revenue declined mid-single digits
ongoing shift to a growing Linux market while continuing to serve as reported and adjusted for currency year to year.
a high-value, but declining, UNIX market. Workload on the Linux
platform continued double-digit growth while the traditional
Geographic Revenue
UNIX base declined. The company continued the expansion of
Total geographic revenue of $21,662 million decreased
new Linux offerings, with Power on Linux now representing over
1.5 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency in
15 percent of the Power portfolio.
the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to the prior year. Americas
Storage Systems revenue decreased 10.6 percent (10 percent revenue of $10,283 million was flat as reported and adjusted
adjusted for currency) year to year, reflecting the continued for currency compared to the prior year. EMEA fourth quarter
market shift toward software-defined environments. The year- revenue of $6,737 million decreased 8.0 percent as reported
to-year decline was primarily driven by midrange and high-end and 3 percent adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific revenue of
disk storage, both of which declined as reported and on an $4,641 million grew 5.1 percent as reported and 1 percent
adjusted for currency basis. The company benefited from the adjusted for currency. Americas and Asia Pacific revenue growth
performance of its full suite of all flash array offerings which rates improved sequentially, as reported and adjusted for
contributed double-digit revenue growth in the fourth quarter. currency, compared to the third quarter.
While not within the Systems segment, Software-Defined
Within Americas, U.S. revenue increased 2.1 percent compared
Storage had continued double-digit revenue growth as reported
to the prior year. Canada was down 5.8 percent as reported
and adjusted for currency in the fourth quarter.
(6 percent adjusted for currency). Latin America decreased
Within Systems, total fourth quarter strategic imperatives 5.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
revenue of $1.1 billion decreased 19 percent (18 percent quarter compared to the prior year. Within Latin America, Brazil
adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud revenue of $0.9 billion was flat year to year as reported, but declined 10 percent
decreased 15 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency). adjusted for currency. Fourth quarter revenue in Mexico
decreased 10.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency).
The Systems gross profit margin increased 1.1 points to
56.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to the prior In the fourth quarter, within EMEA, revenue in the UK decreased
year. This increase was due to mix to z Systems (0.6 points) and 24.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency). Germany
margin expansion (0.4 points) driven by improvements in decreased 7.4 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency). France
z Systems margin; partially offset by declining margins in Power decreased 3.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 56 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Partially offsetting these declines, Italy increased 9.9 percent Total expense and other (income) decreased 6.4 percent in the
(12 percent adjusted for currency). Fourth quarter revenue fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 27.1 percent
performance in Europe declined sequentially from the third compared to 28.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2015. Total
quarter driven by the UK, Germany and Russia consistent with operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased
macro- and geo-political trends. In the Central and Eastern 6.8 percent in the fourth quarter. The decrease in total expense
European region, revenue decreased 21.0 percent (20 percent and other (income) was primarily driven by shifts within the
adjusted for currency) year to year with Russia declining operational expense base driving productivity and efficiency,
38.8 percent. The Middle East and Africa region declined the yield from workforce rebalancing actions earlier in the year,
4.3 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency) and the growth in intellectual property income (12 points). The
compared to 2015. growth in IP income year to year was a result of the company’s
revitalized efforts in this area. The fourth-quarter expense
Within Asia Pacific, China revenue grew 19.1 percent (22 percent
dynamics also reflect increased acquisition-related expenses
adjusted for currency), reflecting the strength of the z Systems
(4 points) and a modest impact from currency (1 point) in the
platform in the banking sector. Japan grew 8.1 percent as
fourth quarter of 2016 compared with the prior year.
reported, but decreased 2 percent adjusted for currency. Fourth
quarter revenue in India declined 0.8 percent as reported,
but grew 1 percent adjusted for currency. Australia decreased Results of Discontinued Operations
11.6 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency). The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was $4 million
in the fourth quarter of 2016 compared to $3 million of income
in the fourth quarter of 2015.
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions) Cash Flow
Yr.-to-Yr. The company generated $3,968 million in cash flow provided by
Percent/
Margin operating activities, a decrease of $1,311 million compared to
For the fourth quarter: 2016 2015 Change the fourth quarter of 2015 driven by higher income tax payments
Total consolidated and an increase in working capital due to the timing and mix of
expense and other substantial transactions in December 2016. Net cash used in
(income) $5,907 $6,308 (6.4)% investing activities of $3,687 million decreased $1,758 million
Non-operating compared to the prior year, primarily due to higher cash
adjustments payments for acquisitions in the fourth quarter of the prior year,
Amortization of net changes in marketable securities and other investments,
acquired partially offset by a cash payment in the fourth quarter related
intangible assets (132) (80) 65.4 to the divestiture of the Microelectronics business. Net cash
Acquisition-related used in financing activities of $1,287 million decreased
charges (4) (15) (75.1) $61 million compared to the prior year, primarily due to a
Non-operating decline in net cash payments to settle debt, partially offset by
retirement-related an increase in cash used for gross common stock repurchases
(costs)/income (76) (100) (23.8) and dividends.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other
(income) $5,696 $6,114 (6.8)%
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue
ratio 27.1% 28.6% (1.5 )pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue
ratio 26.2% 27.7% (1.6 )pts.

===== PAGE 57 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating
earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented,
may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section
on pages 26 and 27 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2016: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $10,893 $ 124 $ 78 $11,095
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 51.0%
SG&A $ 4,976 $(136) $ (69) $ 4,771
RD&E 1,431 — (6) 1,425
Other (income) and expense (136) 0 — (136)
Total expense and other (income) 5,907 (136) (76) 5,696
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,986 260 154 5,399
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 22.9% 1.2 pts. 0.7 pts. 24.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 480 $ 66 $ 77 $ 623
Effective tax rate 9.6% 0.8 pts. 1.2 pts. 11.5%
Income from continuing operations $ 4,505 $ 193 $ 77 $ 4,776
Income margin from continuing operations 20.7% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 21.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 4.73 $0.20 $0.08 $ 5.01
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to
the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $ 11,407 $ 105 $ 119 $11,630
Gross profi t margin 51.7% 0.5 pts. 0.5 pts. 52.7%
SG&A $ 5,157 $ (95) $ (88) $ 4,975
RD&E 1,362 — (12) 1,350
Other (income) and expense (146) 0 — (146)
Total expense and other (income) 6,308 (95) (100) 6,114
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 5,098 199 218 5,516
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 23.1% 0.9 pts. 1.0 pts. 25.0%
Provision for income taxes* $ 638 $ 89 $ 82 $ 809
Effective tax rate 12.5% 1.2 pts. 1.0 pts. 14.7%
Income from continuing operations $ 4,460 $ 110 $ 137 $ 4,707
Income margin from continuing operations 20.2% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 21.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 4.59 $0.11 $0.14 $ 4.84
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to
the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 58 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW IBM’s System x business to Lenovo were January 31, 2014 and
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the October 1, 2014, respectively. Management believes that
company’s financial performance in 2015 as compared to 2014. presenting financial information for years 2015 versus 2014
For additional information, see the company’s recast 2015 without either or both of these items is more representative of
Annual Report on Form 8-K dated June 13, 2016. operational performance and provides more insight into, and
clarifies the basis for, historical and/or future performance,
The initial closing dates for the sales of IBM’s worldwide
which may be more useful to investors.
customer care outsourcing services business to SYNNEX and
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Revenue $ 81,741 $ 92,793 (11.9)%*
Gross profi t margin 49.8% 50.0% (0.2) pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 24,740 $ 26,421 (6.4)%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 30.3% 28.5% 1.8 pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 15,945 $ 19,986 (20.2)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 2,581 $ 4,234 (39.1)%
Income from continuing operations $ 13,364 $ 15,751 (15.2)%
Income from continuing operations margin 16.3% 17.0% (0.6) pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (174) $ (3,729) (95.3)%
Net income $ 13,190 $ 12,022 9.7%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ 13.60 $ 15.59 (12.8)%
Consolidated earnings per share—assuming dilution $ 13.42 $ 11.90 12.8%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 982.7 1,010.0 (2.7)%
Assets** $110,495 $117,271 (5.8)%
Liabilities** $ 96,071 $105,257 (8.7)%
Equity** $ 14,424 $ 12,014 20.1%
* (4.1) percent adjusted for currency; (1.2) percent adjusted for divestitures and currency
** At December 31
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2015 and 2014.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Net income as reported $13,190 $12,022 9.7%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (174) (3,729) (95.3)
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $15,751 (15.2)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 562 670 (16.1)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 734 280 161.8
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $14,659 $16,702 (12.2)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 14.92 $ 16.53 (9.7)%
* See page 66 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings.

===== PAGE 59 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot Business analytics revenue of $17.9 billion increased 7 percent
In 2015, the company delivered $81.7 billion in revenue, as reported and 16 percent year to year adjusted for currency
$13.4 billion in income from continuing operations and making the company the largest analytics provider. The company
$14.7 billion in operating (non-GAAP) earnings resulting in also moved into new areas including Watson Health and Watson
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $13.60 IoT. In Watson Health, the company is integrating its own organic
as reported and $14.92 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. capabilities with acquired content, including the acquisition of
The results of continuing operations exclude a net loss Merge Healthcare in 2015.
from discontinued operations of $174 million in 2015 and
In the area of engagement (security, mobile and social), revenue
$3,729 million in 2014 related to the divestiture of the
increased 64 percent as reported and 77 percent adjusted for
Microelectronics business. On a consolidated basis, net income
currency. Security revenue increased 5 percent as reported
in 2015 was $13.2 billion, with diluted earnings per share of
(12 percent adjusted for currency), mobile revenue more than
$13.42. The company generated $17.0 billion in cash from
tripled year to year as reported and adjusted for currency and
operations and $13.1 billion in free cash flow in 2015 driving
social revenue increased 14 percent as reported (21 percent
shareholder returns of $9.5 billion in gross common stock
adjusted for currency).
repurchases and dividends.
From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue
Total consolidated revenue decreased 11.9 percent as reported
declined 9.4 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted for
and 1 percent year to year adjusted for currency and the
currency) with declines in transactional revenue and annuity
divestitures of the System x and customer care businesses.
revenue. Annuity-based revenue declined as reported, but grew
Currency had an 8 point, or $7.2 billion, impact on reported
adjusted for currency, including Software-as-a-Service. GBS
revenue in 2015. Revenue was impacted by 3 points in 2015
revenue decreased 12.0 percent as reported and 4 percent
from the divested businesses. Combined, the impact of currency
adjusted for currency (8 points). Technology Services & Cloud
and divested businesses reduced the reported revenue growth
Platforms revenue declined 9.6 percent as reported, but was
by 11 points.
flat year to year adjusted for currency (9 points) and divestitures
In 2015, strategic imperatives revenue, which includes with strong growth in the strategic imperatives on both an
analytics, cloud, mobile, social and security, grew 17 percent as-reported and adjusted basis. Systems revenue decreased
year to year as reported and 26 percent adjusted for currency 22.3 percent as reported, but increased 4 percent adjusted for
and the System x divestiture. In total, the strategic imperatives the System x divestiture (22 points) and currency (4 points),
generated $28.9 billion in revenue in 2015, which represented and reflected a successful mainframe cycle in 2015
approximately 35 percent of the company’s total revenue. and the repositioning of Power Systems to address a
broader opportunity.
Cloud revenue increased 43 percent as reported in 2015 and
57 percent adjusted for currency and the System x divestiture. The consolidated gross profit margin of 49.8 percent decreased
In 2015, Cloud revenue was $10.2 billion making the company 0.2 points year to year. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
the largest cloud provider. Cloud revenue spans across many of 50.8 percent increased 0.2 points compared to 2014 primarily
different segments. The company leveraged its extensive driven by the shift to higher value through portfolio actions and
relationships in enterprise IT and incumbency in the data center the relative strength of z Systems, partially offset by margin
to help clients implement hybrid cloud environments. declines in GBS, Technology Services & Cloud Platforms and
In addition: Cognitive Solutions.
• As-a-Service revenue increased 50 percent (61 percent Total expense and other (income) decreased 6.4 percent in 2015
adjusted for currency) year to year to $4.5 billion and versus 2014. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other
the company exited 2015 with an annual run rate of (income) decreased 7.8 percent year to year. The key year-to-
$5.3 billion. year drivers were:
• Cloud revenue included $5.6 billion of revenue from Total Operating
foundational offerings—where the company provided Consolidated (non-GAAP)
software, hardware and services for clients to build their • Currency* (9) points (9) points
own clouds. • System x divestiture (2) points (2) points
• Clients utilized cloud not just to reduce costs, but also to • Divestiture gains 6 points 6 points
gain agility and to enable innovation. The company has • Workforce rebalancing (3) points (3) points
been leading clients in making the move to cloud through
* Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs
consuming as-a-Service, or through their own clouds or
the implementation of a hybrid environment.
• The company made seven cloud acquisitions in 2015
including; Cleversafe, Gravitant, and Clearleap. The
company also invested nearly $1 billion in 2015 to
expand its global cloud data center footprint to 46.

===== PAGE 60 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The reduction in expense was driven primarily by currency At December 31, 2015, the company continued to have the
impacts, a lower level of workforce rebalancing charges and financial flexibility to support the business over the long term.
the impact of the divested System x business. These benefits Cash and marketable securities at year end were $8.2 billion, a
were partially offset by the impact of lower divestiture gains decrease of $0.3 billion from December 31, 2014. Key drivers
($1.6 billion) year to year. The reduction in operating (non-GAAP) in the balance sheet and total cash flows were:
expense was driven primarily by the same factors. The company
Total assets decreased $6.8 billion ($0.3 billion adjusted for
continued to shift resources and spending within its operational
currency) from December 31, 2014 driven by:
expense base—driving productivity and efficiency in some areas
with increased investment in support of the strategic • Decreases in total receivables ($4.4 billion), deferred taxes
imperatives. In 2015, the company shifted over $5 billion of ($1.9 billion) and prepaid expenses and sundry assets
spending across cost, expense and capital expenditures, to the ($1.1 billion); partially offset by
strategic imperatives.
• Increased goodwill ($1.5 billion).
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $15.9 billion
decreased 20.2 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin was Total liabilities decreased $9.2 billion ($4.7 billion adjusted for
19.5 percent, a decrease of 2.0 points. The continuing operations currency) from December 31, 2014 driven by:
effective tax rate for 2015 was 16.2 percent, a decrease of
5.0 points versus 2014, primarily driven by benefits from the • Decreases in other liabilities ($2.3 billion), taxes
settlement of the U.S. tax audit and geographic mix of pre-tax ($2.2 billion), retirement-related liabilities ($1.8 billion),
profits; partially offset by less utilization of foreign tax credits. deferred income ($0.8 billion), total debt ($0.8 billion) and
Income from continuing operations of $13.4 billion decreased accounts payable ($0.8 billion).
15.2 percent and the net income margin was 16.3 percent, a
decrease of 0.6 points versus 2014. Losses from discontinued Total equity of $14.4 billion increased $2.4 billion from
operations, net of tax, were $174 million compared to December 31, 2014 as a result of:
$3,729 million in 2014. Net income of $13.2 billion increased
• Higher retained earnings ($8.3 billion) and higher common
9.7 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income
stock ($0.6 billion); partially offset by
from continuing operations decreased 16.3 percent year to year
and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing • Increased treasury stock ($4.8 billion) and increased
operations decreased 1.1 points to 21.6 percent. Operating accumulated other comprehensive losses ($1.7 billion).
(non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of $14.7 billion
decreased 12.2 percent including an impact of 7 points from the The company generated $17.0 billion in cash flow provided by
2014 gains from the System x and customer care divestitures. operating activities, an increase of $0.1 billion when compared
The operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing to 2014, driven primarily by lower income tax payments, offset
operations of 17.9 percent decreased 0.1 points. The operating by net income performance. Net cash used in investing activities
(non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations was of $8.2 billion was $5.2 billion higher than 2014, primarily due
17.2 percent versus 21.0 percent in 2014. The 2015 profit and to a decrease in cash provided from divestitures ($2.8 billion)
margin performance reflected portfolio actions taken as the and an increase in net cash used for acquisitions ($2.7 billion).
company continued to shift to higher value, as well as Net cash used in financing activities of $9.2 billion decreased
investments made to add capabilities to drive the transformation. $6.3 billion compared to 2014, driven primarily by a decrease
in cash used for gross common stock repurchases ($9.1 billion),
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $13.60
partially offset by lower net debt issuances ($1.8 billion) and
in 2015 decreased 12.8 percent year to year. In 2015, the
higher dividend payments ($0.6 billion).
company repurchased 30.3 million shares of its common stock
at a cost of $4.7 billion. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings
per share of $14.92 decreased 9.7 percent versus 2014
including an impact of 7 points from the 2014 gains from the
System x and customer care divestitures. Diluted earnings per
share from discontinued operations was ($0.18) in 2015
compared to ($3.69) in 2014.

===== PAGE 61 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2015 versus 2014 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent
Percent/ Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $17,841 $19,689 (9.4)% (3.0)%
Gross margin 85.1% 86.8% (1.6) pts.
Global Business Services 17,166 19,512 (12.0)% (4.1)%*
Gross margin 28.2% 30.4% (2.2) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 35,142 38,889 (9.6)% 0.1%*
Gross margin 42.7% 44.3% (1.5) pts.
Systems 9,547 12,294 (22.3)% 3.9%*
Gross margin 55.8% 48.7% 7.1 pts.
Global Financing 1,840 2,034 (9.5)% 1.5%
Gross margin 45.6% 49.4% (3.7) pts.
Other 206 374 (45.0)% (39.1)%
Gross margin (253.0)% (215.0)% (38.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $81,741 $92,793 (11.9)% (1.2)%*
Total consolidated gross profi t $40,684 $46,407 (12.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 49.8% 50.0% (0.2) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 373 416 (10.5)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 469 173 170.7%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profi t $41,526 $46,996 (11.6)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 50.8% 50.6% 0.2 pts.
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency

===== PAGE 62 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue $17,841 $19,689 (9.4)% (3.0)%
Solutions Software $12,021 $12,847 (6.4)% (0.3)%
Transaction Processing Software 5,819 6,842 (14.9) (7.9)
In 2015, approximately 75 percent of the Cognitive Solutions business was annuity-like, including Software-as-a-Service and
subscription and support. Renewal rates were steady, the SaaS business grew, and overall annuity revenue increased year to year
adjusted for currency, but declined as reported. Transactional revenue declined year to year as reported and adjusted for currency
as large clients with multi-year contracts continued to utilize the flexibility the company has provided in deployment of their software.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Cognitive Solutions
External gross profi t $15,189 $17,085 (11.1)%
External gross profi t margin 85.1% 86.8% (1.6) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 7,245 $ 8,215 (11.8)%
Pre-tax margin 36.1% 37.5% (1.4) pts.
Profit performance for 2015 reflected the overall revenue trajectory, a higher level of investments in areas such as Watson Platform,
Watson Health and Watson IoT, and an impact from currency.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $17,166 $19,512 (12.0)% (4.1)%*
Consulting $ 7,678 $ 9,057 (15.2)% (8.5)%
Global Process Services 1,435 1,688 (15.0) (6.8)*
Application Management 8,053 8,767 (8.2) 1.3
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency
As the company continued to transform the GBS business in 2015, revenue from the strategic imperative practices grew at strong
rates. However, overall revenue performance continued to be impacted by the company’s shift away from traditional businesses,
such as ERP. Clients are moving away from ERP engagements to initiatives that focus on digitizing their business with analytics,
cloud and mobile technologies.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Global Business Services
External gross profi t $4,837 $5,923 (18.3)%
External gross profi t margin 28.2% 30.4% (2.2 ) pts.
Pre-tax income $2,602 $3,347 (22.3)%
Pre-tax margin 14.7% 16.7% (2.0 ) pts.

===== PAGE 63 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
This year-to-year profit decline reflected the market shifts in the GBS business. In parts of the portfolio where the market has been
declining, there was price and profit pressure. In addition, the company continued to shift and add significant resources to the
high-growth analytics, cloud and mobility practices, which impacted productivity and margin.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue $35,142 $38,889 (9.6)% 0.1%*
Infrastructure Services $23,075 $25,533 (9.6)% 0.6%
Technical Support Services 7,426 8,276 (10.3) 0.9*
Integration Software 4,641 5,080 (8.6) (2.4)
* Adjusted for the System x divestiture and currency
In Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, the company helped clients transition to a hybrid cloud services platform bringing cloud,
mobility and security to infrastructure services. In Infrastructure Services, the company continued to reinvent its portfolio, providing
the most modern IT services that connect clients to the cloud-based mobile world. The Technical Support Services business
continued to contribute revenue by delivering a wide range of support services to maintain and improve clients’ IT infrastructure.
Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, the strategic imperatives, including hybrid cloud services, grew strong double digits
as reported and at constant currency in 2015. The company continued to increase its cloud capacity with 46 cloud data centers
opened around the world as of December 31, 2015.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015* 2014* Change
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
External Technology Services gross profi t $11,008 $12,793 (13.9)%
External Technology Services gross profi t margin 36.1% 37.8% (1.7) pts.
External Integration Software gross profi t $ 4,005 $ 4,420 (9.4)%
External Integration Software gross margin 86.3% 87.0% (0.7 )pts.
External gross profi t $15,014 $17,213 (12.8)%
External gross profi t margin 42.7% 44.3% (1.5) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 5,669 $ 7,084 (20.0)%
Pre-tax margin 15.8% 17.8% (2.0) pts.
* Recast to conform with 2016 presentation
The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin year-to-year decline was driven primarily by margin declines in
Infrastructure Services. The pre-tax margin decline was primarily due to investments being made in this business. The company
continued to invest to deliver the most contemporary offerings that are built with cloud, analytics, mobile, security and cognitive
technologies enabling it to transform clients’ enterprises. In addition, currency had a year-to-year impact on profit given the strong
dollar currency environment.

===== PAGE 64 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $9,547 $12,294 (22.3)% 3.9%*
Systems Hardware $7,574 $ 9,991 (24.2)% 7.5%*
z Systems 28.1 34.7
Power Systems (0.4) 4.5
Storage Systems (11.9) (7.0)
Operating Systems Software 1,973 2,303 (14.3) (7.9)
* Adjusted for the System x divestiture and currency
Systems Hardware revenue included a successful mainframe per second) shipments increased 33 percent in 2015. The z13
product cycle in 2015 and continued repositioning in Power system was contemporized for the workloads around mobile,
Systems. The company continued to deliver innovation to its hybrid cloud and analytics. Power Systems revenue decreased
systems to enable them to run the most contemporary 0.4 percent as reported, but grew 4 percent adjusted for
workloads. Approximately half of the Systems Hardware revenue currency compared to 2014, the first year of revenue growth
in 2015 was for solutions that address analytics workloads, or since 2011. The Power Systems performance reflected the
hybrid and private clouds. Operating Systems Software declined progress being made to transform the platform to align around
driven by declines in both z Systems and Power Systems. data and cloud opportunities, while embracing an open
ecosystem. Storage revenue declined driven by continued
z Systems revenue was driven primarily by the launch of the z13
weakness in traditional disk and tape.
system in the first quarter of 2015. MIPS (millions of instructions
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2015* 2014* Change
Systems
External Systems Hardware gross profi t $3,536 $3,947 (10.4)%
External Systems Hardware gross profi t margin 46.7% 39.5% 7.2 pts.
External Operating Systems Software gross profi t $1,790 $2,041 (12.3)%
External Operating Systems Software gross margin 90.7% 88.6% 2.1 pts.
External total gross profi t $5,326 $5,988 (11.1)%
External total gross profi t margin 55.8% 48.7% 7.1 pts.
Pre-tax income $1,722 $1,384 24.4%
Pre-tax margin 16.7% 10.4% 6.3 pts.
* Recast to conform with 2016 presentation
Systems gross profit margin increased year to year driven Global Financing
primarily by an improved mix (10.3 points) due to strong growth See pages 76 through 81 for an analysis of Global Financing’s
in z Systems and the divestiture of the lower margin System x segment results.
business. The improvement was partially offset by lower
margins (3.2 points) in z Systems and Power Systems compared
to 2014. The 2015 Systems results reflected a successful
transformation and ongoing repositioning of the business
including a solid mainframe product cycle.

===== PAGE 65 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic
basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2015 2014 Change Currency*
Total revenue $81,741 $92,793 (11.9)% (1.2)%
Geographies $81,430 $92,326 (11.8)% (1.1)%
Americas 38,486 41,410 (7.1) (1.8)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 26,073 30,700 (15.1) 0.3
Asia Pacifi c 16,871 20,216 (16.5) (1.7)
* Adjusted for divestitures and currency
Americas revenue decreased year to year as reported and Asia Pacific revenue decreased 16.5 percent as reported and
adjusted for currency. There was a decline in North America as 2 percent adjusted for currency (9 points) and the divested
reported and adjusted for currency. Latin America declined as businesses (6 points) compared to 2014. Japan decreased
reported, but grew adjusted for currency. The U.S. decreased 9.9 percent as reported, but had growth of 5 percent adjusted
4.4 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for divestitures. for currency (13 points) and the divested businesses (2 points).
Canada was down 17.2 percent as reported and 2 percent China decreased 34.4 percent as reported and 21 percent
adjusted for currency (13 points) and divestitures (2 points). adjusted for the divested businesses (12 points) and currency
In Latin America, Brazil decreased 26.0 percent as reported and (1 point). India decreased 3.8 percent as reported, but had
2 percent adjusted for currency (22 points) and the divested growth of 8 percent adjusted for the divested businesses
businesses (2 points), while Mexico had growth of 0.5 percent (7 points) and currency (5 points).
as reported and 14 percent adjusted for currency (9 points)
and divestitures (4 points). Total Expense and Other (Income)
EMEA revenue decreased year to year as reported, but was flat ($ in millions)
compared to 2014 adjusted for currency and the divested Yr.-to-Yr.
businesses. Germany decreased 13.2 percent as reported, but Percent/
For the year ended Margin
grew 7 percent adjusted for currency (17 points) and the
December 31: 2015 2014 Change
divested businesses (3 points). The UK decreased 6.3 percent
Total consolidated
year to year as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for expense and
currency (7 points) and the divested businesses (2 points). The other (income) $24,740 $26,421 (6.4)%
Middle East and Africa region decreased 4.8 percent as
Non-operating
reported, but grew 5 percent adjusted for the divested adjustments
businesses (6 points) and currency (4 points). Russia decreased
Amortization of acquired
32.2 percent as reported and 24 percent adjusted for intangible assets (304) (374) (18.8)
the divestitures.
Acquisition-related
charges (26) (12) 112.6
Non-operating
retirement-related
(costs)/income (581) (180) 222.4
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and other
(income) $23,830 $25,855 (7.8)%
Total consolidated
expense-to-revenue
ratio 30.3% 28.5% 1.8 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense-to-revenue
ratio 29.2% 27.9% 1.3 pts.

===== PAGE 66 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent For the year ended Percent
December 31: 2015 2014 Change December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Selling, general and Total consolidated
administrative research, development
expense and engineering $5,247 $5,437 (3.5)%
Selling, general and Non-operating adjustment
administrative—other $16,643 $18,532 (10.2)%
Non-operating
Advertising and retirement-related
promotional expense 1,290 1,307 (1.3) (costs)/income (48) 77 NM
Workforce rebalancing Operating (non-GAAP)
charges 587 1,472 (60.1) research, development
Retirement-related costs 1,052 811 29.7 and engineering $5,200 $5,514 (5.7)%
Amortization of acquired NM—Not meaningful
intangible assets 304 374 (18.8)
Stock-based RD&E expense was 6.4 percent of revenue in 2015 and
compensation 322 350 (8.0)
5.9 percent of revenue in 2014.
Bad debt expense 231 334 (30.8)
RD&E expense decreased 3.5 percent in 2015 versus 2014
Total consolidated
primarily driven by:
selling, general and
administrative • The effects of currency (5 points); and
expense $20,430 $23,180 (11.9)%
Non-operating • The impact of the divested System x business (4 points);
adjustments partially offset by
Amortization of • Increased base spending (4 points); and
acquired
intangible assets (304) (374) (18.8) • Higher expense due to acquisitions (1 point).
Acquisition-related
charges (21) (11) 81.1 Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 5.7 percent in
Non-operating 2015 compared to 2014, driven primarily by the same factors.
retirement-related
(costs)/income (533) (257) 107.3 Intellectual Property and Custom Development
Operating (non-GAAP) Income
selling, general and
administrative ($ in millions)
expense $19,573 $22,537 (13.2)% Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent
December 31: 2015* 2014* Change
Total SG&A expense decreased 11.9 percent versus 2014, Licensing of intellectual
primarily driven by the following factors: property including
royalty-based fees $407 $378 7.6%
• The effects of currency (7 points);
Custom development
• Lower workforce rebalancing charges (3 points); and income 262 330 (20.5)
• The impact of the divested System x business (1 point). Sales/other transfers of
intellectual property 13 34 (62.6)
Total $682 $742 (8.1)%
Operating (non-GAAP) expense decreased 13.2 percent year to
year driven primarily by the same factors.
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation
Bad debt expense decreased $103 million in 2015 compared to
2014. The receivables provision coverage was 2.6 percent at The timing and amount of licensing, sales and other transfers of
December 31, 2015, an increase of 40 basis points from IP may vary significantly from period to period depending upon
December 31, 2014. the timing of licensing agreements, economic conditions,
industry consolidation and the timing of new patents and know-
how development. There were no significant individual IP
transactions in 2015 or 2014.

===== PAGE 67 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense • A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax income in
2015 (3.5 points); partially offset by
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. • A reduced benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign
For the year ended Percent tax credits (2.5 points).
December 31: 2015 2014 Change
Other (income) and
expense The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
rate was 17.2 percent, a decrease of 3.8 points versus 2014
Foreign currency
transaction principally driven by the same factors described above.
losses/(gains) $ 414 $ (599) NM
(Gains)/losses on Results of Discontinued Operations
derivative instruments (853) 654 NM The loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, was
Interest income (72) (90) (19.8)% $0.2 billion in 2015 and $3.7 billion in 2014. The loss from
Net (gains)/losses from discontinued operations in 2014 included a nonrecurring pre-tax
securities and charge of $4.7 billion, or $3.4 billion, net of tax, which included
investment assets 47 (26) NM an impairment to reflect the fair value less estimated costs to
sell the Microelectronics business and other estimated costs
Other (260) (1,878) (86.1)%
related to the transaction, including cash consideration.
Total consolidated other
The discontinued operations effective tax rate in 2015 was
(income) and expense $(724) $(1,938) (62.6)%
40.3 percent compared to 30.2 percent in 2014.
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related Financial Position
charges (5) (1) NM
At December 31, 2015, the company continued to have the
Operating (non-GAAP) financial flexibility to support the business over the long term.
other (income) and Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2015 were
expense $(729) $(1,939) (62.4)%
$8,195 million, a decrease of $282 million from December 31,
NM—Not meaningful 2014. During the year, the company continued to manage the
investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation and
The decrease in consolidated other income of $1,214 million liquidity objectives.
year over year was primarily driven by: Total debt of $39,890 million decreased $832 million from the
• Lower gains on divestitures ($1,623 million) primarily December 31, 2014 level. Within total debt, $27,205 million was
associated with the divestitures of the System x and in support of the Global Financing business which was leveraged
customer care businesses in 2014; and at a 7.3 to 1 ratio. The company continued to have substantial
flexibility in the debt markets. During 2015, the company
• Higher foreign currency transaction losses ($1,013 million); completed bond issuances totaling $3,368 million, with terms
partially offset by ranging from 3 to 7 years, and interest rates ranging from
• Increased gains on derivative instruments ($1,507 million). 0.53 to 2.88 percent depending on maturity.
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured
Interest Expense the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans
at December 31. At December 31, 2015, the overall
($ in millions)
net underfunded position was $15,513 million, a decrease of
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended Percent $1,419 million from December 31, 2014 driven by an increase
December 31: 2015 2014 Change in discount rates. At December 31, 2015, the company’s
Interest expense qualified defined benefit plans were well funded. In 2015, the
Total $468 $484 (3.2)% return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was negative
1.0 percent and the plan was 101 percent funded at December
The decrease in interest expense compared to 2014 was 31. Overall, global asset returns were negative 0.2 percent and
primarily driven by lower average debt levels, partially offset by the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 97 percent
higher average interest rates. Overall interest expense funded at December 31, 2015.
(excluding capitalized interest) was $1,009 million, a decrease During 2015, the company generated $17,008 million in cash
of $16 million year to year. from operations, an increase of $139 million compared to 2014.
The company generated $13,075 million in free cash flow, an
Income Taxes increase of $703 million versus 2014. The company returned
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2015 was $9,507 million to shareholders in 2015, with $4,897 million in
16.2 percent, a decrease of 5.0 points versus 2014, primarily dividends and $4,609 million in gross share repurchases.
driven by the following factors: In 2015, the company repurchased 30.3 million shares and
had $5.6 billion remaining in share repurchase authorization
• The benefit resulting from the completion of the U.S.
at December 31, 2015.
2011-2012 tax audit in 2015, including the associated
reserve redeterminations (3.9 points); and

===== PAGE 68 =====
66 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating
earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented,
may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section
on pages 26 and 27 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $40,684 $ 373 $ 469 $41,526
Gross profi t margin 49.8% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.8%
SG&A $20,430 $(324) $(533) $19,573
RD&E 5,247 — (48) 5,200
Other (income) and expense (724) (5) — (729)
Total expense and other (income) 24,740 (330) (581) 23,830
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 15,945 703 1,050 17,697
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 19.5% 0.9 pts. 1.3 pts. 21.6%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,581 $ 141 $ 316 $ 3,037
Effective tax rate 16.2% 0.2 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.2%
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $ 562 $ 734 $14,659
Income margin from continuing operations 16.3% 0.7 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 13.60 $0.57 $0.75 $ 14.92
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amount)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2014: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profi t $46,407 $ 416 $ 173 $46,996
Gross profi t margin 50.0% 0.4 pts. 0.2 pts. 50.6%
SG&A $23,180 $(385) $(257) $22,537
RD&E 5,437 — 77 5,514
Other (income) and expense (1,938) (1) — (1,939)
Total expense and other (income) 26,421 (386) (180) 25,855
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 19,986 803 353 21,142
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 21.5% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 22.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 4,234 $ 133 $ 73 $ 4,440
Effective tax rate 21.2% (0.2) pts. 0.0 pts. 21.0%
Income from continuing operations $15,751 $ 670 $ 280 $16,702
Income margin from continuing operations 17.0% 0.7 pts. 0.3 pts. 18.0%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 15.59 $0.66 $0.28 $ 16.53
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 69 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION in 2015 has now fully wrapped on a year-to-year basis. While
Looking Forward pre-tax income is expected to decline year to year on a GAAP
The company’s strategies, investments and actions are all taken basis due to higher non-operating pension expense, the
with an objective of optimizing long-term performance. A long- company expects growth in operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax
term perspective ensures that the company is well-positioned income in 2017. In order to achieve these expectations, gross
to take advantage of the major shifts in technology, business and profit margin expansion is not required, which gives the company
the global economy. flexibility to accelerate its shift into as-a-Service faster. The
company expects to continue to monetize its technology,
Within the IT industry, there are major shifts occurring—driven
including through IP licensing arrangements in 2017, with the
by cognitive; including data and analytics, cloud and changes in
opportunity for IP income to be flat year to year. Consistent with
the ways individuals and enterprises are engaging. The company
the long-term model, the company also expects over the course
is bringing together its cognitive technologies on cloud platforms
of 2017 to continue to acquire key capabilities, remix skills,
that create industry-based solutions in order to solve enterprise
invest in areas of growth and return value to shareholders. This
clients’ real-world problems. The company continues to address
is all taken into account in the full-year view. Overall, the
the higher value areas of enterprise IT and is amassing a unique
company expects GAAP earnings per share from continuing
set of capabilities and is differentiating itself from other
operations for 2017 to be at least $11.95. Excluding acquisition-
technology providers as it moves into new spaces, and in some
related charges of $0.75 per share and non-operating
cases, creating entirely new markets. IBM is more than a
retirement-related items of $1.10 per share, operating (non-
hardware, software and services company; it has emerged as a
GAAP) earnings per share is expected to be at least $13.80. For
cognitive solutions and cloud platform company. The company’s
the first quarter of 2017, the company expects operating (non-
strategic imperatives—cloud, analytics, mobile, social and
GAAP) earnings per share to be approximately 17 percent of the
security solutions—are focused on these market shifts.
full year expectation. The company expects a discrete tax
In 2016, the company made significant progress in its benefit in the first quarter of 2017, similar to the first quarter of
transformation, including strong revenue growth in the strategic 2016, though smaller in size, and other actions are expected to
imperatives, repositioning of the core businesses, continued offset a portion of the benefit. This is taken into account in the
high levels of investment, both organic and through acquisitions, earnings per share skew for first quarter.
and remixing skills. The company had 13 percent growth as
Free cash flow realization, defined as free cash flow to income
reported (14 percent adjusted for currency) in the strategic
from continuing operations (GAAP), was 97 percent as reported
imperatives, generating $33 billion of revenue, which
in 2016 and is again expected to be in excess of 90 percent in
represented 41 percent of total revenue. The growth rate
2017. The company expects free cash flow to be essentially flat
achieved in 2016 keeps the company ahead of track of previous
year to year.
expectations of $40 billion of revenue from the strategic
imperatives in 2018. In addition, the company expects to The company expects that the 2017 GAAP tax rate will be
continue to allocate its capital efficiently and effectively to approximately 3 points lower than the operating (non-GAAP) tax
investments, and to return value to its shareholders through a rate expectation. Expectations for the operating (non-GAAP) tax
combination of dividends and share repurchases. Over the long rate are approximately 15 percent plus or minus three points,
term, in consideration of the opportunities it will continue to excluding discrete items. The rate will change year to year based
develop, the company expects to have the ability to generate on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of income tax
low single-digit revenue growth, and with a higher value business audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors
mix, high single-digit operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing
growth, with free cash flow realization of GAAP net income in and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local
the 90 to 100 percent range. taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
The company enters 2017 in a stronger position than a year ago, In January 2017, the company announced a reorganization of
even taking into account the ongoing shifts in the IT industry, its client and commercial financing business as a wholly owned
country-specific issues and opportunities, certain macro effects subsidiary, IBM Credit, LLC. The subsidiary is expected to begin
of currency and potential tax reform. In 2017, the company will accessing capital markets directly in 2017 and the company
continue to focus on growing the strategic imperatives and the expects to increase its financing business leverage from 7:1 to
transformation of its core businesses, with a continued high level 9:1. See page 81 for additional information.
of investment, although the higher-level investment that began

===== PAGE 70 =====
68 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company expects 2017 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt
to be approximately $2.9 billion, an increase of approximately securities at December 31, 2016 appear in the following table
$900 million compared to 2016. This estimate reflects current and remain unchanged from December 31, 2015. The company’s
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2016. Within total indenture governing its debt securities and its various credit
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan facilities each contain significant covenants which obligate the
cost is expected to be approximately $1.4 billion, approximately company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit the
flat versus 2016. Non-operating retirement-related plan cost is aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and
expected to be approximately $1.5 billion, an increase of leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s
approximately $900 million compared to 2016, driven by lower consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s
income from expected return on assets. Contributions for ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met.
all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s
$2.5 billion in 2017, an increase of approximately $100 million consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
compared to 2016. than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect
to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
For a discussion of new accounting standards that the company
will adopt in future periods, please see note B, “Accounting The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
Changes,” beginning on page 99. covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The
failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an
Liquidity and Capital Resources event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between and interest on the debt to which such event of default applied
$16.9 billion and $19.6 billion per year over the past five years. would become immediately due and payable.
The company provides for additional liquidity through several The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its
sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the
funding sources, a committed global credit facility and other holders to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate
committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating.
following table provides a summary of the major sources of The company’s contractual agreements governing derivative
liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2012 through 2016. instruments contain standard market clauses which can trigger
the termination of the agreement if the company’s credit rating
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2016, the
fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position
($ in billions)
was $206 million, before any applicable netting, and this
2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
position is subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period
Net cash from
based on the level of the company’s outstanding instruments
operating
activities $ 17.0 $17.0 $16.9 $17.5 $19.6 and market conditions. The company has no other contractual
arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating,
Cash and
would result in a material adverse effect on its financial position
short-term
marketable or liquidity.
securities $ 8.5 $ 8.2 $ 8.5 $11.1 $11.1
Committed Moody’s
global Standard Investors Fitch
credit facility $10.3 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0 & Poor’s Service Ratings
Senior long-term debt AA- Aa3 A+
Commercial paper A-1+ Prime-1 F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows in accordance with applicable accounting standards for
cash flow presentation on page 87 and highlights causes and
events underlying sources and uses of cash in that format
on page 47. For the purpose of running its business, the
company manages, monitors and analyzes cash flows in
a different format.

===== PAGE 71 =====
Management Discussion 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate its performance-related declines in net income and a decline in
operating results, plan share repurchase levels, strategic cash provided by trade receivables; partially offset by a
investments and assess its ability and need to incur and service reduction in cash tax payments.
debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily
In 2016, the company continued to focus its cash utilization on
available for discretionary expenditures. The company defines
returning value to shareholders including $5.3 billion in
free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the
dividends and $3.5 billion in gross common stock repurchases
change in Global Financing receivables and net capital
(23.3 million shares). In addition, $5.7 billion was utilized for
expenditures, including the investment in software. A key
15 acquisitions in 2016.
objective of the Global Financing business is to generate strong
returns on equity, and increasing receivables is the basis for Over the past five years, the company generated over $70 billion
growth. Accordingly, management considers Global Financing in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested over
receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working $16 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $65 billion
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. Therefore, to shareholders through dividends and net share repurchases.
management includes presentations of both free cash flow and The company’s performance during this period demonstrates
net cash from operating activities that exclude the effect of that there is fungibility across the elements of share
Global Financing receivables. Free cash flow guidance is derived repurchases, dividends and acquisitions. The amount of
using an estimate of profit, working capital and operational cash prospective returns to shareholders in the form of dividends and
outflows. As previously noted, the company views Global share repurchases will vary based upon several factors including
Financing receivables as a profit generating investment which each year’s operating results, capital expenditure requirements,
it seeks to maximize and therefore it is not considered research and development investments and acquisitions, as well
when formulating guidance for free cash flow. As a result, the as the factors discussed below.
company does not estimate a GAAP Net Cash from Operations
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider
expectation metric.
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2016, the Board
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
2016, after investing $3.7 billion in capital investments primarily dividend from $1.30 to $1.40 per share.
in support of cloud and cognitive, the services backlog and the
The table below represents the way in which management
upcoming new hardware product cycles, the company generated
reviews cash flow as described above.
free cash flow of $11.6 billion, a decrease of $1.5 billion
compared to 2015. The decrease was driven primarily by
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $17.0 $17.0 $ 16.9 $ 17.5 $ 19.6
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables 1.7 0.2 0.7 (1.3) (2.9)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding
Global Financing receivables 15.3 16.9 16.2 18.8 22.5
Capital expenditures, net (3.7) (3.8) (3.8) (3.8) (4.3)
Free cash flow (FCF) 11.6 13.1 12.4 15.0 18.2
Acquisitions (5.7) (3.3) (0.7) (3.1) (3.7)
Divestitures (0.5) (0.4) 2.4 0.3 0.6
Share repurchase (3.5) (4.6) (13.7) (13.9) (12.0)
Dividends (5.3) (4.9) (4.3) (4.1) (3.8)
Non-Global Financing debt 1.3 (0.1) (1.3) 3.2 0.7
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and
Global Financing debt) 2.3 0.0 2.6 2.4 (0.8)
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term
marketable securities $ 0.3 $ (0.3) $ (2.6) $ (0.1) $ (0.8)
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations 97% 98% 79% 89% 107%

===== PAGE 72 =====
70 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund
dynamics discussed previously include significant changes in its current domestic operations and obligations, including
operating results, material changes in geographic sources of investing and financing activities such as dividends and debt
cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future service. The company’s U.S. operations generate substantial
pension funding requirements during periods of severe downturn cash flows, and, in those circumstances where the company has
in the capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether additional cash requirements in the U.S., the company has
any litigation has such an adverse impact will depend on a several liquidity options available. These options may include
number of variables, which are more completely described in the ability to borrow additional funds at reasonable interest
note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 127 to rates, utilizing its committed global credit facility, repatriating
129. With respect to pension funding, in 2016, the company certain foreign earnings and utilizing intercompany loans with
contributed $507 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit plans certain foreign subsidiaries.
compared to $514 million in 2015. As highlighted in the
The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax
Contractual Obligations table, the company expects to make
income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely
legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S.
reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries,
plans of approximately $2.3 billion in the next five years. The
and accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been
2017 contributions are currently expected to be approximately
made on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The
$500 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related
company periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to
plans is expected to be approximately $2.5 billion in 2017, an
the extent that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability.
increase of approximately $100 million compared to 2016.
Quantification of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with
Financial market performance could increase the legally
indefinitely reinvested earnings is not practicable. While the
mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries
company currently does not have a need to repatriate funds held
that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status.
by its foreign subsidiaries, if these funds are needed for
The company is not quantifying any further impact from pension
operations and obligations in the U.S., the company could elect
funding because it is not possible to predict future movements
to repatriate these funds which could result in a reassessment
in the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations.
of the company’s policy and increased tax expense.
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law
in 2006, and, among other things, increased the funding
requirements for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning
after December 31, 2007. No mandatory contribution is required
for the U.S. defined benefit plan in 2017 as of December
31, 2016.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Payments Due In
Total Contractual
Payment Stream 2017 2018–19 2020–21 After 2021
Long-term debt obligations $41,138 $ 6,238 $10,109 $ 8,506 $16,284
Interest on long-term debt obligations 10,372 1,240 1,843 1,329 5,960
Capital (fi nance) lease obligations 7 1 4 2 —
Operating lease obligations 6,883 1,414 2,546 1,812 1,111
Purchase obligations 3,334 799 1,211 783 541
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defi ned benefi t plan pension funding
(mandated)* 2,300 500 1,000 800 —
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,675 181 402 456 636
Long-term termination benefi ts 1,322 428 183 117 595
Tax reserves** 3,066 966
Divestiture related 488 302 167 18 —
Other 1,117 91 142 99 785
Total $71,702 $12,160 $17,607 $13,921 $25,913
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2021 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $966 million of the liability is
expected to be settled within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of our income tax liability cannot be reasonably
estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not
expected to be due within the next 12 months.

===== PAGE 73 =====
Management Discussion 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table Critical Accounting Estimates
excluding the effects of time value, and therefore, may not equal The application of GAAP requires the company to make
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial estimates and assumptions about certain items and future
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the events that directly affect its reported financial condition. The
previous table as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section
includes deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability are those that the company considers to be the most critical to
benefits and other sundry items. Certain obligations related to its financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered
the company’s divestitures are included. critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is
material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved,
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase
and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet
estimate and assumption is material to the company’s financial
any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the
condition. Senior management has discussed the development,
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled,
selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments
Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The company’s
even if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or
significant accounting policies are described in note A,
services (take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 90 to 99.
services is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is
included in the previous table. If the obligation is cancelable, A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that
but the company would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated
amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obligation. and provides material information to investors. The amounts
Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts used to assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are
are also included in the table as they represent the portion of included to allow users of the Annual Report to understand a
each contract that is a firm commitment. general direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates
and do not represent management’s predictions of variability.
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into
For all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a
rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and estimates require
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or
regular review and adjustment.
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms.
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased Pension Assumptions
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the
purchase obligations. measurement of the benefit obligation to employees and net
periodic pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount
effective interest rate at December 31, 2016, plus the interest rates and expected return on plan assets.
rate spread associated with that debt, if any.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet
benefit obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release 67
rate assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-
(FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis
based defined benefit plan, by 20 basis points to 3.80 percent
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con-
on December 31, 2016. This change will increase pre-tax cost
tractual Obligations.”
and expense recognized in 2017 by an estimated $61 million.
At December 31, 2016, the company had no off-balance sheet If the discount rate assumption for the PPP had increased by
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a 20 basis points on December 31, 2016, pre-tax cost and
material current or future effect on financial condition, changes expense recognized in 2017 would have decreased by an
in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of estimated $63 million. Changes in the discount rate assumptions
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. would impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact the company’s
See the table on page 70 for the company’s contractual funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis
obligations and note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on point increase or decrease in the discount rate would cause a
page 129 for detailed information about the company’s corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s
guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification PBO of an estimated $1.2 billion based upon December 31,
arrangements. The company does not have retained interests 2016 data.
in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material
off-balance sheet interests or instruments.

===== PAGE 74 =====
72 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is calculating these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are
used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates.
Expected returns on plan assets are calculated based on the If these estimates were changed by 10 percent in 2016, net
market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes income would have been impacted by $79 million (excluding
in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year Global Financing receivables).
period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic
pension (income)/cost. The differences between the actual Costs to Complete Service Contracts
return on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan The company enters into numerous service contracts through
assets are recognized over five years in the expected return on its services businesses. During the contractual period, revenue,
plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate
as a component of actuarial (gains)/losses, which are recognized profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the
over the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of
depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC
thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
value of plan assets, as provided by accounting standards. remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its POC-
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan based services contracts in order to determine whether the
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption company to estimate the future costs to complete each contract
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of are future labor costs, future product costs and expected
$263 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded
pension (income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities
December 31, 2016 and assuming no contributions are made in were $13 million and $12 million at December 31, 2016 and
2017). 2015, respectively.
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required,
Income Taxes
by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and
that differ from the estimates may result in more or less future
numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments
company funding into the pension plans than is planned by
are required in determining the consolidated provision for
management. Impacts of these types of changes on the
income taxes.
company’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would
vary depending upon the status of each respective plan. During the ordinary course of business, there are many
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension
determination is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement
tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect
and interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized
experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any
when, despite the company’s belief that its tax return positions
given year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of
are supportable, the company believes that certain positions
economic and other factors.
may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. The
For additional information on the company’s pension plans and company believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate
the development of these assumptions, see Note S, “Retirement- for all open audit years based on its assessment of many factors,
Related Benefits,” on pages 143 and 144. including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This
assessment relies on estimates and assumptions, and may
involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To
Revenue Recognition
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related the extent that new information becomes available which causes
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of
existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically,
complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions income tax expense in the period in which such determination
may require significant contract interpretation to determine the is made.
appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables Significant judgment is also required in determining any
specified in a multiple-deliverable arrangement should be valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In
treated as separate units of accounting. Other significant assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management
judgments include determining whether IBM or a reseller is considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including
acting as the principal in a transaction and whether separate past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and
contracts are considered part of one arrangement. the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability that the company changes its determination as to the amount of
to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. deferred tax assets that can be realized, the company will adjust
The company considers various factors, including a review of its valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to income
specific transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
historical experience and market and economic conditions when

===== PAGE 75 =====
Management Discussion 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring goodwill impairment test. This quantitative test is required only
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, if the company concludes that it is more likely than not that
the timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount.
and local taxes and the effects of various global income
In the fourth quarter, the company performed its annual goodwill
tax strategies.
impairment analysis. The qualitative assessment illustrated
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ evidence of a potential impairment triggering event as a result
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations of the financial performance of the Systems reporting unit. The
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have quantitative analysis resulted in no impairment as the reporting
decreased/improved by $123 million in 2016. unit’s estimated fair value exceeded the carrying amount by over
100 percent.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment Loss Contingencies
accounting requires the use of significant estimates and The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for business proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status
combinations requires the company to estimate the fair value of of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial
assets acquired, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding
interest in the acquiree to properly allocate purchase price is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably
consideration between assets that are depreciated and estimated, the company accrues a liability for the estimated
amortized from goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets. loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination
Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure
indefinite-lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to
flows to those assets or group of assets and if required, an these matters, accruals are based only on the best information
estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. The available at the time. As additional information becomes
company’s estimates are based upon assumptions believed to available, the company reassesses the potential liability related
be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and to its pending claims and litigation, and may revise its estimates.
unpredictable. These valuations require the use of These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could
management’s assumptions, which would not reflect have a material impact on the company’s results of operations
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur. and financial position.
Valuation of Goodwill Global Financing Receivables Allowance for
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and Credit Losses
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. In 2015, the port folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A
company elected to perform the first step of the quantitative description of the methods used by management to estimate
test to compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its the amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A,
carrying value instead of first conducting a qualitative “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 98. Factors that could
assessment. In 2016, the company resumed the assessment result in actual receivable losses that are materially different
of qualitative risk factors to determine whether it is more likely from the estim ated reserve include sharp changes in the
than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its economy, or a significant change in the economic health of a
carrying amount. particular client that represents a concentration in Global
Financing’s receivables portfolio.
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its reporting
units that carry goodwill including relevant events and To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s
circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units. estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global
Examples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic, Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income
industry and market conditions; as well as other individual from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher
factors such as: or lower by an estimated $44 million depending upon whether
the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than
• A loss of key personnel;
the estimates.
• A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of
the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition; Residual Value
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment
• A significant pending litigation;
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates
• A more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as
or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or operating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair
otherwise disposed of; and value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing
the current market for new and used equipment, and obtaining
• An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
forward-looking product information such as marketing plans

===== PAGE 76 =====
74 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
and technological innovations. Residual value estimates are as-reported basis and an increase of approximately $150 million
periodically reviewed and “other than temporary” declines in on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same mathematical
estimated future residual values are recognized upon exercise resulted in a decrease of approximately $900 million
identification. Anticipated increases in future residual values are in 2015 on an as-reported basis and a decrease of approximately
not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. $1,000 million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company
views these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to its
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from
as-reported financial results. Considering the operational
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment
responses mentioned above, movements of exchange rates, and
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology
the nature and timing of hedging instruments, it is difficult to
innovations and any resulting changes in the useful lives of
predict future currency impacts on any particular period, but the
used equipment.
company believes it could be substantially less than
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than the theoretical maximum given the competitive pressure in
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s the marketplace.
segment pre-tax income and the company’s income from
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
continuing operations before income taxes for 2016 would have
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
been lower by an estimated $72 million. If the actual residual
translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations.
value recovery is higher than management’s estimates, the
Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities
increase in income will be realized at the end of lease when the
by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars.
equipment is remarketed.
The company continues to monitor the economic conditions in
Currency Rate Fluctuations Venezuela. In mid-February 2016, changes to the currency
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. exchange systems were announced which eliminated the SICAD
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial exchange rate and replaced the SIMADI rate with DICOM, which
position. At December 31, 2016, currency changes resulted in is expected to be a floating exchange rate. The company
assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies being recorded a pre-tax loss of $43 million in the first quarter of 2016
translated into less dollars than at year-end 2015. The company in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of
uses financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency Earnings as a result of the elimination of SICAD and devaluation
risks related to financing transactions and other foreign of the new exchange. The system for currency exchange in
currency-based transactions. Venezuela has remained constant through the fourth quarter
and the company continued to use the SIMADI rate since the
During periods of sustained movements in currency, the DICOM rate had not been instrumented by the authorities. Total
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates. For pre-tax loss for 2016 was $48 million. The company’s net assets
example, when pricing offerings in the marketplace, the denominated in local currency were $11 million at December
company may use some of the advantage from a weakening U.S.
31, 2016. The company’s operations in Venezuela comprised
dollar to improve its position competitively, and price more less than 1 percent of total 2016, 2015 and 2014 revenue,
aggressively to win the business, essentially passing on a portion respectively.
of the currency advantage to its customers. Competition will
frequently take the same action. Consequently, the company
Market Risk
believes that some of the currency-based changes in cost impact
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the
the prices charged to clients. The company also maintains
company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to
currency hedging programs for cash management purposes
the market risk associated with interest rate and currency
which temporarily mitigate, but do not eliminate, the volatility
movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar
of currency impacts on the company’s financial results.
denominated assets and liabilities, other examples of risk
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non- include collectibility of accounts receivable and recoverability
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. of residual values on leased assets.
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency”
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established
reflect adjustments based upon a simple mathematical formula.
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse
However, this constant currency methodology that the company
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result,
utilizes to disclose this information does not incorporate any
the company does not anticipate any material losses from
operational actions that management may take in reaction to
these risks.
fluctuating currency rates. Currency movements impacted the
company’s year-to-year revenue and earnings per share growth The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business
in 2016. Based on the currency rate movements in 2016, total and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations,
revenue decreased 2.2 percent as reported and 1.6 percent at contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and
constant currency versus 2015. On an income from continuing currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through
operations before income taxes basis, these translation impacts the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives,
offset by the net impact of hedging activities resulted in a as described in note D, “Financial Instruments—Derivative
theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or sourcing actions) Financial Instruments,” on pages 110 through 114.
increase of approximately $125 million in 2016, on an

===== PAGE 77 =====
Management Discussion 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest
a sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s debt
exposures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
and other financial instruments.
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash At December 31, 2016, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against
equivalents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would
loans, commercial financing and installment payment result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial
receivables, investments, long-term and short-term debt and instruments of $132 million as compared with a decrease of
derivative financial instruments. The company’s derivative $74 million at December 31, 2015. Conversely, a 10 percent
financial instruments generally include interest rate swaps, stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other
foreign currency swaps and forward contracts. variables held constant, would result in an increase in the fair
value of the company’s financial instruments of $132 million
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the compared with an increase of $74 million at December 31, 2015.
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes
in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-
Financing Risks
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign
See the “Description of Business” on page 34 for a discussion
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present
of the financing risks associated with the Global Financing
value of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates
business and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
that are attributable to the market risk being measured. The
discount rates used for the present value computations were
Cybersecurity
selected based on market interest and foreign currency
The company’s approach to cybersecurity draws on the depth
exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2016 and 2015. The
and breadth of its global capabilities, both in terms of its
differences in this comparison are the hypothetical gains or
offerings to clients and its internal approaches to risk
losses associated with each type of risk.
management. The company has commercial solutions that
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not deliver identity and access management, data security,
necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the application security, network security and endpoint security.
company would incur under normal market conditions because, IBM’s solutions include security intelligence, analytics and
due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific forensic tools that can collect information on customer IT
market risk factor are held constant. In addition, the results of security events and vulnerabilities and provide detailed
the model are constrained by the fact that certain items are information to customers about potential threats and security
specifically excluded from the analysis, while the financial posture. The company’s services businesses offer professional
instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items solutions for security from assessment and incident response
are included by definition. Excluded items include short-term to deployment and resource augmentation. In addition, the
and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing company offers managed and outsourced security solutions
leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the from multiple security operations centers around the world.
company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a Finally, security is embedded in a multitude of IBM offerings
consequence, reported changes in the values of some of the through secure engineering processes and by critical functions
financial instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity (encryption, access control, etc.) in servers, storage, software,
analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes in the service, and other solutions.
values of the items that those instruments are designed to
From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi-
finance or hedge.
faceted risk-management approach to identify and address
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2016 and cybersecurity risks. The company has established policies and
2015, are as follows: procedures that provide the foundation upon which IBM’s
infrastructure and data are managed. IBM performs ongoing
Interest Rate Risk assessments regarding its technical controls and its methods
At December 31, 2016, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The
interest rates with all other variables held constant would result company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to
in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial defend against cybersecurity attacks and threats on networks,
instruments of $147 million as compared with a decrease of end-user devices, servers, applications and cloud solutions. The
$69 million at December 31, 2015. A 10 percent increase in the company also has a global incident response process to respond
levels of interest rates with all other variables held constant to cybersecurity threats. In addition, the company utilizes a
would result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s combination of online training, educational tools, social media
financial instruments of $142 million as compared to an increase and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security
of $66 million at December 31, 2015. Changes in the relative awareness and responsibility among its workforce.
sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s financial instrument

===== PAGE 78 =====
76 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Employees and Related Workforce Results of Operations
(In thousands) ($ in millions)
For the year ended For the year ended
December 31: 2016 December 31: 2016 2015 2014
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 380.3 External revenue $1,692 $1,840 $2,034
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 9.6 Internal revenue 1,802 2,637 2,488
Complementary 24.5 Total revenue 3,494 4,477 4,522
Cost 1,146 1,412 1,428
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in Gross profi t $2,348 $3,065 $3,094
more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business Gross profi t margin 67.2% 68.5% 68.4%
to the higher value segments of enterprise IT. The company
Pre-tax income $1,656 $2,364 $2,189
continues to remix its skills and people needs to match the best
After-tax income* $1,126 $1,572 $1,462
opportunities in the marketplace.
Return on equity* 30.6% 41.5% 36.8%
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent
* See page 80 for the details of the after-tax income and return on
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and
equity calculation.
limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific
business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
Total revenue in 2016 decreased $983 million versus 2015 as
a result of:
GLOBAL FINANCING
• A decline in external revenue of 8.0 percent (down
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as
6.9 percent adjusted for currency), due to a decrease in
a stand-alone entity.
financing revenue (down 11.2 percent to $1,231 million),
In 2016, the Global Financing business remained focused on its partially offset by an increase in used equipment sales
core competencies–providing IT financing to the company’s revenue (up 1.6 percent to $461 million); and
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing
• A decline in internal revenue of 31.7 percent, due
delivered external revenue of $1,692 million and total revenue
to decreases in used equipment sales revenue
of $3,494 million. Total pre-tax income of $1,656 million
(down 35.5 percent to $1,486 million) and financing
decreased 29.9 percent compared to 2015 and return on equity
revenue (down 5.2 percent to $316 million).
was 30.6 percent.
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact The decrease in external financing revenue was due to lower
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s asset yields and a decrease in average asset balance, as well as
results are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly a decline in remarketing lease revenue. The decrease in internal
impact Global Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing financing revenue was primarily due to lower asset yields,
both financing revenue and the associated borrowing costs. partially offset by an increase in average asset balance.
Originations, which determine the asset base of Global
Global Financing gross profit decreased 23.4 percent in 2016
Financing’s annuity-like business, are impacted by IBM’s non-
compared to 2015, due to decreases in used equipment sales
Global Financing sales and services volumes and Global
gross profit and financing gross profit. The gross profit margin
Financing’s participation rates. Participation rates are the
declined 1.3 points compared to 2015 due to a decrease in
propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their transactions through
equipment sales margin, partially offset by an increase in
Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or financing
financing margin.
through a third party.

===== PAGE 79 =====
Management Discussion 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2015 decreased $45 million versus 2014 as Financial Condition
a result of: Balance Sheet
• A decrease in external revenue of 9.5 percent (up 1.5 ($ in millions)
percent adjusted for currency), driven by decreases in At December 31: 2016 2015
financing revenue (down 10.2 percent to $1,386 million) Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,844 $ 1,555
and used equipment sales revenue (down 7.6 percent to
Net investment in sales-type
$454 million); partially offset by and direct fi nancing leases 6,893 7,594
• An increase in internal revenue of 6.0 percent driven by an Equipment under operating leases—
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 10.7 percent external clients (1) 548 605
to $2,303 million); partially offset by a decrease in Client loans 11,478 12,525
financing revenue (down 18.3 percent to $334 million). Total client fi nancing assets 18,920 20,725
Commercial fi nancing receivables 9,700 8,948
The decrease in external and internal financing revenue was Intercompany fi nancing receivables (2) (3) 4,959 4,245
primarily due to decreases in the average asset balance and Other receivables 196 308
yields, as well as a decrease in remarketing lease revenue.
Other assets 872 378
Global Financing gross profit decreased 0.9 percent compared Total assets $36,492 $36,157
to 2014 due to a decrease in financing gross profit, partially Intercompany payables (2) $ 2,189 $ 3,089
offset by an increase in used equipment sales gross profit. The
Debt (4) 27,859 27,205
gross profit margin was flat compared to 2014 with an increase
Other liabilities 2,631 2,134
in equipment sales margin, offset by a shift in mix away from
Total liabilities 32,679 32,428
higher margin financing and a decrease in financing margin.
Total equity 3,812 3,729
Global Financing pre-tax income decreased 29.9 percent in 2016
Total liabilities and equity $36,492 $36,157
versus 2015, following an increase of 8.0 percent in 2015 versus
2014. The decrease in 2016 was driven by a decrease in gross (1) Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on
profit ($717 million) and an increase in selling, general and products purchased from the company’s product divisions which is
eliminated in IBM’s consolidated results
administrative expenses ($66 million), partially offset by a
(2) Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results
decrease in financing receivables provisions ($75 million). The
and therefore does not appear on page 86
increase in 2015 was driven by decreases in selling, general and
(3) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are
administrative expenses ($107 million) and financing receivables leveraged at the value in the table using Global Financing debt.
provisions ($96 million); partially offset by the decrease in gross (4) Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and
profit ($29 million). The decrease in financing receivable external debt. A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the
provisions in 2016 was due to lower specific reserve company’s internal business, or related to intercompany mark-up
embedded in the Global Financing assets.
requirements in China, partially offset by higher reserves in
Brazil in the current year. At December 31, 2016, the overall
allowance for credit losses coverage rate was 1.6 percent, a
decrease of 54 basis points year over year primarily due to a
write-off of previously reserved receivables.
The decrease in return on equity from 2015 to 2016 was driven
by the decrease in net income, partially offset by a lower average
equity balance. The increase in return on equity from 2014 to
2015 was driven by the increase in net income and a lower
average equity balance.

===== PAGE 80 =====
78 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Sources and Uses of Funds Originations
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client The following are total financing originations:
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end
($ in millions)
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services,
For the year ended
but also include OEM equipment, software and services to meet
December 31: 2016 2015 2014
IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets
Client fi nancing $11,703 $14,444 $15,099
are primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases
for systems products, as well as loans and installment payment Commercial fi nancing 42,666 40,571 43,664
plans for systems, software and services with terms up to seven Total $54,370 $55,015 $58,762
years. Global Financing’s client loans and installment payment
plans are primarily for software and services and are unsecured.
In 2016, cash collection of client financing assets exceeded new
These agreements are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate
financing originations, while new financing originations of
the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are
commercial financing exceeded collections. This resulted in a
taken to mitigate risks, which include covenants to protect
net decline in financing assets from December 2015. The
against credit deterioration during the life of the obligation.
decrease in originations in 2016 versus 2015, as well as the
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory decrease in originations in 2015 versus 2014, was due to
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers declining volumes. Internal loan financing with Technology
of IBM and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory financing Services & Cloud Platforms is executed under a loan facility and
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 is not considered originations.
days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2016 was deployed to
are also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to
pay intercompany payables and dividends to IBM as well as
evaluate the associated risk.
external payables to business partners and OEM suppliers.
In addition to the actions previously described, the company has
a long-standing practice of taking mitigation actions, in certain
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
circumstances, to transfer credit risk to third parties, including
The following table presents external financing receivables
credit insurance, financial guarantees, non-recourse borrowings,
excluding residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
transfer of receivables recorded as true sale in accordance
with accounting guidance or sales of equipment under ($ in millions)
operating lease. At December 31: 2016 2015
At December 31, 2016, substantially all financing assets were Gross fi nancing receivables $28,043 $29,086
IT related assets, and approximately 52 percent of the total Specifi c allowance for credit losses 335 517
external portfolio was with investment grade clients with no Unallocated allowance for credit losses 103 93
direct exposure to consumers. The reduction in investment
Total allowance for credit losses 438 610
grade year to year (3 points) was driven primarily by rating
Net fi nancing receivables $27,605 $28,475
changes within the existing portfolio, not by changing the
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.6% 2.1%
company’s approach to the market. This investment grade
percentage is based on credit ratings of the companies in the
portfolio. Additionally, as noted above, the company takes Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables Allowance
actions to transfer exposure to third parties. On that basis, the for Credit Losses
investment grade content would increase by 14 points to ($ in millions)
66 percent, also a reduction of 3 points year to year. January 1, Allowance Additions/ December 31,
2016 Used* (Reductions) Other** 2016
$610 $(236 ) $69 $(5 ) $438
* Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were written
off during the period
** Primarily represents translation adjustments

===== PAGE 81 =====
Management Discussion 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed
was 1.6 percent at December 31, 2016 and 2.1 percent at residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating
December 31, 2015. In the fourth quarter of 2016, write-offs of leases at December 31, 2016 and 2015. In addition, the table
$188 million of receivables previously reserved, primarily in presents the residual value as a percentage of the related
China, was the primary driver of the 35 percent reduction in the original amount financed and a run out of when the unguaranteed
specific allowance, from $517 million at December 31, 2015, to residual value assigned to equipment on leases at December
$335 million at December 31, 2016. See note F, “Financing 31, 2016 is expected to be returned to the company. In addition
Receivables” on pages 114 to 118 for additional information. to the unguaranteed residual value, on a limited basis, Global
Unallocated reserves increased 10 percent from $93 million at Financing will obtain guarantees of the future value of the
December 31, 2015, to $103 million at December 31, 2016, due equipment to be returned at end of lease. While primarily
to higher general reserve requirements in Brazil. focused on IBM products, guarantees are also obtained for
certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees are
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was $69 million for 2016,
included in minimum lease payments as provided for by
compared to $144 million for 2015. The year-to-year decrease
accounting standards in the determination of lease
in bad debt expense was due to lower specific reserve
classifications for the covered equipment and provide protection
requirements in China, partially offset by higher reserve
against risk of loss arising from declines in equipment values
requirements in Brazil in the current year.
for these assets.
Residual Value The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to lease as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating
accurately project future equipment values at lease inception. lease. The aggregate asset values associated with the
Global Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for guarantees of sales-type leases were $329 million and
the IBM products under lease. Based upon this product $811 million for the financing transactions originated during
information, Global Financing continually monitors projections the years ended December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015,
of future equipment values and compares them with the residual respectively. In 2016, the residual value guarantee program
values reflected in the portfolio. resulted in the company recognizing approximately $220 million
of revenue that would otherwise have been recognized in future
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by periods as operating lease revenue. If the company had chosen
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment to not participate in a residual value guarantee program in 2016
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current and prior years, the 2016 impact would be substantially
clients. Sales of equipment include equipment returned at the
mitigated by the effect of prior year asset values being
end of a lease, surplus internal equipment, or used equipment recognized as operating lease revenue in the current year. The
purchased externally. These sales represented 55.7 percent and aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of direct
61.6 percent of Global Financing’s revenue in 2016 and 2015, financing leases were $169 million and $185 million for the
respectively. The decrease was due to a lower volume of
financing transactions originated during the years ended
used equipment sales for internal transactions. The gross
December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The associated
profit margins on total equipment sales were 60.5 percent and
aggregate guaranteed future values at the scheduled end of
66.0 percent in 2016 and 2015, respectively. The decrease in
lease were $19 million and $54 million for the financing
the gross profit margin was primarily driven by a shift in mix transactions originated during the years ended December 31,
away from higher margin internal equipment sales. 2016 and 2015, respectively. The cost of guarantees was
$2 million and $5 million for the years ended December 31, 2016
and 2015, respectively.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total Estimated Run Out of 2016 Balance
2020 and
At December 31: 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Beyond
Sales-type and direct fi nancing leases $ 645 $ 585 $110 $167 $187 $121
Operating leases 144 140 50 42 33 15
Total unguaranteed residual value $ 789 $ 725 $160 $209 $220 $136
Related original amount fi nanced $14,223 $12,845
Percentage 5.6% 5.6%

===== PAGE 82 =====
80 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt contract by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company
measures Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and
At December 31: 2016 2015
accordingly, interest expense relating to debt supporting Global
Debt-to-equity ratio 7.3x 7.3x
Financing’s external client and internal business is included in
the “Global Financing Results of Operations” on page 76 and in
The debt used to fund Global Financing assets is composed of note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 150 to 154. In the
intercompany loans and external debt. Total debt changes company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the external
generally correspond with the level of client and commercial debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financing’s
financing receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents, internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of
the change in intercompany and external payables and the financing to interest expense.
change in intercompany investment from IBM. The terms of the The following table provides additional information on total
intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes
match the term and currency underlying the financing receivable internal loans and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support
and are based on arm’s-length pricing. of long-term services contracts and other internal activity.
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the The company believes these assets should be appropriately
company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under leveraged in line with the overall Global Financing
business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2016 December 31, 2015
Global Financing Segment $27,859 $27,205
Debt to support external clients $24,034 $23,934
Debt to support internal clients 3,825 3,271
Non-Global Financing Segments 14,309 12,684
Debt supporting operations 18,134 15,955
Intercompany activity (3,825) (3,271)
Total company debt $42,169 $39,890
Liquidity and Capital Resources Return on Equity
Global Financing is a segment of the company, and therefore is
($ in millions)
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access
At December 31: 2016 2015
to capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was
Numerator
deployed to pay dividends to the company in order to maintain
an appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. Global Financing after-tax
income (1) * $1,126 $1,572
Denominator
Average Global Financing equity (2) ** $3,680 $3,785
Global Financing return on equity (1) /(2) 30.6% 41.5%
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on
Global Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision
for income taxes is determined on a consolidated basis
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last
five quarters

===== PAGE 83 =====
Management Discussion 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Looking Forward The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of
funding capacity which enables the company to be well provision for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to
positioned in the current environment. Global Financing’s assets apply rigorous credit policies in both the origination of new
and new financing volumes are IBM and OEM products and business and the evaluation of the existing portfolio and will take
services financed to the company’s clients and business risk mitigation actions when necessary.
partners, and substantially all financing assets are IT related
As previously discussed, Global Financing has historically
assets which provide a stable base of business for future growth.
been able to manage residual value risk both through insight
Global Financing’s offerings are competitive and available to
into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its
clients as a result of the company’s borrowing cost and access
remarketing business.
to the capital markets. Overall, Global Financing’s originations
will be dependent upon the demand for IT products and services Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the key
as well as client participation rates. risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with
product and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper
management of the business going forward, even during periods
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A
of uncertainty with respect to the global economy.
protracted period where IBM could not access the capital
markets would likely lead to a slowdown in originations.
As part of its transformation, the company changed the structure
of its financing business in January 2017 to drive operational
benefits. The client and commercial financing businesses have
been reorganized as a wholly owned subsidiary, IBM Credit LLC.
This will drive operational benefits by consolidating the
operations of the financing business. Debt will be issued directly
out of the new entity, and the new entity is expected to be able
to access the capital markets later in 2017. The financing
business expects to increase its leverage from approximately
7:1 to 9:1, which represents an increase of approximately $600
million in Global Financing debt. The Global Financing segment
remains unchanged, and will continue to include the client and
commercial financing businesses, as well as the hardware
remanufacturing and remarketing business.
Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency
fluctuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit.
The company’s interest rate risk management policy, however,
combined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should
mitigate gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates.

===== PAGE 84 =====
82 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM adequate internal control over financial reporting of the
management. The accompanying financial statements have company. Internal control over financial reporting is a process
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
generally accepted in the United States of America, applying reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
certain estimates and judgments as required. statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists,
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
control environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we
United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of
carefully select and train our employees, develop and
the company are being made only in accordance with
disseminate written policies and procedures, provide
authorizations of management and directors of the company;
appropriate communication channels and foster an environment
and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
conducive to the effective functioning of controls. We believe
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition
that it is essential for the company to conduct its business affairs
of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
in accordance with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in
financial statements.
the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines,
translated into numerous languages, are distributed to Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also,
internal programs to assure that they are understood projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods
and followed. are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is
responsible for recommending to the Board the independent Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria
year, subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013)
meets regularly and privately with the independent registered issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
public accounting firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation,
well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, management concluded that the company’s internal control over
internal control structure and financial reporting matters. financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2016.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over
financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer
February 28, 2O17
Martin J. Schroeter
Senior Vice President and
Chief Financial Officer
February 28, 2O17

===== PAGE 85 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
Directors of International Business designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
Machines Corporation: reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated statements of statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
Financial Position and the related consolidated statements of accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control
Earnings, Comprehensive Income, Changes in Equity and Cash over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
Flows present fairly, in all material respects, the financial that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
position of International Business Machines Corporation and its detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
subsidiaries at December 31, 2016 and December 31, 2015 and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable
the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2016 in preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control with authorizations of management and directors of the
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2016, based on company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use,
issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organi zations of the or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material
Treadway Commission (COSO) (2013). The Company’s effect on the financial statements.
management is responsible for these financial statements, for
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also,
and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods
over financial reporting, included in the accompanying
are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of
Reporting appearing on page 82. Our responsibility is to express
compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
opinions on these financial statements and on the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting based on our integrated
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with the
standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board
(United States). Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
whether the financial statements are free of material New York, New York
misstatement and whether effective internal control over February 28, 2O17
financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our
audits of the financial statements included examining, on a test
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements, assessing the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management, and evaluating
the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit of internal
control over financial reporting included obtaining an
understanding of internal control over financial reporting,
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary
in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinions.

===== PAGE 86 =====
84 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2016 2015 2014
Revenue
Services $51,268 $49,911 $55,673
Sales 26,942 29,967 35,063
Financing 1,710 1,864 2,057
Total revenue T 79,919 81,741 92,793
Cost
Services 34,021 33,126 36,034
Sales 6,559 6,920 9,312
Financing 1,044 1,011 1,040
Total cost 41,625 41,057 46,386
Gross profi t 38,294 40,684 46,407
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 21,069 20,430 23,180
Research, development and engineering O 5,751 5,247 5,437
Intellectual property and custom development income (1,631) (682) (742)
Other (income) and expense 145 (724) (1,938)
Interest expense D&J 630 468 484
Total expense and other (income) 25,964 24,740 26,421
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 12,330 15,945 19,986
Provision for income taxes N 449 2,581 4,234
Income from continuing operations 11,881 13,364 15,751
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax C (9) (174) (3,729)
Net income $11,872 $13,190 $12,022
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations P $ 12.39 $ 13.60 $ 15.59
Discontinued operations P (0.01) (0.18) (3.69)
Total P $ 12.38 $ 13.42 $ 11.90
Basic
Continuing operations P $ 12.44 $ 13.66 $ 15.68
Discontinued operations P (0.01) (0.18) (3.71)
Total P $ 12.43 $ 13.48 $ 11.97
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 958,714,097 982,700,267 1,010,000,480
Basic 955,422,530 978,744,523 1,004,272,584
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 87 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2016 2015 2014
Net income $11,872 $13,190 $12,022
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L (20) (1,379) (1,636)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (38) (54) (29)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to net income 34 86 5
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (3) 32 (24)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 243 618 958
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to net income 102 (1,072) (97)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges 345 (454) 861
Retirement-related benefi t plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) — 6 1
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,490) (2,963) (9,799)
Curtailments and settlements (16) 33 24
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (107) (100) (114)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,764 3,304 2,531
Total retirement-related benefi t plans 150 279 (7,357)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L 472 (1,523) (8,156)
Income tax (expense)/benefi t related to items of other comprehensive income L (263) (208) 1,883
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L 209 (1,731) (6,274)
Total comprehensive income $12,081 $11,459 $ 5,748
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 88 =====
86 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2016 2015
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 7,826 $ 7,686
Marketable securities D 701 508
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $290 in 2016 and $367 in 2015) 9,182 8,333
Short-term fi nancing receivables (net of allowances of $337 in 2016 and $490 in 2015) F 19,006 19,020
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $48 in 2016 and $51 in 2015) 1,057 1,201
Inventories E 1,553 1,551
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 4,564 4,205
Total current assets 43,888 42,504
Property, plant and equipment G 30,133 29,342
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 19,303 18,615
Property, plant and equipment—net G 10,830 10,727
Long-term fi nancing receivables (net of allowances of $101 in 2016 and $118 in 2015) F 9,021 10,013
Prepaid pension assets S 3,034 1,734
Deferred taxes N 5,224 4,822
Goodwill I 36,199 32,021
Intangible assets—net I 4,688 3,487
Investments and sundry assets H 4,585 5,187
Total assets $117,470 $110,495
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 3,235 $ 2,847
Short-term debt D&J 7,513 6,461
Accounts payable 6,209 6,028
Compensation and benefi ts 3,577 3,560
Deferred income 11,035 11,021
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,705 4,353
Total current liabilities 36,275 34,269
Long-term debt D&J 34,655 33,428
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefi t obligations S 17,070 16,504
Deferred income 3,600 3,771
Other liabilities K 7,477 8,099
Total liabilities 99,078 96,071
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 53,935 53,262
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2016—2,225,116,815; 2015—2,221,223,449)
Retained earnings 152,759 146,124
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2016—1,279,249,412; 2015—1,255,494,724) (159,050) (155,518)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (29,398) (29,607)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 18,246 14,262
Noncontrolling interests A 146 162
Total equity 18,392 14,424
Total liabilities and equity $117,470 $110,495
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 89 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $11,872 $13,190 $12,022
Adjustments to reconcile net income
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 2,837 2,662 3,145
Amortization of intangibles 1,544 1,193 1,347
Stock-based compensation 544 468 512
Deferred taxes (1,132) 1,387 (237)
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other 62 481 (1,535)
Loss on microelectronics business disposal — 71 3,381
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including fi nancing receivables) 712 812 1,270
Retirement related 54 (22) (655)
Inventories (14) 133 (39)
Other assets/other liabilities 282 (3,448) (1,886)
Accounts payable 197 81 (456)
Net cash provided by operating activities 16,958 17,008 16,868
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (3,567) (3,579) (3,740)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 424 370 404
Investment in software (583) (572) (443)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (5,917) (3,073) (2,338)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 5,692 2,842 2,493
Non-operating fi nance receivables—net (891) (398) (1,078)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (5,679) (3,349) (656)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred (454) (401) 2,357
Net cash used in investing activities (10,976) (8,159) (3,001)
Cash flows from fi nancing activities
Proceeds from new debt 9,132 5,540 8,180
Payments to settle debt (6,395) (5,622) (4,644)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 26 101 (1,753)
Common stock repurchases (3,502) (4,609) (13,679)
Common stock transactions—other 204 322 709
Cash dividends paid (5,256) (4,897) (4,265)
Net cash used in fi nancing activities (5,791) (9,166) (15,452)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents (51) (473) (655)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents 140 (790) (2,240)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 7,686 8,476 10,716
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $ 7,826 $ 7,686 $ 8,476
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 1,078 $ 2,657 $ 5,748
Interest paid on debt $ 1,158 $ 995 $ 1,061
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 90 =====
88 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2014
Equity, January 1, 2014 $51,594 $130,042 $(137,242) $(21,602) $22,792 $137 $22,929
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 12,022 12,022 12,022
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) (6,274) (6,274) (6,274)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 5,748 $ 5,748
Cash dividends paid—
common stock (4,265) (4,265) (4,265)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (7,687,026
shares) 977 977 977
Purchases (1,313,569 shares) and
sales (1,264,232 shares) of
treasury stock under
employee plans—net (6) (79) (85) (85)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (71,504,867 shares) (13,395) (13,395) (13,395)
Changes in other equity 95 95 95
Changes in noncontrolling interests 8 8
Equity, December 31, 2014 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $11,868 $146 $12,014
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2015
Equity, January 1, 2015 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $11,868 $146 $12,014
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 13,190 13,190 13,190
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) (1,731) (1,731) (1,731)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $11,459 $11,459
Cash dividends paid—
common stock (4,897) (4,897) (4,897)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (6,013,875
shares) 606 606 606
Purchases (1,625,820 shares) and
sales (1,155,558 shares) of
treasury stock under
employee plans—net 39 (102) (63) (63)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (30,338,647 shares) (4,701) (4,701) (4,701)
Changes in other equity (10) (10) (10)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 16 16
Equity, December 31, 2015 $53,262 $146,124 $(155,518) $(29,607) $14,262 $162 $14,424
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 91 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2016
Equity, January 1, 2016 $53,262 $146,124 $(155,518) $(29,607) $14,262 $162 $14,424
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 11,872 11,872 11,872
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) 209 209 209
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $12,081 $12,081
Cash dividends paid—
common stock (5,256) (5,256) (5,256)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (3,893,366
shares) 695 695 695
Purchases (854,365 shares) and
sales (383,077 shares) of
treasury stock under
employee plans—net 18 (77) (59) (59)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (23,283,400 shares) (3,455) (3,455) (3,455)
Changes in other equity (22) 0 (22) (22)
Changes in noncontrolling interests (16) (16)
Equity, December 31, 2016 $53,935 $152,759 $(159,050) $(29,398) $18,246 $146 $18,392
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 90 through 154 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 92 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES experience, actions that the company may undertake in the
future and on various other assumptions that are believed to be
Basis of Presentation reasonable under the circumstances. As a result, actual results
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and may be different from these estimates. See “Critical Accounting
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation Estimates” on pages 71 to 74 for a discussion of the company’s
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with critical accounting estimates.
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of
America (GAAP). Revenue
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded
realizable and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are
arrangement, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain
determinable and collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery
prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the
does not occur until products have been shipped or services
current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable.
have been provided to the client, risk of loss has transferred to
On October 20, 2014, the company announced a definitive the client, and either client acceptance has been obtained, client
agreement to divest its Microelectronics business and acceptance provisions have lapsed, or the company has
manufacturing operations to GLOBALFOUNDRIES. The objective evidence that the criteria specified in the client
transaction closed on July 1, 2015. Refer to note C, acceptance provisions have been satisfied. The sales price is
“Acquisitions/Divestitures,” for additional information on the not considered to be fixed or determinable until all contingencies
transaction. related to the sale have been resolved.
In January 2016, the company made a number of changes to its The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers,
organizational structure and management system. These resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”)
changes impacted the company’s reportable segments, but did when the reseller has: economic substance apart from the
not impact the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. company, credit risk, risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee
Refer to note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 150 to 154 for to the company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the
additional information on the changes in reportable segments. end user, the company has no further obligations related to
bringing about resale or delivery and all other revenue
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $16 million, $8 million and
recognition criteria have been met.
$6 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2016,
2015 and 2014, respectively, are included as a reduction within The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns,
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement stock rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar
of Earnings. allowances. (See Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying
Accounts and Reserves” included in the company’s Annual
Principles of Consolidation Report on Form 10-K). Revenue is recognized only if these
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of estimates can be reasonably and reliably determined. The
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority company bases its estimates on historical results taking into
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary consideration the type of client, the type of transaction and the
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense
noncontrolling interest is reported as described above in the only if the company receives from the client an identifiable
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The accounts of variable benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale whose fair
interest entities (VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial value can be reasonably and reliably estimated. If the company
Statements, if required. Investments in business entities in does not receive an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable
which the company does not have control, but has the ability to from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably
exercise significant influence over operating and financial estimated, such payments are recorded as a reduction of
policies, are accounted for using the equity method and the revenue.
company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
other (income) and expense. The accounting policy for other is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
investments in equity securities is on page 98 within “Marketable between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered
are primarily accounted for using the cost method. All to determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most
intercompany transactions and accounts have been eliminated notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client,
in consolidation. or has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the
company adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or
Use of Estimates service, was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP or service, has latitude in establishing the sales price or has
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that credit risk.
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs,
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes
expenses and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that are
assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In
accompanying disclosures. These estimates are based on
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following
management’s best knowledge of current events, historical

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
are the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple- Services
deliverable arrangements and for each major category The company’s primary services offerings include information
of revenue. technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing,
application management services, consulting and systems
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements integration, technology infrastructure and system maintenance,
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist hosting and the design and development of complex IT systems
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on to a client’s specifications (design and build). Many of these
the needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any services can be delivered entirely or partially through as-a-
combination of services, software, hardware and/or financing. Service or cloud delivery models. These services are provided
For example, a client may purchase a server that includes on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a
operating system software. In addition, the arrangement may fixed-price per measure of output contract and the contract
include post-contract support for the software and a contract terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.
for post-warranty maintenance service for the hardware. These
Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
types of arrangements can also include financing provided by contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided
the company. These arrangements consist of multiple using either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line
deliverables, with the hardware and software delivered in one basis over the term of the contract. Under the output method,
reporting period, and the software support and hardware the amount of revenue recognized is based on the services
maintenance services delivered across multiple reporting delivered in the period.
periods. In another example, a client may outsource the running
of its datacenter operations to the company on a long-term, Revenue from application management services, technology
multiple-year basis and periodically purchase servers and/or infrastructure, and system maintenance and hosting contracts
software products from the company to upgrade or expand its is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the
facility. The outsourcing services are provided on a continuous contracts. Revenue from time-and-material contracts is
basis across multiple reporting periods, and the hardware and recognized as labor hours are delivered and direct expenses are
software products are delivered in one reporting period. To the incurred. Revenue related to extended warranty and product
extent that a deliverable in a multiple-deliverable arrangement maintenance contracts is recognized on a straight-line basis over
is subject to specific accounting guidance, that deliverable is the delivery period.
accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is
Examples of such arrangements may include leased hardware recognized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method.
which is subject to specific leasing guidance or software which Under the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the
is subject to specific software revenue recognition guidance on
labor costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total
whether and/or how to separate multiple-deliverable estimated labor costs to fulfill the contract. If circumstances
arrangements into separate units of accounting (separability) arise that change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or
and how to allocate the arrangement consideration among those extent of progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates
separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other are made. These revisions may result in increases or decreases
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance in estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple- in income in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise
deliverable arrangement is separated into more than one unit of to the revision become known by the company.
accounting if the following criteria are met:
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand- services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order
alone basis; and to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return and profits require updating. If at any time these estimates
relative to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire
of the undelivered item(s) is considered probable and estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded
substantially in the control of the company. immediately. For non-POC method services contracts, any
losses are recorded as incurred.
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to
as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until income of $5,873 million and $6,039 million at December 31,
the earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last 2016 and 2015, respectively, is included in the Consolidated
undelivered element is delivered. If these criteria are met for Statement of Financial Position. In other services contracts,
each element and there is a relative selling price for all units of the company performs the services prior to billing the client.
accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration Unbilled accounts receivable of $1,611 million and
is allocated to the separate units of accounting based on each $1,630 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively,
unit’s relative selling price. The following revenue policies are is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in the
then applied to each unit of accounting, as applicable. Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Revenue from the company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, security, Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
and cognitive offerings follow the specific revenue recognition the services or in accordance with specific contractual
policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements and for each provisions. Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within
major category of revenue depending on the type of offering four months.
which can be comprised of services, hardware and/or software.

===== PAGE 94 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hardware deferred until the earlier of when such criteria are met or when
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of the last undelivered element is delivered. If these criteria are
system servers and storage solutions. The company also offers met for each element and there is VSOE of fair value for all units
installation services for its more complex hardware products. of accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration
is allocated to the separate units of accounting based on each
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is
unit’s relative VSOE of fair value. There may be cases, however,
recognized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and
in which there is VSOE of fair value of the undelivered item(s)
there are no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the
but no such evidence for the delivered item(s). In these cases,
client’s final acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of
the residual method is used to allocate the arrangement
standard warranties and remaining obligations that are
consideration. Under the residual method, the amount of
inconsequential or perfunctory are accrued when the
consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the total
corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue from rentals and
arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair value
operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
of the undelivered elements.
term of the rental or lease.
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have a
Software stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software
recognition criteria have been met. Revenue from post-contract deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the
support, which may include unspecified upgrades on a when- relative selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement
and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis over using the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best
the period such items are delivered. Revenue from software estimate of selling price (BESP). In circumstances where the
hosting or Software-as-a-Service arrangements is recognized company cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for
as the service is delivered. In software hosting arrangements, all of the deliverables in the arrangement, including the software
the rights provided to the customer (e.g., ownership of a license, deliverable, BESP is used for the purpose of performing
contract termination provisions and the feasibility of the this allocation.
customer to operate the software) are considered in determining
whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements Financing
which include a software license, the associated revenue is Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct
recognized according to whether the license is perpetual or financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis
term. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) license using the effective interest method. Operating lease income is
software is recognized on a straight-line basis over the period recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
that the client is entitled to use the license.
In multiple-deliverable arrangements that include software that Best Estimate of Selling Price
is more than incidental to the products or services as a whole In certain instances, the company is not able to establish VSOE
(software multiple-deliverable arrangements), software and for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When
software-related elements are accounted for in accordance with VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish
software revenue recognition guidance. Software-related the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is
elements include software products and services for which a determined based on competitor prices for similar deliverables
software deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tangible when sold separately.
products containing software components and non-software When the company is unable to establish selling price using VSOE
components that function together to deliver the tangible or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrangement
product’s essential functionality are not within the scope of consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at
software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted for which the company would transact a sale if the product or service
based on other applicable revenue recognition guidance. were sold on a stand-alone basis. BESP may be used, for
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated example, if a product is not sold on a stand-alone basis or when
into more than one unit of accounting if all of the following the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does
criteria are met: not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to
selling the new product on a stand-alone basis.
• The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors
dependent on the undelivered element(s);
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning,
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing
based on the price charged when the deliverable is sold practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that
separately by the company on a regular basis and not as includes review and approval by the company’s management.
part of the multiple-deliverable arrangement; and In addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its
products and services, in addition to BESP.
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the
culmination of the earnings process for that element(s).
Services Costs
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs
accounted for as one unit of accounting which would result in related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred.
revenue being recognized ratably over the contract term or being For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method certain data conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized
are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up to three years
to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense.
fulfill the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred
in the initial phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and Product Warranties
subsequently amortized. These costs consist of transition and The company offers warranties for its hardware products that
setup costs related to the installation of systems and processes generally range up to three years, with the majority being either
and are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected one or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard
period of benefit, not to exceed the term of the contract. to the deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for
Additionally, fixed assets associated with outsourcing contracts the related deliverable. The company estimates its warranty
are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the costs standard to the deliverable based on historical warranty
expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, claim experience and estimates of future spending, and applies
then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of this estimate to the revenue stream for products under warranty.
the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess Estimated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue
of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing recognized in the current period are charged to cost of sales.
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line The warranty liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of properly reflects the remaining obligation based on the
benefit not to exceed the term of the contract. The company anticipated expenditures over the balance of the obligation
performs periodic reviews to assess the recoverability of period. Adjustments are made when actual warranty claim
deferred contract transition and setup costs. This review is done experience differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price
by comparing the estimated minimum remaining undiscounted support or maintenance contracts, including extended warranty
cash flows of a contract to the unamortized contract costs. If contracts, are recognized as incurred.
such minimum undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to
recover the unamortized costs, an impairment loss is recognized. Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded as
deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-line
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,072 million basis over the delivery period. Changes in deferred income for
and $2,144 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty liability for
respectively. Amortization of deferred services transition and standard warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses
setup costs was estimated at December 31, 2016 to be and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of
$590 million in 2017, $515 million in 2018, $374 million in 2019, Financial Position, are presented in the following tables:
$248 million in 2020 and $344 million thereafter.
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of Standard Warranty Liability
acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were
($ in millions)
$160 million and $184 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015,
2016 2015
respectively. Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients
Balance at January 1 $ 181 $ 197
in excess of the fair value of acquired assets is recorded as an
offset of revenue and was estimated at December 31, 2016 to Current period accruals 145 173
be $53 million in 2017, $46 million in 2018, $28 million in 2019, Accrual adjustments to reflect
$20 million in 2020 and $13 million thereafter. In situations in experience (6) 7
which an outsourcing contract is terminated, the terms of the Charges incurred (164) (196)
contract may require the client to reimburse the company for Balance at December 31 $ 156 $ 181
the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamortized
deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized in Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred
($ in millions)
by the company to transition the services.
2016 2015
Balance at January 1 $538 $ 536
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design Revenue deferred for new extended
of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to warranty contracts 263 286
research, development and engineering expense; costs that are Amortization of deferred revenue (267) (253)
incurred to produce the finished product after technological Other* (4) (31)
feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible Balance at December 31 $ 531 $ 538
asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis Current portion $ 264 $ 238
over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded in
Noncurrent portion $ 267 $ 300
software cost within cost of sales. The company performs
periodic reviews to ensure that unamortized program costs * Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or
service licensed programs are charged to software cost within Shipping and Handling
cost of sales as incurred. Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized
as incurred and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to
of Earnings.
purchase or to create and implement internal-use software
programs, including software coding, installation, testing and

===== PAGE 96 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expense and Other Income losses, gains and losses from the sale of businesses, other than
Selling, General and Administrative reported as discontinued operations, and amounts related to
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged accretion of asset retirement obligations.
to income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling
products and services are classified as selling expense and Business Combinations and
include such items as compensation, advertising, sales Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
commissions and travel. General and administrative expense The company accounts for business combinations using the
includes such items as compensation, legal costs, office acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets
supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and office rental. In acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest
addition, general and administrative expense includes other in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values.
operating items such as an allowance for credit losses, Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the
workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obligated fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to
payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of identifiable intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate
business, acquisition costs related to business combinations, goodwill are the value of synergies between the acquired entities
amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental and the company and the acquired assembled workforce,
remediation costs. neither of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible
asset. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to
Advertising and Promotional Expense applicable reporting units based on expected revenues.
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology is
are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in recorded in Cost, and amortization of all other intangible assets
the period in which the related advertising and promotional is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs,
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation and other costs,
which includes media, agency and promotional expense, was are expensed in the periods in which the costs are incurred. The
$1,327 million, $1,290 million and $1,307 million in 2016, 2015 results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the
and 2014, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Impairment
Research, Development and Engineering Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are intangible assets, are tested for impairment whenever events
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has may not be recoverable. The impairment test is based on
been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the asset is written
down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible assets
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its are tested at least annually, in the fourth quarter, for impairment
intellectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an impairment
trade secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP may exist. Goodwill is tested at the reporting unit level which is
transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and the operating segment, or a business, which is one level below
others are transaction-based sales/other transfers. Income from that operating segment (the “component” level) if discrete
licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of the financial information is prepared and regularly reviewed by
perpetual license term if all revenue recognition criteria have management at the segment level. Components are aggregated
been met. Income from royalty-based fee arrangements is as a single reporting unit if they have similar economic
recognized over time or as the licensee sells future related characteristics.
products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s revenue).
The company also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of Depreciation and Amortization
patents, and income from these arrangements is recognized Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and
when earned. In addition, the company earns income from depreciated over their estimated useful lives using the straight-
certain custom development projects for strategic technology line method. The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable
partners and specific clients. The company records the income assets are as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building
from these projects if the fee is not refundable, is not dependent equipment, 10 to 20 years; land improvements, 20 years; plant,
upon the success of the project and when all revenue recognition laboratory and office equipment, 2 to 20 years; and computer
have been met. equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements are
amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the
Other (Income) and Expense related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after
than from Global Financing external transactions), gains and technological feasibility has been established are amortized
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from over periods ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain use software are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods
real estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and ranging up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over
periods between 1 and 7 years.

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Environmental component of OCI and amortization of the net transition asset
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup (AOCI). Service cost represents the actuarial present value of
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will participant benefits earned in the current year. Interest cost
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably represents the time value of money cost associated with the
estimated, the company accrues remediation costs for known passage of time. Certain events, such as changes in the
environmental liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for employee base, plan amendments and changes in actuarial
all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation and the
are recorded for environmental liabilities that are not probable corresponding change in OCI. The result of these events is
or estimable. amortized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) over
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending
Asset Retirement Obligations on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations are based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets.
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E
liabilities are initially recorded at fair value and the related asset in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the
retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the carrying employees’ respective functions.
amount of the related assets by the same amount as the liability. (Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized
Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated over the as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated
useful lives of the related assets. Subsequent to initial Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a
recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in
component of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of
the ARO liability resulting from the passage of time in interest Comprehensive Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service
expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized as a component of
original expected cash flows to the related assets. net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and
amortization provisions of applicable accounting guidance.
Defined Benefit Pension and (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between actual
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in actuarial
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent the cost
plans and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement- of benefit changes attributable to prior service granted in
related benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated plan amendments.
Statement of Financial Position. The funded status is measured
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
as the difference between the fair value of plan assets and the
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by
benefit obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For
the company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms
defined benefit pension plans, the benefit obligation is the
of the plans and use participant-specific information such as
projected benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the
compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain
actuarial present value of benefits expected to be paid upon
assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected
retirement based on employee services already rendered and
return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest
estimated future compensation levels. For the nonpension
crediting rates and mortality rates.
postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which
represents the actuarial present value of postretirement Defined Contribution Plans
benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is
fair value of plan assets represents the current market value of recorded when the employee renders service to the company.
assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the
of participants, which are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’
plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit respective functions.
obligation, are aggregated and recorded as a prepaid pension
asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit Stock-Based Compensation
obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, are aggregated Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
and recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement based awards granted to employees. The company measures
benefit obligation equal to this excess. stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the
postretirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial
employee requisite service period. The company grants its
present value of benefits payable in the next 12 months
employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention
exceeding the fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-
Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share Units
plan basis. This obligation is recorded in compensation and
(PSUs) and periodically grants stock options. RSUs are stock
benefits in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
awards granted to employees that entitle the holder to shares
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit of common stock as the award vests, typically over a one- to
cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined and
Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price,
return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/ adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. The company
(credits) and (gains)/losses previously recognized as a estimates the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes

===== PAGE 98 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in recognized in other (income) and expense. Income and expense
Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of items are translated at the weighted-average rates of exchange
Earnings based on the employees’ respective functions. prevailing during the year. These translation gains and losses
are included in net income for the period in which exchange
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result
rates change.
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on
the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory
Derivative Financial Instruments
tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction.
Differences between the deferred tax assets recognized for Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid
reported on the income tax return are recorded in additional expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry
paid-in capital (if the tax deduction exceeds the deferred tax assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities.
asset) or in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings (if the Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is
deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction and no additional based upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than
paid-in capital exists from previous awards). or greater than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, the
company requires that the instruments be effective in reducing
the risk exposure that they are designated to hedge. For
Income Taxes
instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge designation criteria
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
also require that it be probable that the underlying transaction
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
will occur. Instruments that meet established accounting criteria
differences between asset and liability amounts that are
are formally designated as hedges. These criteria demonstrate
recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts
that the derivative is expected to be highly effective at offsetting
that are recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred
changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying exposure
taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws.
both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an ongoing
Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax
basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness and
assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized.
measuring hedge ineffectiveness is formally documented at
In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management
hedge inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness
considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including
and measures hedge ineffectiveness at least quarterly
past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and
throughout the designated hedge period.
the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. When the
company changes its determination as to the amount of deferred Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company
tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a
adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized firm
the period in which such determination is made. commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or
foreign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the
of a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received or
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable,
paid related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully
hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or
sustained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax
(3) a hedge of a long-term investment (net investment hedge) in
positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is
a foreign operation. In addition, the company may enter into
greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement.
derivative contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks,
The current portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the
even though hedge accounting does not apply or the company
noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities
elects not to apply hedge accounting. In these cases, there
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. To the
exists a natural hedging relationship in which changes in the fair
extent that new information becomes available which causes
value of the derivative, which are recognized currently in net
the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of
income, act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value of
existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact
the underlying hedged item(s).
income tax expense in the period in which such determination
is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a
liabilities for potential tax assessments are included in fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value
income tax expense. of the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings
each period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts adjustments are recorded as adjustments to interest expense
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local and cost of financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars For hedges of currency risk associated with recorded financial
at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are assets or liabilities, derivative fair value adjustments are
recorded in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at recognized in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value of a derivative
that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net of
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-
applicable taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of
monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and
Comprehensive Income. When net income is affected by the
branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the variability of the underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting
approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company amount of the gain or loss from the derivative that is deferred in
acquired the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities AOCI is released to net income and reported in interest expense,
denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and expense in the
at year-end exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the nature of the Fair Value Measurement
underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net investment Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would
hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. The be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an
effective portion of changes in the fair value of net investment orderly transaction between market participants at the
hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial measurement date. Under this guidance, the company is
instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded required to classify certain assets and liabilities based on the
as foreign currency translation adjustments in AOCI. Changes following fair value hierarchy:
in the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging
• Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets
derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment are
for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at
recorded in interest expense. If the underlying hedged item in a
the measurement date;
fair value hedge ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of
the derivative are included in net income each period until the • Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within
instrument matures. When the derivative transaction ceases to Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability,
exist, a hedged asset or liability is no longer adjusted for changes either directly or indirectly; and
in its fair value except as required under other relevant
• Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
accounting standards.
Derivatives that are not designated as hedges, as well as The guidance requires the use of observable market data if
changes in the fair value of derivatives that do not effectively such data is available without undue cost and effort.
offset changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item
throughout the designated hedge period (collectively, When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
“ineffectiveness”), are recorded in earnings for each period and prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies
are primarily reported in other (income) and expense. When a such items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not
cash flow hedging relationship is discontinued, the net gain or available, fair value is based upon internally developed models
loss in AOCI must generally remain in AOCI until the item that that use current market-based or independently sourced market
was hedged affects earnings. However, when it is probable that parameters such as interest rates and currency rates. Items
a forecasted transaction will not occur by the end of the valued using internally generated models are classified
originally specified time period or within an additional two- according to the lowest level input or value driver that is
month period thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI must be significant to the valuation.
reclassified into earnings immediately. The determination of fair value considers various factors
The company reports cash flows arising from derivative financial including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying
instruments designated as fair value or cash flow hedges the financial instruments. For derivatives and debt securities,
the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis
consistent with the classification of cash flows from the
using discount rates commensurate with the duration of the
underlying hedged items that these derivatives are hedging.
instrument.
Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives
designated as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the
cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the
Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives “base valuations” calculated using the methodologies described
designated as net investment hedges and derivatives that do not below for several parameters that market participants would
qualify as hedges are reported in cash flows from investing consider in determining fair value:
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to
currency swaps designated as hedges of foreign currency
financial instruments, taking into account the actual
denominated debt (included in the company’s debt risk
credit risk of a counterparty as observed in the credit
management program as addressed in note D, “Financial
Instruments,” on pages 110 through 114), cash flows directly default swap market to determine the true fair value
associated with the settlement of the principal element of these of such an instrument.
swaps are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from • Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair
value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in
Financial Instruments developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed
company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are in the credit default swap market.
based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance
sheet date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 109 As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a
to 110 for further information. All methods of assessing fair discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs
value result in a general approximation of value, and such value such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and
may never actually be realized. forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs
relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets
which are available for the full term of the derivative.

===== PAGE 100 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a Inventories
nonrecurring basis. These assets include equity method Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at
investments that are recognized at fair value at the measurement the lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the
date to the extent that they are deemed to be other-than- sale of inventories are reflected in net cash provided
temporarily impaired. Certain assets that are measured at fair by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of
value on a recurring basis can be subject to nonrecurring fair Cash Flows.
value measurements. These assets include available-for-sale
equity investments that are deemed to be other-than- Allowance for Credit Losses
temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than-temporary Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment
impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured of a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A
using a model described above. reasonable estimate of probable net losses on the value of
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible customer receivables is recognized by establishing an allowance
financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at for credit losses.
fair value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are
otherwise not permitted to be accounted for at fair value under Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
other accounting standards. This election is irrevocable. The An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated
company has not applied the fair value option to any eligible based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and
assets or liabilities. any specific, known troubled accounts.
Cash Equivalents Financing Receivables
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing
less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with
equivalents. lease accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial
assets recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair
Marketable Securities value. The company determines its allowances for credit losses
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities on financing receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease
that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the receivables and loan receivables. The company further
balance sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not segments the portfolio into two classes: major markets and
growth markets.
expected to be realized in cash within one year and alliance
equity securities are included in investments and sundry assets. When calculating the allowances, the company considers its
Debt and marketable equity securities are considered available ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased
for sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and equipment and by considering the current fair market value of
losses, net of applicable taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and any other collateral. The value of the equipment is the net
losses for available-for-sale securities are included in other realizable value. The allowance for credit losses for capital
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of leases, installment sales and customer loans includes an
Earnings. Realized gains and losses are calculated based on the assessment of the entire balance of the capital lease or loan,
specific identification method. including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that the
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows:
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is
below its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing
of the issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the receivables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review
company’s intent and ability to retain the security in order to primarily consists of an analysis based upon current information
allow for an anticipated recovery in fair value. Other-than- available about the client, such as financial statements, news
temporary declines in fair value from amortized cost for reports, published credit ratings, current market-implied credit
available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company analysis, as well as the current economic environment, collateral
intends to sell or would more likely than not be required to sell net of repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans
before the expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are that are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the
charged to other (income) and expense in the period in which fair value of the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using
the loss occurs. For debt securities that the company has no this information, the company determines the expected cash
intent to sell and believes that it more likely than not will not be flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate
required to sell prior to recovery, only the credit loss component of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For those
of the impairment is recognized in other (income) and expense, accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records a
while the remaining loss is recognized in OCI. The credit loss specific reserve.
component recognized in other (income) and expense is
identified as the amount of the principal cash flows not expected
to be received over the remaining term of the debt security as
projected using the company’s cash flow projections.

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated income in the period in which the estimate is changed, as well
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its as an adjustment to unearned income to reduce future-period
different portfolios, excluding accounts that have been financing income.
specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit
rating, probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) Common Stock
and loss history. Factors that could result in actual receivable Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital
losses that are materially different from the estimated reserve stock as designated in the company’s Certificate of
include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant change Incorporation. Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost
in the economic health of a particular client that represents method. When treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed
a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio. and recorded using a weighted-average basis.
Other Credit-Related Policies
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class
the original billing date. method. The two-class method determines EPS for each class
of common stock and participating securities according to
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has
dividends and dividend equivalents and their respective
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual
participation rights in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans
common stock is computed by dividing net income by the
or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other
weighted-average number of common shares outstanding for
accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to
the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed on the
collect all amounts due according to original terms of the lease
basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common
or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued on these
stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares
receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a reduction to
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock
payments outstanding is recognized as interest income.
awards, convertible notes and stock options.
Receivables may be removed from non-accrual status,
if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances.
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES
financing receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for
impairment on a quarterly basis. The company considers any New Standards to be Implemented
loan with an individually evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. In January 2017, the Financial Accounting Standards Board
Depending on the level of impairment, loans will also be placed (FASB) issued guidance which clarifies the definition of a
on non-accrual status as appropriate. Client loans are primarily business. The guidance provides a more robust framework to
for software and services and are unsecured. These loans are use in determining when a set of assets and activities acquired
subjected to credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, or sold is a business. The guidance is effective January 1, 2018
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in and early adoption is permitted. The guidance will be applied
the loan agreements which include covenants to protect against prospectively to any transactions occurring within the period of
credit deterioration during the life of the obligation. adoption. The company adopted the guidance effective January
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance 1, 2017 and does not expect a material impact in the
in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible. consolidated financial statements.
Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. In October 2016, the FASB issued guidance which requires an
Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to the entity to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity
extent that the customer is no longer in operation and/or, there transfers of assets, other than inventory, at the time of transfer.
is no reasonable expectation of additional collections Assets within the scope of the guidance include intellectual
or repossession. The company’s assessments factor in the property and property, plant and equipment. The guidance is
history of collections and write-offs in specific countries and effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption is permitted. The
across the portfolio. company adopted the guidance on January 1, 2017 using the
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets required modified retrospective method. At adoption, $95 million
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at and $47 million were reclassified from investments in sundry
the inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets and prepaid and other current assets, respectively into
assets at the end of the lease term. The company periodically retained earnings. Additionally, net deferred taxes of
reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any $244 million were established in deferred taxes in the
anticipated increases in specific future residual values are not Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, resulting in a
recognized before realization through remarketing efforts. cumulative-effect net credit to retained earnings of $102 million.
Anticipated decreases in specific future residual values that are In January 2017, the company had a transaction generating
considered to be other-than-temporary are recognized approximately $400 million to $500 million benefit to income tax
expense, income from continuing operations and net income
immediately upon identification and are recorded as an
adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and for the three months ended March 31, 2017. The ongoing impact
direct-financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net of this guidance will be dependent on any transaction that is
investment and is recognized as a loss charged to financing within its scope.

===== PAGE 102 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In June 2016, the FASB issued guidance for credit impairment The FASB issued guidance on the recognition of revenue from
based on an expected loss model rather than an incurred loss contracts with customers in May 2014 with amendments in 2015
model. The guidance requires the consideration of all available and 2016. Revenue recognition will depict the transfer of
relevant information when estimating expected credit losses, promised goods or services to customers in an amount that
including past events, current conditions and forecasts and their reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be
implications for expected credit losses. The guidance is effective entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance
January 1, 2020 with a one-year early adoption permitted. The also requires disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing
company is evaluating the impact of the new guidance. and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts
with customers. The guidance permits two methods of adoption:
In March 2016, the FASB issued guidance which changes the
retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented, or
accounting for share-based payment transactions, including the
retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying
income tax consequences, classification of awards as either
the guidance recognized at the date of initial application (the
equity or liabilities and classification in the Consolidated
cumulative catch-up transition method). The guidance was
Statement of Cash Flows. The guidance was effective January
initially effective January 1, 2017 and early adoption was not
1, 2017 and upon transition did not have a material impact in the
permitted. The amended guidance provides for a one-year
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The ongoing
deferral of the effective date to January 1, 2018, with an option
impact of the guidance could result in increased volatility in the
of applying the standard on the original effective date. The
provision for income taxes and earnings per share in the
company will adopt the guidance on January 1, 2018 and apply
Consolidated Statement of Earnings, depending on the
the cumulative catch-up transition method.
company’s share price at exercise or vesting of share-based
awards compared to grant date, however these impacts are not Given the scope of work required to implement the recognition
expected to be material. The guidance also requires cash and disclosure requirements under the new standard, the
payments on behalf of employees for shares directly withheld company began its assessment process in 2014 and has since
for taxes to be presented as financing outflows in the made significant progress, including identification of changes to
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Prior to adoption, the policy, processes, systems and controls.
company reported this activity as an operating cash outflow. For
The company expects revenue recognition for its broad portfolio
the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, the
of hardware, software and services offerings to remain largely
amounts for this activity that were recorded as operating cash
unchanged. However, the guidance is expected to change the
outflows were $126 million and $248 million. This provision of
timing of revenue recognition in certain areas, including
the guidance requires retrospective application upon adoption
accounting for certain software licenses. These impacts are not
on January 1, 2017.
expected to be material. The company expects to continue to
In February 2016, the FASB issued guidance which changes the recognize revenue for term license (recurring license charge)
accounting for leases. The guidance requires lessees to software arrangements on a monthly basis over the period that
recognize right-of-use assets and lease liabilities for most leases the client is entitled to use the license due to the contractual
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The terms in these arrangements.
guidance makes some changes to lessor accounting, including
Since the company currently expenses sales commissions as
the elimination of the use of third-party residual value guarantee
incurred, the requirement in the new standard to capitalize
insurance in the capital lease test, and overall aligns with the
certain in-scope sales commissions is being evaluated to
new revenue recognition guidance. The guidance also requires
determine its potential impact in the consolidated financial
qualitative and quantitative disclosures to assess the amount,
statements in the year of adoption. There will be no impact to
timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases. The
cash flows.
company will adopt the guidance as of the effective date of
January 1, 2019. The company is currently evaluating the impact The company continues to assess all potential impacts of the
of the new guidance on its consolidated financial results and guidance and given normal ongoing business dynamics,
expects it will have a material impact on the Consolidated preliminary conclusions are subject to change.
Statement of Financial Position. The company’s operating lease
Standards Implemented
commitments were $6.9 billion at December 31, 2016. In 2016,
In November 2015, the FASB issued guidance which requires
the use of third-party residual value guarantee insurance
deferred tax liabilities and assets be classified as noncurrent in
resulted in the company recognizing $220 million of sales-type
the statement of financial position. The guidance was effective
lease revenue that would otherwise have been recognized over
January 1, 2016 with early adoption permitted. The company
the lease period as operating lease revenue.
adopted the guidance in the fourth quarter of 2015 on a
In January 2016, the FASB issued guidance which addresses retrospective basis. The guidance was a change in financial
aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and disclosure presentation only.
of financial instruments. Certain equity investments will be
measured at fair value with changes recognized in net income. The
amendment also simplifies the impairment test of equity
investments that lack readily determinable fair value. The guidance
is effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption is not permitted
except for limited provisions. The guidance is not expected to have
a material impact in the consolidated financial results.

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In September 2015, the FASB issued guidance eliminating the NOTE C. ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES
requirement that an acquirer in a business combination account
for a measurement-period adjustment retrospectively. Instead, Acquisitions
an acquirer will recognize a measurement-period adjustment Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in
during the period in which the amount of the adjustment is the tables in this note, was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
determined. In addition, the portion of the amount recorded in are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net
current-period earnings by line item that would have been of acquired cash and cash equivalents.
recorded in previous reporting periods if the adjustment to the
provisional amounts had been recognized as of the acquisition
2016
date should be presented separately on the face of the income
In 2016, the company completed fifteen acquisitions at an
statement or disclosed in the notes. The guidance was effective
aggregate cost of $5,899 million.
January 1, 2016 on a prospective basis. The guidance did not
have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
The Weather Company (TWC)—On January 29, 2016, the
In May 2015, the FASB issued guidance which removed the company completed the acquisition of TWC’s B2B, mobile and
requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all cloud-based Web-properties, weather.com, Weather
investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset Underground, The Weather Company brand and WSI, its
value per share practical expedient. The amendments also global business-to-business brand, for cash consideration of
removed the requirement to make certain disclosures for all $2,278 million. The cable television segment was not acquired
investments that are eligible to be measured at fair value using by IBM, but is licensing weather forecast data and analytics from
the net asset value per share practical expedient. Rather, those IBM under a long-term contract. TWC was a privately held
disclosures are limited to investments for which the entity has business. Goodwill of $1,717 million has been assigned to the
elected to measure the fair value using that practical expedient. Cognitive Solutions segment. It is expected that none of the
The guidance was effective January 1, 2016. The guidance was goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
a change in disclosure only and did not have an impact in the weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
consolidated financial results. acquired is 6.9 years.
In April 2015, the FASB issued guidance about whether a cloud Truven Health Analytics, Inc. (Truven)—On April 8, 2016, the
computing arrangement includes a software license. If the company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Truven, a
arrangement includes a software license, then the customer leading provider of healthcare analytics solutions, for cash
should account for the software license consistent with the consideration of $2,612 million, of which $200 million will be
acquisition of other software licenses. If the arrangement does paid in July 2017. Truven has developed proprietary analytic
not include a software license, the customer should account for methods and assembled analytic content assets, creating
the arrangement as a services contract. All software licenses extensive national healthcare utilization, performance, quality
recognized under this guidance will be accounted for consistent and cost data. Truven was a privately held business. Goodwill
with other licenses of intangible assets. The guidance was of $1,933 million has been assigned to the Cognitive Solutions
effective January 1, 2016 and the company adopted it on a segment. It is expected that approximately 15 percent of the
prospective basis. The guidance did not have a material impact goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
in the consolidated financial results. weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
acquired is 6.9 years.
In April 2015, the FASB issued guidance which requires debt
issuance costs related to a recognized debt liability to be Other Acquisitions—The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
presented in the balance sheet as a direct deduction from the segment completed acquisitions of four businesses: in the first
carrying amount of that debt liability, consistent with debt quarter: Ustream, Inc. (Ustream), a privately held business, and
discounts. The guidance was effective January 1, 2016 with AT&T’s application and hosting services business; in the third
early adoption permitted. The company adopted the guidance quarter, G4S’s cash solutions business; and in the fourth quarter,
in the fourth quarter of 2015 on a retrospective basis. The Sanovi Technologies Private Limited (Sanovi), a privately held
company had debt issuance costs of $82 million and $74 million business. Global Business Services (GBS) completed
at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. Debt issuance acquisitions of six privately held businesses: in the first quarter,
costs were previously included in investments and sundry assets Resource/Ammirati, ecx International AG (ecx.io) and Optevia
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Limited (Optevia); in the second quarter, Aperto AG (Aperto) and
Bluewolf Group, LLC (Bluewolf); and in the fourth quarter, Fluid,
Inc.’s Expert Personal Shopper (XPS) business. The Cognitive
Solutions segment completed acquisitions of three privately held
businesses: in the second quarter, Resilient Systems, Inc.
(Resilient) and EZ Legacy, Ltd. (EZSource); and in the fourth
quarter, Promontory Financial Group, LLC (Promontory).

===== PAGE 104 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Each acquisition is expected to enhance the company’s portfolio experience design and industry consulting leadership with one
of product and services capabilities. Ustream provides cloud- of the world’s leading Salesforce consulting practices to deliver
based video streaming to enterprises and broadcasters. The differentiated, consumer-grade experiences via the cloud. Fluid,
acquisition of AT&T’s application and hosting services business Inc.’s Expert Personal Shopper business extends the company’s
strengthens the company’s cloud portfolio. The acquisition of portfolio of SaaS offerings and services, helping clients conduct
G4S’s cash solutions business brings together the engineering commerce and engage with their customers. Resilient, a provider
skills of G4S with the company’s analytics and remote of incident response solutions, automates and orchestrates the
technology capabilities to expand delivery solutions. Sanovi many processes needed when dealing with cyber incidents from
provides hybrid cloud recovery, cloud migration and business breaches to lost devices. EZSource helps developers quickly and
continuity software for enterprise data centers and cloud easily understand and change mainframe code based on data
infrastructure. Resource/Ammirati is a leading U.S.-based digital displayed through dashboards and other visualizations.
marketing and creative agency, addressing the rising demand Promontory, a global market-leading risk management and
from businesses seeking to reinvent themselves for the digital regulatory compliance consulting firm, helps address clients’
economy. Ecx.io enhances GBS’ IBM Interactive Experience escalating regulations and risk management requirements.
(IBM iX) with new digital marketing, commerce and platform
All of these Other Acquisitions were for 100 percent of the
skills to accelerate clients’ digital transformations. Optevia is a
acquired businesses.
Software-as-a Service systems integrator specializing in CRM
solutions for public sector organizations. Aperto also joined IBM The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
iX, supporting the company’s growth in Europe, with expertise acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
in digital strategy projects, including website and application December 31, 2016.
development. Bluewolf extends the company’s analytics,
2016 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
The Truven
Amortization Weather Health Other
Life (in Years) Company Analytics Acquisitions
Current assets $ 76 $ 171 $ 153
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 123 127 110
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,717 1,933 593
Completed technology 1–7 160 338 96
Client relationships 3–7 313 516 226
Patents/trademarks 1–7 349 54 42
Total assets acquired 2,738 3,141 1,220
Current liabilities (88) (148) (96)
Noncurrent liabilities (372) (381) (76)
Total liabilities assumed (460) (529) (171)
Bargain purchase gain — — (40)*
Total purchase price $2,278 $2,612 $1,009
N/A—Not applicable.
* Bargain purchase gain relating to AT&T’s application and hosting services business was recognized in selling, general and administrative expense
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the three months ended March 31, 2016.
The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations assigned to the GBS segment and goodwill of $171 million has
using the acquisition method, and accordingly, the identifiable been assigned to the Cognitive Solutions segment. It is expected
assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling that approximately 55 percent of the goodwill will be deductible
interest in the acquired entity were recorded at their estimated for tax purposes.
fair values at the date of acquisition. The primary items
On February 3, 2017, the company announced that it had
that generated the goodwill are the value of the synergies
acquired Agile 3 Solutions, LLC (Agile 3 Solutions), a privately
between the acquired businesses and IBM and the acquired
held business based in San Francisco, California. Agile 3
assembled workforce, neither of which qualify as an amortizable
Solutions is a developer of software used by the C-Suite and
intangible asset.
senior executives to better visualize, understand and manage
For the Other Acquisitions, the overall weighted-average life risks associated with the protection of sensitive data. The
of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired is business will be integrated within the Technology Services &
6.3 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized Cloud Platforms segment. At the date of issuance of the financial
on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete
$119 million has been assigned to the Technology Services & for this acquisition.
Cloud Platforms segment, goodwill of $303 million has been

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2015 second quarter, Blue Box Group, Inc. (Blue Box); in the third
In 2015, the company completed fourteen acquisitions at quarter, StrongLoop, Inc. (StrongLoop); and in the fourth quarter,
an aggregate cost of $3,555 million. Gravitant, Inc. (Gravitant) and Clearleap, Inc. (Clearleap). GBS
completed acquisitions of two privately held businesses in the
Merge Healthcare, Inc. (Merge)—On October 13, 2015,
fourth quarter, Advanced Application Corporation (AAC) and
the company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Merge,
Meteorix, LLC. (Meteorix).
a publicly held business and a leading provider of medical image
handling and processing, interoperability and clinical systems AlchemyAI provides scalable cognitive computing application
designed to advance healthcare quality and efficiency, for cash program interface services and computing applications. Blekko
consideration of $1,036 million. Merge joined the company’s technology provides advanced Web-crawling, categorization and
Watson Health business unit, bolstering clients’ ability to analyze intelligent filtering. Explorys provides secure cloud-based
and cross-reference medical images against billions of data solutions for clinical integration, at-risk population management,
points already in the Watson Health Cloud. Goodwill of cost of care measurement and pay-for-performance. Phytel’s
$695 million was assigned to the Cognitive Solutions SaaS-based population health management offerings help
($502 million) and Technology Services & Cloud Platforms providers identify patients at risk for care gaps and engage the
($193 million) segments. It was expected that none of the patient to begin appropriate preventative care. Blue Box
goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall provides hosted, managed, OpenStack-based production-grade
weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets private clouds for the enterprise and service provider markets.
acquired was 7.0 years. Compose offers auto-scaling, production-ready databases to
help software development teams deploy data services
Cleversafe, Inc. (Cleversafe)—On November 6, 2015, the
efficiently. StrongLoop provides application development
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Cleversafe,
software that enables software developers to build applications
a privately held business and a leading developer and
using application programming interfaces. AAC engages in
manufacturer of object-based storage software and appliances,
system integration application development, software support
for cash consideration of $1,309 million. Cleversafe’s integration
and services. AAC was an affiliate of JBCC Holdings Inc. and IBM
into the company’s Cloud business gives clients strategic data
Japan Ltd. The company acquired all the shares of AAC which
flexibility, simplified management and consistency with
became a wholly owned subsidiary as of October 1, 2015.
on-premise, cloud and hybrid cloud deployment options.
Gravitant develops cloud-based software to enable
Goodwill of $1,000 million was assigned to the Technology
organizations to easily plan, buy and manage, or “broker,”
Services & Cloud Platforms ($590 million) and Systems
software and computing services from multiple suppliers across
($410 million) segments. It was expected that none of the
hybrid clouds. Meteorix offers consulting, deployment,
goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
integration and ongoing post-production services for Workday
weighted-average useful life of the identified intangible assets
Financial Management and Human Capital Management
acquired was 6.9 years.
applications. Clearleap provides cloud-based video services.
Other Acquisitions—The Cognitive Solutions segment IRIS Analytics provides technology and consultancy services to
completed acquisitions of six privately held businesses: in the the payments industry to detect electronic payment fraud.
first quarter, AlchemyAI, Inc. (AlchemyAI) and Blekko, Inc.
All of these Other Acquisitions were for 100 percent of the
(Blekko); in the second quarter, Explorys, Inc. (Explorys) and
acquired businesses with the exception of the AAC acquisition.
Phytel, Inc. (Phytel); in the third quarter, Compose, Inc.
(Compose); and in the fourth quarter, IRIS Analytics GmbH (IRIS The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
Analytics). The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
completed acquisitions of four privately held businesses: in the December 31, 2015.
2015 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (inYears) Merge Cleversafe Acquisitions
Current assets $ 94 $ 23 $ 60
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 128 63 82
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 695 1,000 895
Completed technology 5–7 133 364 163
Client relationships 5–7 145 23 95
Patents/trademarks 2–7 54 11 23
Total assets acquired 1,248 1,484 1,318
Current liabilities (73) (15) (34)
Noncurrent liabilities (139) (160) (73)
Total liabilities assumed (212) (175) (107)
Total purchase price $1,036 $1,309 $1,210
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 106 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life 2014 Acquisitions
of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.4 years. These
($ in millions)
identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line
Amortization Total
basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $518 million was Life (in Years) Acquisitions
assigned to the Cognitive Solutions segment, $303 million was Current assets $ 56
assigned to the Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment,
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 39
and $74 million was assigned to the GBS segment. It was
Intangible assets
expected that 7 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for
tax purposes. Goodwill N/A 442
Completed technology 5–7 68
2014 Client relationships 7 77
In 2014, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate Patents/trademarks 1–7 18
cost of $608 million. Total assets acquired 701
The Cognitive Solutions segment completed acquisitions of four Current liabilities (26)
privately held businesses: in the first quarter, Cloudant, Inc. Noncurrent liabilities (67)
(Cloudant); in the second quarter, Silverpop Systems, Inc. Total liabilities assumed (93)
(Silverpop) and Cognea Group Pty LTD (Cognea); and in the third Total purchase price $608
quarter, CrossIdeas s.p.a. (CrossIdeas). Technology Services &
Cloud Platforms completed acquisitions of two privately held N/A—Not applicable
businesses: in the first quarter, Aspera, Inc. (Aspera); and in the
third quarter, Lighthouse Security Group, LLC (Lighthouse). The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable
intangible assets acquired was 6.8 years. These identified
Aspera’s technology helps make cloud computing faster, more
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over
predictable and more cost effective for big data transfers such
their useful lives. Goodwill of $442 million was assigned to the
as enterprise storage, sharing virtual images or accessing the
Cognitive Solutions ($311 million) and Technology Services &
cloud for increased computing capacity. Cloudant extends the
Cloud Platforms ($131 million) segments. It was expected that
company’s mobile and cloud platform by enabling developers
approximately 1 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for
to easily and quickly create next-generation mobile and Web-
tax purposes.
based applications. Silverpop is a provider of cloud-based
capabilities that deliver personalized customer engagements in
Divestitures
highly scalable environments. Cognea offers personalized
Microelectronics—On October 20, 2014, IBM and
artificial intelligence capabilities designed to serve as an
GLOBALFOUNDRIES announced a definitive agreement in which
intuitive interface between human users and data-driven
GLOBALFOUNDRIES would acquire the company’s
information. CrossIdeas delivers next generation identity and
Microelectronics business, including existing semiconductor
access governance capabilities to help mitigate access risks and
manufacturing assets and operations in East Fishkill, NY and
segregation of duty violations. Lighthouse provides cloud-
Essex Junction, VT. The commercial OEM business acquired by
enabled managed identity and access management solutions.
GLOBALFOUNDRIES includes custom logic and specialty
All acquisitions were for 100 percent of the acquired businesses.
foundry, manufacturing and related operations. The transaction
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these closed on July 1, 2015.
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
The transaction includes a 10-year exclusive manufacturing
December 31, 2014.
sourcing agreement in which GLOBALFOUNDRIES will provide
server processor semiconductor technology for use in IBM
Systems. The agreement provides the company with capacity
and market-based pricing for current semiconductor nodes in
production and progression to nodes in the future for both
development and production needs. As part of the transaction,
the company will provide GLOBALFOUNDRIES with certain
transition services, including IT, supply chain, packaging
and test services and lab services. The initial term for these
transition services was one to three years, with
GLOBALFOUNDRIES having the ability to renew.

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In the third quarter of 2014, the company recorded a pre-tax Summarized financial information for discontinued operations
charge of $4.7 billion related to the sale of the Microelectronics is shown below.
disposal group, which was part of the Systems reportable
segment. The pre-tax charge reflected the fair value less the ($ in millions)
estimated cost of selling the disposal group including For the year ended
an impairment to the semiconductor long-lived assets of December 31: 2016 2015 2014
$2.4 billion, $1.5 billion representing the cash consideration Total revenue $ 0 $ 720 $ 1,335
expected to be transferred to GLOBALFOUNDRIES and Loss from discontinued
$0.8 billion of other related costs. Additional pre-tax charges of operations, before tax (11) (175) (619)
$116 million were recorded during 2015 related to the disposal, Loss on disposal, before
and pre-tax charges of less than $1 million were recorded during tax 0 (116) (4,726)
the year ended December 31, 2016. The cumulative pre-tax Total loss from
charge was $4.8 billion as of December 31, 2016. Any additional discontinued
charges that may be recorded in future periods are expected operations, before
to be immaterial. income taxes (11) (291) (5,346)
Provision/(benefi t) for
Reporting the related assets and liabilities initially as held for sale income taxes (2) (117) (1,617)
at September 30, 2014 was based on meeting all of the criteria
Loss from discontinued
for such reporting in the applicable accounting guidance. While
operations, net of tax $ (9) $(174 ) $(3,729 )
the company met certain criteria for held for sale reporting in prior
periods, it did not meet all of the criteria until September 30,
2014. In addition, at September 30, 2014, the company Industry Standard Server—On January 23, 2014, IBM and Lenovo
concluded that the Microelectronics business met the criteria for Group Limited (Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement in
discontinued operations reporting. The disposal group constituted which Lenovo would acquire the company’s industry standard
a component under accounting guidance. The continuing cash server portfolio (System x) for an adjusted purchase price of
inflows and outflows with the discontinued component are related $2.1 billion, consisting of approximately $1.8 billion in cash, with
to the manufacturing sourcing arrangement and the transition, the balance in Lenovo common stock. The stock represented less
packaging and test services. These cash flows are not direct cash than 5 percent equity ownership in Lenovo. The company sold to
flows as they are not significant and the company has no Lenovo its System x, BladeCenter and Flex System blade servers
significant continuing involvement. and switches, x86-based Flex integrated systems, NeXtScale
All assets and liabilities of the business, classified as held for and iDataPlex servers and associated software, blade networking
sale at June 30, 2015, were transferred at closing. The company and maintenance operations. As of March 31, 2016, all Lenovo
transferred $515 million of net cash to GLOBALFOUNDRIES in common stock was sold.
the third quarter of 2015. This amount included $750 million of IBM and Lenovo entered into a strategic relationship which included
cash consideration, adjusted by the amount of working capital a global OEM and reseller agreement for sales of IBM’s industry-
due from GLOBALFOUNDRIES and other miscellaneous items. leading entry and midrange Storwize disk storage systems, tape
A second cash payment in the amount of $500 million was storage systems, General Parallel File System software, SmartCloud
transferred in December 2016. The remaining cash Entry offering, and elements of IBM’s system software, including
consideration of $250 million is expected to be transferred in Systems Director and Platform Computing solutions. Effective with
December 2017. the initial closing of the transaction, Lenovo assumed related
customer service and maintenance operations. IBM will continue
to provide maintenance delivery on Lenovo’s behalf for an extended
period of time. In addition, as part of the transaction agreement, the
company is providing Lenovo with certain transition services,
including IT and supply chain services. The initial term for these
transition services ranged from less than one year to three years.
Certain services could be renewed by Lenovo for an additional year.

===== PAGE 108 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The initial closing was completed on October 1, 2014. A Others—In addition to those above, the company completed the
subsequent closing occurred in most other countries in which following divestitures:
there was a large business footprint on December 31, 2014. The
2O16—In the first quarter of 2016, the company completed four
remaining countries closed on March 31, 2015. An assessment
software product-related divestitures. In the fourth quarter of
of the ongoing contractual terms of the transaction resulted in
2016, the company completed the divestiture of one service-
the recognition of pre-tax gains of $63 million and $57 million
related offering. The financial terms related to these
in 2015 and 2016, respectively.
transactions were not material. Overall, the company recorded
Overall, the company expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain a pre-tax gain of $42 million related to these transactions in
on the sale of approximately $1.6 billion, which does not include 2016.
associated costs related to transition and performance-based
2O15—In the first quarter of 2015, the company completed two
costs. Net of these charges, the pre-tax gain was approximately
software product-related divestitures and in the second quarter,
$1.3 billion, of which the cumulative gain recorded as of
the company completed one software product-related
December 31, 2016 is $1.2 billion. The balance of the gain is
divestiture and the divestiture of one Global Business Services’
expected to be recognized in 2019 upon conclusion of the
offering. In the fourth quarter of 2015, the company completed
maintenance agreement.
three software product-related divestitures. The financial terms
Customer Care—On September 10, 2013, IBM and SYNNEX related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the
announced a definitive agreement in which SYNNEX would company recorded a pre-tax gain of $81 million related to these
acquire the company’s worldwide customer care business transactions in 2015.
process outsourcing services business for $501 million,
2O14—In the second quarter of 2014, the company completed
consisting of approximately $430 million in cash, net of balance
one software product-related divestiture and the divestiture of
sheet adjustments, and $71 million in SYNNEX common stock,
one Global Business Services’ offering. In the third quarter, the
which represented less than 5 percent equity ownership in
company completed four software product-related divestitures.
SYNNEX. As part of the transaction, SYNNEX entered into a
In the fourth quarter of 2014, the company completed two
multi-year agreement with the company, and Concentrix,
software product-related divestitures. The financial terms
SYNNEX’s outsourcing business, became an IBM strategic
related to these transactions were not material. Overall, the
business partner for global customer care business process
company recorded a pre-tax gain of $132 million related to
outsourcing services.
these transactions in 2014.
The initial closing was completed on January 31, 2014, with
subsequent closings occurring during 2014. For the full year of
2014, the company recorded a pre-tax gain of $202 million
related to this transaction.
In the second quarter of 2015, resolution of the final balance
sheet adjustments was concluded. An assessment of the
ongoing contractual terms of the transaction resulted in the
recognition of a pre-tax gain of $7 million in 2015. Through
December 31, 2016, the cumulative pre-tax gain attributed to
this transaction was $213 million.

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis at December 31, 2016 and 2015.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2016: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certifi cates of deposit $ — $3,629 $— $3,629
Money market funds 1,204 — — 1,204
Total 1,204 3,629 — 4,832 (6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 699 — 699 (6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 6 — 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 7 — — 7
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 555 — 555
Foreign exchange contracts — 560 — 560
Equity contracts — 11 — 11
Total — 1,126 — 1,126 (7)
Total assets $1,212 $5,460 $— $6,672 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 188 $— $ 188
Equity contracts — 10 — 10
Interest rate contracts — 8 — 8
Total liabilities $ — $ 206 $— $ 206 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(2) U.S. government securities reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2016 were $532 million and $594 million, respectively
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2016 were $145 million and $61 million, respectively
(6) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the
total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $116 million.

===== PAGE 110 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2015: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certifi cates of deposit $ — $2,856 $— $2,856
Money market funds 2,069 — — 2,069
Other securities — 18 — 18
Total 2,069 2,874 — 4,943 (6)
Debt securities—current (2) — 506 — 506(6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3) 1 6 — 8
Trading security investments (3) 28 — — 28
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 192 — — 192
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 656 — 656
Foreign exchange contracts — 332 — 332
Equity contracts — 6 — 6
Total — 994 — 994 (7)
Total assets $2,290 $4,381 $— $6,671 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 164 $— $ 164
Equity contracts — 19 — 19
Interest rate contracts — 3 — 3
Total liabilities $ — $ 186 $— $ 186 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(2) Commercial paper and certificates of deposit reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2015 were $292 million and $702 million, respectively
(5) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of
Financial Position at December 31, 2015 were $164 million and $22 million, respectively
(6) A vailable-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value
(7) If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total
derivative asset and liability positions would have been reduced by $139 million each.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015.

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Long-Term Debt
Fair Value Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
Short-Term Receivables and Payables market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. market price is not available, an expected present value
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt technique that uses rates currently available to the company for
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt) are financial debt with similar terms and remaining maturities is used to
liabilities with carrying values that approximate fair value. If estimate fair value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is
measured at fair value in the financial statements, these $34,655 million and $33,428 million and the estimated fair
financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value is $36,838 million and $35,220 million at December 31,
value hierarchy. 2016 and 2015, respectively. If measured at fair value in the
financial statements, long-term debt (including the current
Loans and Long-Term Receivables portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using
current interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
similar credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are
December 31, 2016 and 2015, the difference between the considered available for sale and recorded at fair value, which
carrying amount and estimated fair value for loans and long- is not materially different from carrying value, in the
term receivables was immaterial. If measured at fair value in Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
the financial statements, these financial instruments would be
The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent debt
classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
and marketable equity securities which are also considered
available for sale and recorded at fair value in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2016: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 5 $3 $— $ 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $ 3 $5 $ 0 $ 7
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2015: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1) $ 5 $3 $— $ 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) $186 $6 $ 0 $192
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during
securities in conjunction with the sale of the System x business the period were as follows:
which were classified as available-for-sale securities. Based on
($ in millions)
an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 2015,
For the year ended
the company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment loss December 31: 2016 2015 2014
of $86 million resulting in an adjusted cost basis of $185 million
Proceeds $151 $8 $21
as of December 31, 2015. In the first quarter of 2016, the
Gross realized gains
company recorded a gross realized loss of $37 million (before
(before taxes) 3 1 0
taxes) related to the sale of all the outstanding shares. The loss
Gross realized losses
on this sale was recorded in other (income) and expense in the
(before taxes) 37 1 5
Consolidated Statement of Earnings.

===== PAGE 112 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-sale respectively, for which no collateral was posted at either date.
debt and equity securities that have been included in other Full collateralization of these agreements would be required in
comprehensive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/ the event that the company’s credit rating falls below investment
losses reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive grade or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis
income/(loss) to net income were as follows: points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral
security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of derivative
($ in millions) instruments in asset positions as of December 31, 2016 and
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2015 was $1,126 million and $994 million, respectively. This
amount represents the maximum exposure to loss at the
Net unrealized gains/(losses)
arising during the period $(23) $(33) reporting date if the counterparties failed to perform as
contracted. This exposure was reduced by $116 million and
Net unrealized (gains)/losses
$139 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, of
reclassifi ed to net income* 21 53
liabilities included in master netting arrangements with those
* Includes pre-tax writedowns of $86 million in 2015. There were no counterparties. Additionally, at December 31, 2016 and 2015,
writedowns in 2016.
this exposure was reduced by $141 million and $90 million of
cash collateral and $35 million and $40 million of non-cash
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale collateral in U.S. Treasury securities, respectively, received
debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2016. by the company. At December 31, 2016 and 2015, the net
exposure related to derivative assets recorded in the
Derivative Financial Instruments Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was $834 million
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is and $726 million, respectively. At December 31, 2016 and 2015,
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the the net exposure related to derivative liabilities recorded in the
normal course of business, the company is exposed to the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was $90 million
impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency and $47 million, respectively.
fluctuations, and to a lesser extent equity and commodity price
In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the
changes and client credit risk. The company limits these risks
company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in
by following established risk management policies and
master netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or
procedures, including the use of derivatives, and, where cost
payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral
effective, financing with debt in the currencies in which assets
against the fair values of the related derivative instruments. No
are denominated. For interest rate exposures, derivatives are
amount was recognized in other receivables at December 31,
used to better align rate movements between the interest rates
2016 and 2015 for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The
associated with the company’s lease and other financial assets
amount recognized in accounts payable for the obligation to
and the interest rates associated with its financing debt.
return cash collateral was $141 million and $90 million at
Derivatives are also used to manage the related cost of debt. For
December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The company
foreign currency exposures, derivatives are used to better
restricts the use of cash collateral received to rehypothecation,
manage the cash flow volatility arising from foreign exchange
and therefore reports it in prepaid expenses and other current
rate fluctuations.
assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. No
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is amount was rehypothecated at December 31, 2016 and 2015.
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in
counterparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only
currency exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the
entering into contracts with carefully selected major financial
company with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments,
institutions based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s
designated as net investment hedges, expose the company to
established policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk on
liquidity risk as the derivatives have an immediate cash flow
principal transactions include reviewing and establishing limits
impact upon maturity which is not offset by a cash flow from the
for credit exposure and continually assessing the
translation of the underlying hedged equity. The company
creditworthiness of counterparties. The right of set-off that exists
monitors this cash loss potential on an ongoing basis, and may
under certain of these arrangements enables the legal entities
discontinue some of these hedging relationships by
of the company subject to the arrangement to net amounts due
de-designating or terminating the derivative instrument in order
to and from the counterparty reducing the maximum loss from
to manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as
credit risk in the event of counterparty default.
accounting hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements the changes in the fair value of the de-designated instruments
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These from the date of de-designation until maturity.
arrangements require the company to hold or post collateral
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
(cash or U.S. Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps
exceed contractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds
and options depending upon the underlying exposure. The
can be fixed or can vary based on credit default swap pricing or
company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
credit ratings received from the major credit agencies. The
aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments under these A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
collateralized arrangements that were in a liability position at by underlying risk, follows.
December 31, 2016 and 2015 was $11 million and $28 million,

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Interest Rate Risk hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings $8.3 billion and $8.2 billion, respectively, with a weighted-
The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund average remaining maturity of 0.7 years at both periods.
its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective
At December 31, 2016 and 2015, in connection with cash flow
financing can result in interest-rate mismatches with the
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the
underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
company recorded net gains of $462 million and net gains of
overall interest cost, the company uses interest-rate swaps to
$147 million (before taxes), respectively, in accumulated other
convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt
comprehensive income/(loss). Within these amounts
(i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt
$397 million of gains and $121 million of gains, respectively, are
issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At
expected to be reclassified to net income within the next
December 31, 2016 and 2015, the total notional amount of the
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against
company’s interest-rate swaps was $7.3 billion at both periods.
the underlying anticipated transactions.
The weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments
at December 31, 2016 and 2015 was approximately 6.2 years
and 7.2 years, respectively. Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company
Forecasted Debt Issuance
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are
starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest
accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps
over which the company has hedged its exposure to the
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not
variability in future cash flows is approximately nine years. At
have any derivative instruments relating to this program
December 31, 2016, the total notional amount of cross-currency
outstanding at December 31, 2016 and 2015.
swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency
At December 31, 2016 and 2015, net gains of less than denominated debt was $1.4 billion. At December 31, 2015,
$1 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded in no amounts were outstanding under this program.
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) in connection
At December 31, 2016 and 2015, in connection with cash flow
with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings. Within
hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the
these amounts, less than $1 million of gains, respectively, are
company recorded net gains of $29 million and net losses of
expected to be reclassified to net income within the next
$2 million (before taxes), respectively, in accumulated other
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the
comprehensive income/(loss). Within these amounts,
underlying transactions.
$27 million of gains and less than $1 million of losses,
respectively, are expected to be reclassified to net income
Foreign Exchange Risk
within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries impact against the underlying exposure.
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in
Asset/Liability Management
foreign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the
equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency
the functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In
respect to the U.S. dollar. The company also uses cross-currency
addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts
swaps and foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk
to economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency
management purpose. At December 31, 2016 and 2015, the
exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency
total notional amount of derivative instruments designated as
assets and liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap
net investment hedges was $6.7 billion and $5.5 billion,
contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the
respectively. The weighted-average remaining maturity of these
fair values of these contracts and of the underlying hedged
instruments at December 31, 2016 and 2015 was approximately
exposures are generally offsetting and are recorded in other
0.2 years at both periods.
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of
Earnings. At December 31, 2016 and 2015, the total notional
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional currency exposure was $12.7 billion and $11.7 billion,
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany respectively.
payments for royalties and goods and services among the
company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the parent company.
Equity Risk Management
In anticipation of these foreign currency cash flows and in view
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain
of the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively
broad market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily
employs foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its
related to certain obligations to employees. Changes in the
currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as cash
overall value of these employee compensation obligations are
flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which the
recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of
company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash
Earnings. Although not designated as accounting hedges, the
flows is four years. At December 31, 2016 and 2015, the total
company utilizes derivatives, including equity swaps and futures,
notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow

===== PAGE 114 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
to economically hedge the exposures related to its employee credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures.
compensation obligations. The derivatives are linked to the total The swaps are recorded at fair value with gains and losses
return on certain broad market indices or the total return on the reported in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
company’s common stock, and are recorded at fair value with Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any derivative
gains or losses also reported in SG&A expense in the Consol- instruments relating to this program outstanding at December
idated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2016 and 2015, 31, 2016 and 2015.
the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic
The company is exposed to market volatility on certain
hedges of these compensation obligations was $1.2 billion at
investment securities. The company may utilize options or
both periods.
forwards to economically hedge its market exposure. The
derivatives are recorded at fair value with gains and losses
Other Risks
reported in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2016, the company did
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed not have any derivative instruments relating to this program
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash outstanding. At December 31, 2015, the total notional amount
settlement provisions. The company records the changes in the of derivative instruments in economic hedges of investment
fair value of these warrants in other (income) and expense in the securities was less than $0.1 billion.
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have
any warrants qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the
31, 2016 and 2015. derivative and non-derivative instrument-related risk
management activity as of December 31, 2016 and 2015,
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay as well as for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and
amounts due under contractual terms. The company may utilize 2014, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Sheet Balance Sheet
At December 31: Classifi cation 2016 2015 Classifi cation 2016 2015
Designated as hedging
instruments
Interest rate Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
contracts other current assets $ — $ — expenses and liabilities $ — $ —
Investments and
sundry assets 555 656 Other liabilities 8 3
Foreign exchange Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
contracts other current assets 421 197 expenses and liabilities 46 70
Investments and
sundry assets 17 5 Other liabilities 35 19
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $ 993 $858 derivative liabilities $ 89 $ 92
Not designated as
hedging instruments
Foreign exchange Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
contracts other current assets $ 100 $ 90 expenses and liabilities $ 89 $ 75
Investments and
sundry assets 22 40 Other liabilities 18 —
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Equity contracts other current assets 11 6 expenses and liabilities 10 19
Investments and
sundry assets — — Other liabilities — —
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $ 133 $136 derivative liabilities $ 117 $ 94
Total debt designated as
hedging instruments
Short-term debt N/A N/A $1,125 $ —
Long-term debt N/A N/A $7,844 $7,945
Total $1,126 $994 $9,175 $8,131
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated Attributable to Risk
Statement of Recognized on Derivatives Being Hedged (2)
Earnings Line
For the year ended December 31: Item 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (1) (5)
Cost of
Interest rate contracts fi nancing $ 28 $108 $ 231 $ 58 $(1) $(127)
Interest
expense 31 94 206 63 (1) (114)
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (189) 127 (776) N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
Interest rate contracts and expense 0 (1) 34 N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 112 (27) 51 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
and expense (1) (9) (9) N/A N/A N/A
Total $ (18) $291 $(263) $121 $(1) $(241)
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Ineffectiveness and
Effective Portion Effective Portion Amounts Excluded from
Consolidated
Recognized in OCI Reclassifi ed from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
Statement of
For the year ended Earnings Line
December 31: 2016 2015 2014 Item 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Derivative
instruments in
cash flow hedges
Interest rate Interest
contracts $ — $ — $ — expense $ (24) $ 0 $ (1) $ — $ — $ —
Foreign exchange Other (income)
contracts 243 618 958 and expense (68) 731 98 (3) 5 (1)
Cost (13) 192 (15) — — —
SG&A expense 4 149 15 — — —
Instruments in net
investment
hedges (4)
Foreign exchange Interest
contracts 311 889 1,136 expense — — — 77 13 0
Total $555 $1,507 $2,095 $(102) $1,072 $97 $74 $18 $ (1)
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for
coupon payments required under these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
(5) For the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, fair value hedges resulted in a loss of $4 million, a loss of $2 million and a gain of
$4 million in ineffectiveness, respectively.
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 116 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit
there were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings losses of $28 million and $19 million at December 31, 2016 and
representing hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the 2015, respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts
assessment of hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and
associated with an underlying exposure that did not or was not OEM products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts
expected to occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
anticipated in the normal course of business.
Client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), net of
allowance for credit losses of $276 million and $377 million at
NOTE E. INVENTORIES December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively, are loans that are
provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of
hardware, software and services. Payment terms on these
($ in millions)
financing arrangements are generally for terms up to seven
At December 31: 2016 2015
years.
Finished goods $ 358 $ 352
Client loan and installment payment financing contracts are
Work in process and raw materials 1,195 1,199
priced independently at competitive market rates. The company
Total $1,553 $1,551
has a history of enforcing these financing agreements.
The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2016 reflects
NOTE F. FINANCING RECEIVABLES a write-off in the fourth quarter of $188 million of previously
reserved customer accounts as a result of recent experience
The following table presents financing receivables, net of and history across the portfolio, particularly in China. Of this
allowances for credit losses, including residual values. total, $41 million was in major markets and $147 million in
growth markets and $73 million and $115 million was in lease
receivables and loan receivables, respectively.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2016 2015 The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as
collateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables
Current
pledged as collateral for borrowings were $689 million and
Net investment in sales-type
$545 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
and direct fi nancing leases $ 2,909 $ 3,057
These borrowings are included in note J, “Borrowings,” on
Commercial fi nancing receivables 9,706 8,948
pages 120 to 122.
Client loan and installment
payment receivables (loans) 6,390 7,015 The company did not have any financing receivables held for sale
Total $19,006 $19,020 as of December 31, 2016 and 2015.
Noncurrent
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
Net investment in sales-type
and direct fi nancing leases $ 3,950 $ 4,501 The following tables present financing receivables on a gross
basis, excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual
Client loan and installment
payment receivables (loans) 5,071 5,512 value, by portfolio segment and by class, excluding current
commercial financing receivables and other miscellaneous
Total $ 9,021 $10,013
current financing receivables at December 31, 2016 and 2015.
The company determines its allowance for credit losses based
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms receivables, and further segments the portfolio into two classes:
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales- major markets and growth markets.
type and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual
values of $585 million and $645 million at December 31, 2016
and 2015, respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income
of $513 million and $536 million, and net of the allowance for
credit losses of $133 million and $213 million at those dates,
respectively. Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments
outstanding at December 31, 2016, expressed as a percentage
of the total, are approximately: 2017, 46 percent; 2018,
29 percent; 2019, 16 percent; 2020, 6 percent; and 2021 and
beyond, 2 percent.

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Major Growth
At December 31, 2016: Markets Markets Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 5,013 $1,323 $ 6,336
Loan receivables 9,148 2,589 11,737
Ending balance $14,161 $3,912 $18,073
Collectively evaluated for impairment $14,119 $3,646 $ 17,765
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 43 $ 266 $ 309
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2016
Lease receivables $ 25 $ 188 $ 213
Loan receivables 83 293 377
Total $ 109 $ 481 $ 590
Write-offs (59) (176) (235)
Provision 7 51 58
Other 0 (3) (3)
Ending balance at December 31, 2016 $ 57 $ 353 $ 410
Lease receivables $ 6 $ 127 $ 133
Loan receivables $ 51 $ 225 $ 276
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 30 $ 98 $ 128
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 27 $ 255 $ 281
($ in millions)
Major Growth
At December 31, 2015: Markets Markets Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 5,517 $1,524 $ 7,041
Loan receivables 9,739 3,165 12,904
Ending balance $15,256 $4,689 $19,945
Collectively evaluated for impairment $15,180 $4,227 $19,406
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 76 $ 462 $ 539
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2015
Lease receivables $ 32 $ 133 $ 165
Loan receivables 79 317 396
Total $ 111 $ 450 $ 561
Write-offs (14) (48) (62)
Provision 20 122 141
Other (8) (43) (51)
Ending balance at December 31, 2015 $ 109 $ 481 $ 590
Lease receivables $ 25 $ 188 $ 213
Loan receivables $ 83 $ 293 $ 377
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 43 $ 36 $ 79
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 65 $ 445 $ 511
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually
evaluated receivables, the company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential
loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records a specific reserve. In addition,
the company records an unallocated reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding
accounts that have been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term,
characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.

===== PAGE 118 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status ($ in millions)
The following table presents the recorded investment in Interest
financing receivables which were on non-accrual status at Income
Average Interest Recognized
December 31, 2016 and 2015. For the year ended Recorded Income on Cash
December 31, 2016: Investment Recognized Basis
Major markets $ 55 $0 $—
($ in millions)
Growth markets 284 0 —
At December 31: 2016 2015
Total $339 $0 $—
Major markets $ 2 $ 2
Growth markets 38 63
Total lease receivables $ 40 $ 65
($ in millions)
Major markets $ 19 $ 13
Interest
Growth markets 127 91 Income
Average Interest Recognized
Total loan receivables $145 $104 For the year ended Recorded Income on Cash
Total receivables $185 $168 December 31, 2015: Investment Recognized Basis
Major markets $ 51 $0 $—
Impaired Loans Growth markets 315 0 —
The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated Total $367 $0 $—
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of
impairment, loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. Credit Quality Indicators
The following tables present impaired client loan receivables at The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on
December 31, 2016 and 2015. rating agency data, publicly available information and
information provided by customers, are reviewed periodically
based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a
($ in millions) numerical rating system that maps to Moody’s Investors Service
Recorded Related credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information
At December 31, 2016: Investment Allowance
provided by Moody’s, where available, as one of many inputs in
Major markets $ 31 $ 28 its determination of customer credit rating.
Growth markets 191 185
The tables present the net recorded investment for each class
Total $223 $213 of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2016
and 2015. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging
from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others
($ in millions) are considered non-investment grade. The credit quality
indicators do not reflect mitigation actions that the company
Recorded Related
At December 31, 2015: Investment Allowance may take to transfer credit risk to third parties.
Major markets $ 50 $ 47
Growth markets 297 284 Lease Receivables
Total $347 $331 ($ in millions)
Major Growth
At December 31, 2016: Markets Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 496 $ 44
A1 – A3 1,162 181
Baa1 – Baa3 1,381 140
Ba1 – Ba2 1,144 246
Ba3 – B1 566 313
B2 – B3 271 163
Caa – D 26 69
Total $5,047 $1,156

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Loan Receivables Loan Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Major Growth Major Growth
At December 31, 2016: Markets Markets At December 31, 2015:* Markets Markets
Credit rating Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 904 $ 87 Aaa – Aa3 $ 941 $ 73
A1 – A3 2,117 355 A1 – A3 2,318 305
Baa1 – Baa3 2,515 274 Baa1 – Baa3 2,613 738
Ba1 – Ba2 2,084 483 Ba1 – Ba2 2,125 664
Ba3 – B1 1,031 613 Ba3 – B1 897 522
B2 – B3 494 320 B2 – B3 705 406
Caa – D 48 135 Caa – D 58 164
Total $9,193 $2,268 Total $9,656 $2,872
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation
At December 31, 2016, the industries which made up Global
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial At December 31, 2015, the industries which made up Global
(34 percent), Government (14 percent), Manufacturing Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial
(13 percent), Services (12 percent), Retail (8 percent), (36 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Government
Communications (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent) and (11 percent), Services (11 percent), Retail (9 percent),
Other (6 percent). Communications (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent) and Other
(6 percent).
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
Major Growth
At December 31, 2015:* Markets Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3 $ 535 $ 34
A1 – A3 1,318 142
Baa1 – Baa3 1,486 343
Ba1 – Ba2 1,208 309
Ba3 – B1 510 243
B2 – B3 401 189
Caa – D 33 76
Total $5,492 $1,336
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation

===== PAGE 120 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Fully <90 Days Recorded
Total Reserved or Unbilled Total Investment
Past Due Financing Financing Financing >90 Days and
At December 31, 2016: > 90 Days(1) Receivables Receivables Receivables Accruing(2)
Major markets $ 8 $ 11 $ 4,994 $ 5,013 $ 34
Growth markets 23 78 1,222 1,323 77
Total lease receivables $31 $ 89 $ 6,216 $ 6,336 $111
Major markets $15 $ 5 $ 9,129 $ 9,148 $ 62
Growth markets 16 177 2,396 2,589 80
Total loan receivables $31 $182 $11,524 $11,737 $141
Total $62 $271 $17,740 $18,073 $253
(1) Only the portion of a financing receivable which is greater than 90 days past due, excluding amounts that are fully reserved.
(2) At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for aged financing receivables greater than 90 days
($ in millions)
Fully <90 Days Recorded
Total Reserved or Unbilled Total Investment
Past Due Financing Financing Financing >90 Days and
At December 31, 2015:* > 90 Days(1) Receivables Receivables Receivables Accruing(2)
Major markets $ 5 $ 33 $ 5,479 $ 5,517 $108
Growth markets 30 140 1,355 1,524 60
Total lease receivables $35 $173 $ 6,834 $ 7,041 $168
Major markets $ 7 $ 35 $ 9,696 $ 9,739 $134
Growth markets 31 309 2,825 3,165 86
Total loan receivables $38 $344 $12,521 $12,904 $220
Total $73 $517 $19,355 $19,945 $388
(1) Only the portion of a financing receivable which is greater than 90 days past due, excluding amounts that are fully reserved.
(2) At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for aged financing receivables greater than 90 days
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE G. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
The company assessed all restructurings that occurred on or
after January 1, 2015 and determined that there were no
($ in millions)
significant troubled debt restructurings for the years ended
December 31, 2016 and 2015. At December 31: 2016 2015
Land and land improvements $ 506 $ 558
Buildings and building improvements 6,326 6,552
Plant, laboratory and offi ce equipment 22,318 21,116
Plant and other property—gross 29,150 28,226
Less: Accumulated depreciation 18,842 18,051
Plant and other property—net 10,308 10,176
Rental machines 984 1,115
Less: Accumulated depreciation 461 565
Rental machines—net 523 551
Total—net $10,830 $10,727
In 2016, the company recorded a pre-tax impairment charge
related to certain property, plant and equipment of $215 million.
The remaining fair value of these assets is not material. There
were no material pre-tax impairment charges related to
property, plant and equipment in 2015.

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE H. INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS ($ in millions)
Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
($ in millions) At December 31, 2015: Amount Amortization Amount
At December 31: 2016 2015 Intangible asset class
Deferred transition and setup costs Capitalized software $1,348 $ (581) $ 767
and other deferred arrangements* $1,497 $1,624 Client relationships 1,856 (927) 929
Derivatives—noncurrent 594 702 Completed technology 2,960 (1,397) 1,563
Alliance investments Patents/trademarks 335 (142) 193
Equity method 85 82 Other* 44 (10) 35
Non-equity method 19 393 Total $6,543 $(3,057) $3,487
Prepaid software 230 273
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and
Long-term deposits 267 256 nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.
Other receivables 416 516
Employee benefi t-related 272 273 The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased
Prepaid income taxes 477 496 $1,201 million during the year ended December 31, 2016,
Other assets 729 571 primarily due to intangible asset additions resulting from
acquisitions, partially offset by amortization. There was no
Total $4,585 $5,187
impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2016 and 2015. The
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements aggregate intangible amortization expense was $1,544 million
are related to services client arrangements. Refer to note A, and $1,193 million for the years ended December 31, 2016 and
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 93 for additional
2015, respectively. In addition, in 2016 and 2015, respectively,
information.
the company retired $817 million and $1,809 million of fully
amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross carrying
amount and accumulated amortization by this amount.
NOTE I. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years
Intangible Assets relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the
The following table details the company’s intangible asset Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be
balances by major asset class. the following at December 31, 2016:
($ in millions)
($ in millions) Capitalized Acquired
Gross Net Software Intangibles Total
Carrying Accumulated Carrying 2017 $494 $957 $1,450
At December 31, 2016: Amount Amortization Amount
2018 300 809 1,109
Intangible asset class
2019 83 646 729
Capitalized software $1,537 $ (661) $ 876
2020 — 547 547
Client relationships 2,831 (1,228) 1,602
2021 — 435 435
Completed technology 3,322 (1,668) 1,654
Patents/trademarks 730 (205) 525
Other* 46 (15) 31
Total $8,466 $(3,778) $4,688
* Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and
nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.

===== PAGE 122 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
As described in note T, “Segment Information,” the company changed its reportable segments in January 2016. Goodwill was
assigned to the new reportable segments on a fair value allocation basis. The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable
segment, for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December
Segment 2016 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments* 31, 2016
Cognitive Solutions $15,621 $3,821 $ 5 $(12) $ 48 $19,484
Global Business Services 4,396 303 4 (1) (95) 4,607
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 10,156 119 (12) (5) (1) 10,258
Systems 1,848 — (4) — 5 1,850
Total $32,021 $4,244 $ (7) $(18) $(42) $36,199
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December
Segment 2015 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments* 31, 2015
Cognitive Solutions $15,156 $1,020 $(2) $(18) $ (535) $15,621
Global Business Services 4,555 74 0 (1) (232) 4,396
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 9,373 1,087 (1) (7) (296) 10,156
Systems 1,472 410 0 — (33) 1,848
Total $30,556 $2,590 $(3) $(26) $(1,096 ) $32,021
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during the full year of 2016 or 2015 and the company has no accumulated
impairment losses.
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2016 and 2015 were related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to September
30, 2016 or December 31, 2014, respectively, and were still subject to the measurement period that ends at the earlier of 12 months
from the acquisition date or when information becomes available. Net purchase price adjustments of $7 million were recorded
during 2016 with the primary drivers being deferred tax assets, accounts receivable, deferred income, inventory and other
current liabilities.
NOTE J. BORROWINGS
Short-Term Debt
The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at
($ in millions)
December 31, 2016 and 2015 was 0.7 percent and 0.4 percent,
At December 31: 2016 2015
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term
Commercial paper $ 899 $ 600
loans were 9.5 percent and 5.2 percent at December 31, 2016
Short-term loans 375 590 and 2015, respectively.
Long-term debt—current maturities 6,239 5,271
Total $7,513 $6,461

===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2016 2015
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2016):
3.98% 2017 $ 5,104 $ 9,351
3.21% 2018 – 2019 8,856 7,591
1.84% 2020 –2021 4,941 3,717
2.35% 2022 1,901 1,900
3.38% 2023 1,500 1,500
3.63% 2024 2,000 2,000
7.00% 2025 600 600
3.45% 2026 1,350 —
6.22% 2027 469 469
6.50% 2028 313 313
5.88% 2032 600 600
8.00% 2038 83 83
5.60% 2039 745 745
4.00% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.00% 2045 27 27
4.70% 2046 650 —
7.13% 2096 316 316
30,563 30,319
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2016, in parentheses):
Euros (1.6%) 2019 – 2028 7,122 4,892
Pound sterling (2.7%) 2020 – 2022 1,296 1,555
Japanese yen (0.9%) 2017 – 2026 1,576 1,180
Swiss francs (6.3%) 2020 7 9
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 373 360
Other (11.0%) 2017– 2020 208 506
41,145 38,820
Less: net unamortized discount 839 838
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 82 74
Add: fair value adjustment* 669 790
40,893 38,699
Less: current maturities 6,239 5,271
Total $34,655 $33,428
* The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an
amount equal to the sum of the debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt
obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
There are no debt securities issued and outstanding by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance
subsidiary of International Business Machines Corporation, the parent. Any debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC,
would be fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest,
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale
covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders.
and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s
The failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute
consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s
an event of default with respect to the debt to which such
ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met.
provisions apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the
The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s
principal and interest on the debt to which such event of default
consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
applied would become immediately due and payable.

===== PAGE 124 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2016 2015
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $27,414 3.18% $25,499 3.41%
Floating-rate debt* 13,480 1.59% 13,199 0.96%
Total $40,893 $38,699
* Includes $7,338 million in 2016 and 2015 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt
(See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 110 through 114.)
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt Lines of Credit
outstanding at December 31, 2016, are as follows: In 2016, the company increased the size of its five-year Credit
Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) to $10.25 billion and
($ in millions) extended the term by one year to November 10, 2021. The total
Total expense recorded by the company related to this global credit
2017 $ 6,239 facility was $5.5 million in 2016, $5.3 million in 2015 and
$5.4 million in 2014. The Credit Agreement permits the company
2018 4,918
and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10.25 billion on
2019 5,196
a revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will
2020 4,593
be unconditionally backed by the company. The company may
2021 3,914 also, upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the
2022 and beyond 16,284 additional banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement,
Total $41,145 increase the commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an
additional $1.75 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit
Agreement, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow,
Interest on Debt
prepay and reborrow amounts under the Credit Agreement at
($ in millions) any time during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates on
For the year ended borrowings under the Credit Agreement will be based on
December 31: 2016 2015 2014 prevailing market interest rates, as further described in the
Cost of fi nancing $ 576 $ 540 $ 542 Credit Agreement. The Credit Agreement contains customary
Interest expense 706 481 484 representations and warranties, covenants, events of default,
Net investment derivative and indemnification provisions. The company believes that
activity (77) (13) 0 circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants
Interest capitalized 2 0 4 or an event of default, as specified in the Credit Agreement, are
Total interest paid and remote. As of December 31, 2016, there were no borrowings by
accrued $1,208 $1,008 $1,030 the company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Agreement.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some of
the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest
Refer to the related discussion on page 152 in note T, “Segment
rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing
from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 110
through 114 for a discussion of the use of currency and interest
rate swaps in the company’s debt risk management program.

===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE K. OTHER LIABILITIES total amounts accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities,
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect actual or
($ in millions)
anticipated insurance recoveries, were $272 million and
At December 31: 2016 2015 $283 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Income tax reserves $2,621 $3,150 Estimated environmental costs are not expected to materially
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,494 1,445 affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated results
Disability benefi ts 538 590 of the company’s operations in future periods. However, estimates
of future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup
Derivative liabilities 61 22
periods and changing environmental remediation regulations.
Special restructuring actions 358 362
Workforce reductions 424 407 As of December 31, 2016, the company was unable to estimate
Deferred taxes 424 253 the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are
Other taxes payable 90 89
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that
Environmental accruals 262 270
is not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished
Warranty accruals 68 83
and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would
Asset retirement obligations 142 134 remediate only if it performed major renovations of certain
Acquisition related 111 200 existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have
Divestiture related* 270 575 indeterminate settlement dates, the company could not develop
Other 613 519 a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will
continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each
Total $7,477 $8,099
future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized
* Primarily related to the divestiture of the Microelectronics business once sufficient additional information becomes available. The
total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts
In response to changing business needs, the company classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve Position were $173 million and $166 million at December
productivity, cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
noncurrent contractually obligated future payments associated
with these activities are reflected in the workforce reductions
caption in the previous table. NOTE L. EQUITY ACTIVITY
In addition, the company executed certain special restructuring-
related actions prior to 2006. The previous table provides the The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000
noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of
Current liabilities are included in other accrued expenses and which 945,867,403 shares were outstanding at December 31,
liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 2016 and 150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a
and were immaterial at December 31, 2016. $.01 per share par value, none of which were outstanding at
December 31, 2016.
The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals related to
terminated employees who are no longer working for the
Stock Repurchases
company who were granted annual payments to supplement
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase
their incomes in certain countries. Depending on the individual
IBM common stock. The company repurchased 23,283,400
country’s legal requirements, these required payments will
common shares at a cost of $3,455 million, 30,338,647 common
continue until the former employee begins receiving pension
shares at a cost of $4,701 million and 71,504,867 common
benefits or passes away.
shares at a cost of $13,395 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014,
The company employs extensive internal environmental respectively. These amounts reflect transactions executed
protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The through December 31 of each year. Actual cash disbursements
company also participates in environmental assessments and for repurchased shares may differ due to varying settlement
cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities, dates for these transactions. At December 31, 2016,
previously owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s $5,109 million of Board common stock repurchase authorization
maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be was available. The company plans to purchase shares on the
estimated and no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO open market or in private transactions from time to time,
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The depending on market conditions.

===== PAGE 126 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Stock Transactions stock-based compensation plans, 854,365 common shares
The company issued the following shares of common stock as at a cost of $126 million, 1,625,820 common shares at a cost
part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees of $248 million, and 1,313,569 common shares at a cost
stock purchase plan: 3,893,366 shares in 2016, 6,013,875 of $236 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively, were
shares in 2015, and 7,687,026 shares in 2014. The company remitted by employees to the company in order to satisfy
issued 383,077 treasury shares in 2016, 1,155,558 treasury minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. These
shares in 2015 and 1,264,232 treasury shares in 2014, as a amounts are included in the treasury stock balance in the
result of restricted stock unit releases and exercises of Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and the
stock options by employees of certain acquired businesses Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2016: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (20) $(120) $ (140)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (38) $ 14 $ (23)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 34 (13) 21
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (3) $ 1 $ (2)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 243 $ (80) $ 163
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 13 (8) 6
SG&A expense (4) (2) (7)
Other (income) and expense 68 (26) 42
Interest expense 24 (9) 15
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 345 $(126) $ 219
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period $(2,490) $ 924 $(1,566)
Curtailments and settlements (16) 1 (15)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (107) 34 (74)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,764 (976) 1,788
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $ 150 $ (19) $ 132
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 472 $(263) $ 209
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.)

===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2015: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,379) $ (342) $(1,721)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (54) $ 21 $ (33)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 86 (33) 53
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 32 $ (12) $ 20
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 618 $ (218) $ 399
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (192) 57 (135)
SG&A expense (149) 43 (105)
Other (income) and expense (731) 281 (451)
Interest expense 0 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (454) $ 162 $ (292)
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 6 $ (2) $ 4
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,963) 1,039 (1,925)
Curtailments and settlements 33 (9) 24
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (100) 36 (65)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,304 (1,080) 2,223
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $ 279 $ (17) $ 262
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(1,523) $ (208) $(1,731)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.)

===== PAGE 128 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2014: Amount Benefi t Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,636) $ (438) $(2,074)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (29) $ 11 $ (18)
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 5 (2) 3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (24) $ 9 $ (15)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 958 $ (341) $ 618
Reclassifi cation of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales 15 (7) 9
SG&A expense (15) 6 (9)
Other (income) and expense (98) 38 (60)
Interest expense 1 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 861 $ (304) $ 557
Retirement-related benefi t plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 1 $ 0 $ 1
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (9,799) 3,433 (6,366)
Curtailments and settlements 24 (7) 17
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (114) 41 (73)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,531 (852) 1,678
Total retirement-related benefi t plans $(7,357) $2,615 $(4,742)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(8,156) $1,883 $(6,274)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefi t For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2013 $(165) $ 332 $(21,767) $ (1) $(21,602)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 618 (2,074) (6,348) (18) (7,822)
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other
comprehensive income (60) 0 1,605 3 1,548
Total change for the period 557 (2,074) (4,742) (15) (6,274)
December 31, 2014 392 (1,742) (26,509) (15) (27,875)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 399 (1,721) (1,897) (33) (3,252)
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other
comprehensive income (691) 0 2,158 53 1,520
Total change for the period (292) (1,721) 262 20 (1,731)
December 31, 2015 100 (3,463) (26,248) 5 (29,607)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifi cations 163 (140) (1,581) (23) (1,581)
Amount reclassifi ed from accumulated other
comprehensive income 56 0 1,714 21 1,791
Total change for the period 219 (140) 132 (2) 209
December 31, 2016 $ 319 $(3,603) $(26,116) $ 2 $(29,398)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.

===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M. CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS uncertain, and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome
of these matters. It is the company’s experience that damage
Contingencies amounts claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and
As a company with a substantial employee population and with unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the
plaintiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number
suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from of other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations
time to time in the ordinary course of its business. The company and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural
is a leader in the information technology industry and, as such, status of the matter in question, the presence of complex or
has been and will continue to be subject to claims challenging novel legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and
its IP rights and associated products and offerings, including development of information important to the matters. The
claims of copyright and patent infringement and violations of company reviews claims, suits, investigations and proceedings
trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the company at least quarterly, and decisions are made with respect to
enforces its own IP against infringement, through license recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing reasonably
negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical for possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the
companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide discussions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings,
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related reviews by counsel and other information pertinent to a
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and particular matter.
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in
other benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably
product liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law
have a material effect on the company’s business, financial
and environmental matters. These actions may be commenced condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a
by a number of different parties, including competitors, clients, number of variables, including: the timing and amount of such
current or former employees, government and regulatory losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies;
agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in the significance of the impact any such losses, damages or
which the company does business. Some of the actions to which remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements;
the company is party may involve particularly complex technical and the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter
issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the that may give rise to additional factors. While the company will
laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. continue to defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, company’s business, financial condition, results of operations
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by the
been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably resolution of one or more of these matters.
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and involving the company.
2014 were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v.
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood IBM). The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah.
of material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the Plaintiff is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s
company also discloses matters based on its consideration of
UNIX IP rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair
other matters and qualitative factors, including the experience competition, interference with contract and breach of contract
of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and with regard to the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and
employee relations considerations. contribution of code to Linux and the company has asserted
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and counterclaims. On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time bankruptcy protection, and all proceedings in this case were
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for stayed. The court in another suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell,
example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the Inc., held a trial in March 2010. The jury found that Novell is the
strength of the company’s defenses in those matters. With owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights; the judge subsequently
respect to the remaining claims, suits, investigations and ruled that SCO is obligated to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s
proceedings discussed in this note, except as specifically claims against IBM and Sequent for breach of UNIX license
discussed herein, the company is unable to provide estimates agreements. On August 30, 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of
of reasonably possible losses or range of losses, including losses Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling and denied SCO’s
in excess of amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. appeal of this matter. In June 2013, the Federal Court in Utah
Claims, suits, investigations and proceedings are inherently granted SCO’s motion to reopen the SCO v. IBM case.

===== PAGE 130 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In February 2016, the Federal Court ruled in favor of IBM on all approximately 290 individual actions brought since early 2010
of SCO’s remaining claims, and in March 2016, SCO filed a notice by participants of the defined benefits plans who left IBM UK.
of appeal to the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals. These actions, which allege constructive dismissal and age
discrimination, are pending before the Employment Tribunal in
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf
Southampton UK.
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued
one another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the In March 2011, the company announced that it had agreed to
modernization of social service program processing in Indiana. settle a civil enforcement action with the Securities and
After six weeks of trial, on July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior Exchange Commission (SEC) relating to alleged violations of the
Court in Marion County rejected the State’s claims in their Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (FCPA). On July 25, 2013,
entirety and awarded IBM $52 million plus interest and costs. the court approved that 2011 settlement and required that for
On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court of Appeals reversed a two-year period IBM make reports to the SEC and the court on
portions of the trial judge’s findings, found IBM in material certain matters, including those relating to compliance with the
breach, and ordered the case remanded to the trial judge to FCPA. The two-year period expired in July 2015. In early 2012,
determine the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana Court of IBM notified the SEC of an investigation by the Polish Central
Appeals also affirmed approximately $50 million of the trial Anti-Corruption Bureau involving allegations of illegal activity by
court’s award of damages to IBM. On March 22, 2016, the a former IBM Poland employee in connection with sales to the
Indiana Supreme Court affirmed the outcome of the Indiana Polish government. IBM is cooperating with the SEC and Polish
Court of Appeals and remanded the case to the Indiana authorities in this matter. In April 2013, IBM learned that the
Superior Court. U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) is also investigating allegations
related to the Poland matter, as well as allegations relating to
On April 16, 2014, Iusacell SA de C.V. (Iusacell) sued IBM,
transactions in Argentina, Bangladesh and Ukraine. The DOJ is
claiming that IBM made fraudulent misrepresentations that
also seeking information regarding the company’s global FCPA
induced Iusacell to enter into an agreement with IBM Mexico.
compliance program and its public sector business. The
Iusacell claims damages for lost profits. Iusacell’s complaint
company is cooperating with the DOJ in this matter.
relates to a contractual dispute in Mexico, which is the subject
of a pending arbitration proceeding in Mexico initiated by IBM In March 2015, putative class action litigation was commenced
Mexico against Iusacell for breach of the underlying agreement. in the United States District Court for the Southern District of
On November 14, 2014, the District Court in the Southern New York related to the company’s October 2014 announcement
District of New York granted IBM’s motion to stay Iusacell’s that it was divesting its global commercial semiconductor
action against the company pending the arbitration in Mexico technology business. The company and three of its officers were
between Iusacell and IBM Mexico. named as defendants. Plaintiffs allege that defendants violated
Sections 20(a) and 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal
and Rule 10b-5 thereunder. In May 2015, a related putative
proceedings in May 2010 before the High Court in London
class action was also commenced in the United States District
against the IBM UK Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two
Court for the Southern District of New York based on the same
representative beneficiaries of the UK Trust membership. IBM
underlying facts, alleging violations of the Employee Retirement
UK is seeking a declaration that it acted lawfully both in notifying
Income Security Act (“ERISA”). The company, management’s
the Trustee of the UK Trust that it was closing its UK defined
Retirement Plans Committee, and three current or former IBM
benefit plans to future accruals for most participants and in
executives were named as defendants. On September 7, 2016,
implementing the company’s new retirement policy. In April
the Court granted the company’s motions to dismiss the
2014, the High Court acknowledged that the changes made to
plaintiffs’ claims in both actions. On October 21, 2016, the
its UK defined benefit plans were within IBM’s discretion, but
ERISA plaintiffs filed an amended complaint, dropping the
ruled that IBM breached its implied duty of good faith both in
company as a defendant. The matter remains pending in the
implementing these changes and in the manner in which it
United States District Court.
consulted with employees. Proceedings to determine remedies
were held in July 2014, and in February 2015 the High Court In August 2015, IBM learned that the SEC is conducting an
held that for IBM to make changes to accruals under the plan investigation relating to revenue recognition with respect to the
would require a new consultation of the participants, but other accounting treatment of certain transactions in the U.S., UK and
changes (including to early retirement policy) would not require Ireland. The company is cooperating with the SEC in this matter.
such consultation. IBM UK has appealed both the breach and
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
remedies judgments. If the appeal is unsuccessful, the Court’s
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under
rulings would require IBM to reverse the changes made to the
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
UK defined benefit plans retroactive to their effective dates. This
and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws
could result in an estimated non-operating one-time pre-tax
similar to CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible
charge of approximately $290 million, plus ongoing defined
parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of fault
benefit related accruals. In addition, IBM UK is a defendant in
or ownership of sites. The company is also conducting

===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
or in the vicinity of several current or former operating sites future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
globally pursuant to permits, administrative orders or conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique
agreements with country, state or local environmental agencies, facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
and is involved in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current Historically, payments made by the company under these
or former operating sites. agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s
business, financial condition or results of operations.
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the commitments. The maximum potential future payment under
company is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax these financial guarantees was $34 million and $34 million at
authorities regarding non-income tax assessments and non- December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The fair value of the
income tax litigation matters. In 2016, the company also guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
received new non-income tax assessments from the Financial Position was immaterial.
municipality of Rio de Janeiro. The total potential amount related
to all these matters for all applicable years is approximately
$980 million. The company believes it will prevail on these NOTE N. TAXES
matters and that this amount is not a meaningful indicator
of liability.
($ in millions)
For the year ended
Commitments
December 31: 2016 2015 2014
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
Income from continuing
include unused amounts of $6,542 million and $5,477 million operations before
at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. A portion of these income taxes
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to
U.S. operations $ 3,650 $ 5,915 $ 7,509
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company
Non-U.S. operations 8,680 10,030 12,477
has committed to provide future financing to its clients in
Total income from
connection with client purchase agreements for approximately
continuing operations
$2,463 million and $2,097 million at December 31, 2016 and
before income taxes $12,330 $15,945 $19,986
2015, respectively.
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor to The income from continuing operations provision for income
disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of taxes by geographic operations is as follows:
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following
is a description of arrangements in which the company is ($ in millions)
the guarantor. For the year ended
December 31: 2016 2015 2014
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to
U.S. operations $ 38 $ 849 $2,093
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with
Non-U.S. operations 411 1,732 2,141
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in
Total continuing
the context of contracts entered into by the company, under
operations provision for
which the company customarily agrees to hold the other party
income taxes $449 $2,581 $4,234
harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations
and covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold,
certain IP rights, specified environmental matters, third-party
performance of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain
income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by the
company is conditioned on the other party making a claim
pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract,
the procedures of which typically allow the company to
challenge the other party’s claims. While typically
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual
maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations
under these agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or
nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may have
recourse against third parties for certain payments made by
the company.

===== PAGE 132 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The components of the income from continuing operations In 2016, the company favorably settled the remaining open
provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: items on the company’s U.S. income tax returns for 2011 and
2012 resulting in no further adjustments.
($ in millions)
For the year ended In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of the
December 31: 2016 2015 2014 Japanese Tax Authorities with respect to certain foreign tax
U.S. federal losses. The tax benefit of these losses, approximately
Current $ 186 $ (321) $ 1,134 $1.0 billion adjusted for currency, had been included in
Deferred (746) 553 105 unrecognized tax benefits as of December 2015. In April 2011,
$ (560) $ 232 $ 1,239 the company received notification that the appeal was denied,
and in June 2011, the company filed a lawsuit challenging
U.S. state and local
this decision. In May 2014, the Tokyo District Court ruled in favor
Current $ 244 $ 128 $ 541
of the company. The Japanese government appealed the
Deferred (44) 116 (105) ruling to the Tokyo High Court. On March 25, 2015, the Tokyo
$ 200 $ 244 $ 436 High Court ruled in favor of IBM and, on April 7, 2015, the
Non-U.S. Japanese government appealed the ruling to the Japan Supreme
Current $ 988 $2,101 $ 2,825 Court. On February 18, 2016, the Supreme Court denied the
government appeal thereby upholding the Tokyo High Court’s
Deferred (179) 4 (266)
decision in favor of the company as the final judgment in this
$ 809 $2,105 $ 2,559
matter. This led to a refund of the taxes previously paid of
Total continuing
$1.0 billion, which the company received in the first-quarter
operations provision
2016 and included in the effective tax rate. Interest of
for income taxes $ 449 $2,581 $ 4,234
$0.2 billion was also received.
Discontinued operations
provision for income The 2016 continuing operations effective tax rate decreased
taxes (2) (117) (1,617) 12.5 points from 2015 driven by: the favorable resolution of the
Provision for social Japan tax matter described above (9.5 points), a benefit due to
security, real estate, the year-to-year decrease in tax charges related to intercompany
personal property payments made by foreign subsidiaries and the intercompany
and other taxes 3,417 3,497 4,068 licensing of certain IP (5.7 points), and a benefit from the
Total taxes included in geographic mix of pre-tax earnings year over year. These
net income $3,864 $5,961 $ 6,685 benefits were partially offset by a reduced benefit year to year
related to audit settlements (2.3 points) and a decreased
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign tax credits
company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is as (0.6 points).
follows:
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and
For the year ended liabilities did not have a material impact on the company’s
December 31: 2016 2015 2014 effective tax rate.
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities
Foreign tax differential (21) (17) (14)
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position were:
Japan resolution (10) 0 0
Deferred Tax Assets
State and local 1 1 1
Domestic incentives (1) (2) (2) ($ in millions)
Other 0 (1) 1 At December 31: 2016 2015*
Effective rate 4% 16% 21% Retirement benefi ts $ 4,671 $ 4,621
Share-based and other compensation 1,132 963
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 1,676 1,055
Deferred income 741 762
The significant components reflected within the tax rate
reconciliation labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 816 767
effects of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than Bad debt, inventory and warranty
the U.S. statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax reserves 473 528
impacts of non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts Depreciation 270 329
of intercompany transactions. These items also reflect audit Accruals 624 904
settlements, excluding Japan, or changes in the amount of Other 1,503 1,000
unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of these items.
Gross deferred tax assets 11,906 10,929
Less: valuation allowance 916 740
Net deferred tax assets $10,990 $10,189
* Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation

===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Deferred Tax Liabilities The liability at December 31, 2016 of $3,740 million can be
reduced by $775 million of offsetting tax benefits associated
($ in millions)
with the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing
At December 31: 2016 2015
adjustments, U.S. tax credits, state income taxes and timing
Depreciation $ 856 $ 919
adjustments. The net amount of $2,965 million, if recognized,
Retirement benefi ts 406 252 would favorably affect the company’s effective tax rate. The net
Goodwill and intangible assets 1,800 1,407 amounts at December 31, 2015 and 2014 were $3,724 million
Leases 651 916 and $4,229 million, respectively.
Software development costs 672 554 Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are
Deferred transition costs 351 395 included in income tax expense. During the year ended
Other 1,455 1,177 December 31, 2016, the company recognized $62 million in
Gross deferred tax liabilities $6,191 $5,620 interest expense and penalties; in 2015, the company
recognized $141 million in interest expense and penalties;
and, in 2014, the company recognized $216 million in interest
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign
expense and penalties. The company has $625 million for the
and domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is
payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31,
$855 million, as well as domestic and foreign credit
2016, and had $613 million accrued at December 31, 2015.
carryforwards of $1,982 million. Substantially all of these
carryforwards are available for at least two years and the Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably
majority are available for 10 years or more. possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2016, 2015 and
decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is
2014 were $916 million, $740 million and $646 million,
associated with the anticipated resolution of the company’s U.S.
respectively. The amounts principally apply to certain foreign,
income tax audit for 2013 and 2014, as well as various non-U.S.
state and local loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of
audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax
management, it is more likely than not that these assets will not
benefits at December 31, 2016 could be reduced by
be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to
$966 million.
these carryforwards are realized in the future, the reduction in
the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense. The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various state
and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state and
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2016
foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer
decreased by $834 million in 2016 to $3,740 million. A
subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2012. With limited
reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of
exception, the company is no longer subject to income tax
unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
examination of its U.S. federal tax return for years prior to 2013.
($ in millions) The open years contain matters that could be subject to differing
interpretations of applicable tax laws and regulations related to
2016 2015 2014
the amount and/or timing of income, deductions and tax credits.
Balance at January 1 $ 4,574 $ 5,104 $4,458
Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the
Additions based on tax
company believes that adequate amounts of tax and interest
positions related to the
have been provided for any significant adjustments that are
current year 560 464 697
expected to result for these years.
Additions for tax positions
of prior years 334 569 586 In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax
Reductions for tax assessment notice for approximately $866 million
positions of (approximately $789 million at 2016 year-end currency rates)
prior years (including from the Indian Tax Authorities for 2009. In July 2016, the
impacts due to a lapse Karnataka High Court in Bangalore set aside this assessment by
in statute) (1,443) (1,348) (579) way of court order and the company reached a mutual agreement
Settlements (285) (215) (58) with the Income Tax Department for a new assessment, which
Balance at December 31 $ 3,740 $ 4,574 $5,104 will take place over an 18-month period. At December 31, 2016,
the company has recorded $568 million as prepaid income taxes
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current in India. A significant portion of this balance represents cash tax
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, deposits paid over time to protect the company’s right to appeal
certain tax incentives and credits and state issues. The various income tax assessments made by the Indian
settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits for tax Tax Authorities. The company believes it will prevail on
positions of prior years are primarily attributable to the favorable these matters.
resolution of the Japan tax matter, currency, non-U.S. audits and
In the first quarter of 2016, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service
impacts due to lapses in statutes of limitation.
commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2013
and 2014. The company anticipates that this audit will be
completed by the end of 2017.

===== PAGE 134 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $71.4 billion NOTE O. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December
31, 2016, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest RD&E expense was $5,751 million in 2016, $5,247 million in
these earnings in non-U.S. operations. However, the company 2015 and $5,437 million in 2014. In addition, RD&E expense
periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent included in discontinued operations was $1 million in 2016,
that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification $197 million in 2015 and $368 million in 2014.
of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely
reinvested earnings is not practicable. The company incurred total expense of $5,421 million,
$5,178 million and $5,595 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014,
respectively, for scientific research and the application of
scientific advances to the development of new and improved
products and their uses, as well as services and their application.
Within these amounts, software-related expense was
$3,470 million, $3,064 million and $3,064 million in 2016, 2015
and 2014, respectively.
Expense for product-related engineering was $332 million,
$267 million and $211 million in 2016, 2015 and 2014,
respectively.
NOTE P. EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share
calculations are based
Basic 955,422,530 978,744,523 1,004,272,584
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 2,416,940 3,037,001 4,332,155
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 874,626 918,744 1,395,741
Assuming dilution 958,714,097 982,700,267 1,010,000,480
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $13,364 $15,751
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (9) (174) (3,729)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $11,872 $13,190 $12,022
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $13,364 $15,751
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares 0 (1) (3)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per
share is calculated $11,881 $13,363 $15,749
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic and
diluted earnings per share is calculated (9) (174 ) (3,729 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $11,872 $13,189 $12,020
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 12.39 $ 13.60 $ 15.59
Discontinued operations (0.01) (0.18) (3.69)
Total $ 12.38 $ 13.42 $ 11.90
Basic
Continuing operations $ 12.44 $ 13.66 $ 15.68
Discontinued operations (0.01) (0.18) (3.71)
Total $ 12.43 $ 13.48 $ 11.97
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 405,552 common shares in 2016, 41,380 common shares in 2015 and 17,420 common
shares in 2014 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise price
of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would
have been antidilutive.

===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE Q. RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is
recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and rentals are included in the determination of rental expense as
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum rental
was $1,508 million in 2016, $1,474 million in 2015 and commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related to
$1,592 million in 2014. Within these amounts, rental expense vacant space associated with workforce transformation,
reflected in discontinued operations was $29 million and sublease income commitments and capital lease commitments.
$95 million, in 2015 and 2014, respectively. Rental expense in These amounts reflect activities primarily related to office
space, as well as data centers.
($ in millions)
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 Beyond 2021
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,414 $1,328 $1,218 $1,016 $796 $1,111
Vacant space $ 42 $ 29 $ 20 $ 15 $ 11 $ 9
Sublease income commitments $ 12 $ 8 $ 6 $ 3 $ — $ —
Capital lease commitments $ 1 $ 2 $ 2 $ 2 $ — $ —
NOTE R. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
The following table presents total stock-based compensation the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
cost included in income from continuing operations. “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive
Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the
Board of Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under
($ in millions) the Plans principally include restricted stock units, performance
For the year ended share units, stock options or any combination thereof.
December 31: 2016 2015 2014
Cost $ 88 $ 100 $ 121 The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under
the company’s existing Plans was 273 million at December 31,
Selling, general and
administrative 401 322 350 2016. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under
previous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could
Research, development
and engineering 55 51 54 be reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such,
66.2 million additional shares were considered authorized to be
Other (income) and
issued under the company’s existing Plans as of December 31,
expense* — (6 ) (13)
2016. There were 106.7 million unused shares available to be
Pre-tax stock-based
granted under the Plans as of December 31, 2016.
compensation cost 544 468 512
Income tax benefi ts (179) (156) (174) Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
Net stock-based awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
compensation cost $ 364 $ 312 $ 338 approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, the
number of options or the value of the award, the exercise price
* Reflects the one-time effects related to divestitures
or formula for determining the exercise price and the date of
grant. All awards for senior management are approved by the
The amount of stock-based compensation cost included Committee. All awards for employees other than senior
in discontinued operations, net of tax, was immaterial in management are approved by senior management pursuant to
all periods. a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee,
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested and the grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed
awards at December 31, 2016 and 2015 was $934 million and periodically with the Committee. Awards that are given as part
$871 million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2016 of annual total compensation for senior management and other
is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of employees are made on specific cycle dates scheduled in
approximately 2.6 years. advance. With respect to awards given in connection with
promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date
cost at December 31, 2016, 2015, and 2014. of the promotion or the date of hire.
Stock Awards
Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units
(RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs),
or Performance Share Units (PSUs).

===== PAGE 136 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
RSUs
2016 2015 2014
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $159 7,527,341 $171 7,734,277 $166 8,635,317
RSUs granted 140 3,985,870 143 4,230,186 172 2,525,947
RSUs released 174 (1,860,660) 164 (3,567,495) 157 (2,401,761)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 158 (753,459) 167 (869,627) 167 (1,025,226)
Balance at December 31 $147 8,899,092 $159 7,527,341 $171 7,734,277
PSUs
2016 2015 2014
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $173 2,928,932 $185 3,140,707 $178 2,824,294
PSUs granted at target 140 990,336 153 1,137,242 180 1,430,098
Performance adjustments* 194 (387,457) 185 (168,055) 157 29,960
PSUs released 194 (419,759) 185 (840,552) 157 (1,027,181)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 174 (237,294) 184 (340,410) 187 (116,464)
Balance at December 31** $155 2,874,758 $173 2,928,932 $185 3,140,707
* Represents the change in shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics were above or below specified
targets
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares
issued will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically received by the employee depends on the company’s
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents performance against specified targets and typically vest over a
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not paid.
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date,
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion
of dividend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at
will be achieved. Over the performance period, the number of
December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 is the same as the period
shares of stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or
over which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized,
downward based upon the probability of achievement of
which is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs
performance targets. The ultimate number of shares issued and
granted during the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and
the related compensation cost recognized as expense will be
2014 was $557 million, $606 million and $434 million,
based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to the
respectively. The total fair value of RSUs vested and released
specified targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during
during the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was
the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was
$323 million, $583 million and $378 million, respectively. As of
$138 million, $174 million and $257 million, respectively.
December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, there was $814 million,
Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during the years
$800 million and $754 million, respectively, of unrecognized
ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was $81 million,
compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The company
$156 million and $161 million, respectively.
received no cash from employees as a result of employee vesting
and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, 2016, In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the
2015 and 2014. tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 were $118 million,
$228 million and $222 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock Options The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date
During the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014, the of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and
company did not grant stock options. During the year ended assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options
December 31, 2016, the company made one grant of 1.5 million include the grant price of the award, the expected option term,
premium-priced stock options. The option award cliff vests in volatility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the
three years and has a contractual term of 10 years. The total company’s dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not
compensation cost to be recognized over the three-year vesting intended to predict actual future events or the value ultimately
period is expected to be $12 million. realized by employees who receive equity awards, and
subsequent events are not indicative of the reasonableness of
the original estimates of fair value made by the company.
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014.
2016 2015 2014
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number of Average Number of Average Number of
Exercise Shares Exercise Shares Exercise Shares
Price Under Option Price Under Option Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $ 94 479,774 $ 97 1,750,949 $97 5,622,951
Options granted 140 1,500,000 — — — —
Options exercised 91 (361,088) 98 (1,214,109) 97 (3,740,252)
Options canceled/expired 86 (4,763) 100 (57,066) 95 (131,750)
Balance at December 31 $137 1,613,923 $ 94 479,774 $97 1,750,949
Exercisable at December 31 $103 113,923 $ 94 479,774 $97 1,750,949
The shares under option at December 31, 2016 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding
Weighted- Weighted-Average
Average Number of Aggregate Remaining
Exercise Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$128 and under $103 113,923 $ 7,198,794 0.3
$129 — $154 140 1,500,000 39,236,250 9.1
$137 1,613,923 $46,435,044 8.5
Options Exercisable
Weighted- Weighted-Average
Average Number of Aggregate Remaining
Exercise Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$128 and under $103 113,923 $ 7,198,794 0.3
Exercises of Employee Stock Options The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with
ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was $20 million, treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31,
$74 million and $323 million, respectively. The total cash 2016 and 2015 were approximately 1,279 million and
received from employees as a result of employee stock option 1,255 million shares, respectively.
exercises for the years ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and
2014 was approximately $33 million, $119 million and
$364 million, respectively. In connection with these exercises,
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 were $7 million, $26 million
and $107 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 138 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisitions U.S. Plans
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was Defined Benefit Pension Plans
an additional 0.6 million options outstanding at December 31, IBM Personal Pension Plan
2016, as a result of the company’s conversion of stock-based IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees
awards previously granted by the acquired entities. hired prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined
The weighted-average exercise price of these awards was benefit pension benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior
$33 per share. to 2008, the IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax
qualified (qualified) plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified)
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan plan. Effective January 1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock renamed the Excess Personal Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants the qualified plan is now referred to as the Qualified PPP. The
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a combined plan is now referred to as the PPP. The Qualified PPP
5 percent discount off the average market price on the day of is funded by company contributions to an irrevocable trust fund,
purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of which is held for the sole benefit of participants and
eligible compensation. Eligible compensation includes any beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides
compensation received by the employee during the year. The benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.
ESPP provides for offering periods during which shares may be Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
purchased and continues as long as shares remain available benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion of method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines
the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are benefits based on salary, years of service, mortality and other
restricted from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock participant-specific factors. The second method is a cash
in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period. balance formula that calculates benefits using a percentage of
Employees purchased 1.2 million, 1.3 million and 1.3 million employees’ annual salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively. Cash dividends declared December 31, 2007 for all participants.
and paid by the company on its common stock also include cash
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP.
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
reinvested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is
Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted
based on average earnings, years of service and age at
earnings per share.
termination of employment.
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were
31, 2007 for all participants.
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides
for semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and
continuing as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, Defined Contribution Plans
IBM 4O1(k) Plus Plan
unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board
of Directors. U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified
Approximately 21.8 million, 23.1 million and 24.4 million shares defined contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, Revenue Code. Under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible
2016, 2015 and 2014, respectively. employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their
contributions generally up to 6 percent of eligible compensation
for those hired prior to January 1, 2005, and, generally up to
NOTE S. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS 5 percent of eligible compensation for those hired on or after
January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employees generally
Description of Plans receive automatic contributions from the company equal to
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined 1, 2 or 4 percent of eligible compensation based on their
contribution plans that cover eligible regular employees, a eligibility to participate in the PPP as of December 31, 2007.
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives Employees generally receive automatic contributions and
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily matching contributions after the completion of one year
consisting of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible of service.
retirees and dependents.

===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
All contributions, including the company match, are made in Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
cash and invested in accordance with participants’ investment U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
elections. There are no minimum amounts that must be invested The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension
in company stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring postretirement benefit plan that provides medical and dental
amounts out of company stock to another investment choice, benefits to eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well
other than excessive trading rules applicable to such as life insurance for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999,
investments. Matching and automatic contributions are made the company established a Future Health Account (FHA) for
once annually at the end of the year. In order to receive such employees who were more than five years from retirement
contributions each year, a participant must be employed on eligibility. Employees who were within five years of retirement
December 15 of the plan year. However, matching and automatic eligibility are covered under the company’s prior retiree health
contributions can be made for certain types of separations that benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or the prior retiree
occur prior to December 15, including, for example, if the health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the
participant has completed certain service and/or age company for retiree health benefits. Effective January 1, 2014,
requirements at separation. The company’s matching the company amended the plan to establish a Health
contributions vest immediately and participants are always fully Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) for each Medicare-eligible
vested in their own contributions. plan retiree, surviving spouse and long-term disability plan
participant who is eligible for company-subsidized coverage and
IBM Excess 4O1(k) Plus Plan who enrolls in an individual plan under the Medicare Exchange.
The IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 401(k)) is an unfunded, The company also amended its life insurance plan. Employees
nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees whose retiring on or after January 1, 2015 are not eligible for
eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS life insurance.
compensation limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later,
in the Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to
are not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension
provide benefits that would be provided under the qualified IBM postretirement benefits.
401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation limits did not apply.
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping Non-U.S. Plans
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional sponsor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that
accounts in investments which mirror the primary investment cover eligible regular employees. The company deposits funds
options available under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities
Excess 401(k) are also eligible to receive company match and under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans.
automatic contributions (at the same rate as under the 401(k) Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based
Plus Plan) on eligible compensation deferred into the Excess either on years of service and the employee’s compensation
401(k) and on compensation earned in excess of the Internal (generally during a fixed number of years immediately before
Revenue Code pay limit once they have completed one year of retirement) or on annual credits. The range of assumptions that
service. Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), including are used for the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the
company contributions are recorded as liabilities in the different economic environments within the various countries.
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Matching and
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries
automatic contributions are made once annually at the end of
sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide
the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, a
medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and
participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year.
eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible
However, matching and automatic contributions can be made
non-U.S. retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered
for certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15,
by local government sponsored and administered programs.
including, for example, if the participant has completed certain
service and/or age requirements at separation.

===== PAGE 140 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the
Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Defi ned benefi t pension plans $(334) $(284) $(833) $1,039 $1,421 $1,267 $ 705 $1,137 $ 434
Retention Plan 17 23 15 — — — 17 23 15
Total defi ned benefi t pension
plans (income)/cost $(317) $(261) $(818) $1,039 $1,421 $1,267 $ 722 $1,160 $ 449
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and
non-U.S. plans $ 626 $ 676 $ 713 $ 420 $ 442 $ 526 $1,046 $1,117 $1,239
Excess 401(k) 24 21 14 — — —24 21 14
Total defi ned contribution
plans cost $ 650 $ 697 $ 727 $ 420 $ 442 $ 526 $1,070 $1,138 $1,253
Nonpension postretirement
benefi t plans cost $ 195 $ 218 $ 206 $ 16 $ 55 $ 66 $ 211 $ 273 $ 272
Total retirement-related
benefi ts net periodic cost $ 527 $ 654 $ 115 $1,475 $1,918 $1,859 $2,003 $2,572 $1,974
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement
benefit plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefi t Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualifi ed PPP $50,403 $51,287 $51,405 $51,716 $ 1,002 $ 429
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,509 $ 1,522 $ — $ — $ (1,509) $ (1,522)
Retention Plan 307 312 — — (307) (312)
Nonpension postretirement benefi t
plan 4,470 4,652 26 71 (4,444) (4,582)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 6,286 $ 6,486 $ 26 $ 71 $ (6,260) $ (6,415)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualifi ed defi ned benefi t pension
plans $17,614 $16,766 $19,647 $18,070 $ 2,032 $ 1,304
Nonpension postretirement benefi t
plans 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $17,614 $16,766 $19,647 $18,070 $ 2,032 $ 1,304
Underfunded plans
Qualifi ed defi ned benefi t pension
plans $21,447 $22,039 $16,374 $17,677 $ (5,074) $ (4,362)
Nonqualifi ed defi ned benefi t
pension plans 5,919 5,911 — — (5,919) (5,911)
Nonpension postretirement benefi t
plans 692 618 71 59 (622) (558)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $28,059 $28,568 $16,445 $17,737 $(11,614) $(10,832)
Total overfunded plans $68,017 $68,053 $71,051 $69,786 $ 3,034 $ 1,734
Total underfunded plans $34,344 $35,054 $16,470 $17,807 $ (17,874) $(17,247)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability)
amounts as compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).

===== PAGE 141 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2016, the company’s qualified defined defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans
benefit pension plans worldwide were 98 percent funded under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP
compared to the benefit obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and
102 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-U.S.
company’s defined benefit pension plans worldwide were Plans consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s
90 percent funded. subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under
U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension
Benefit Plan.
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables to page 142 represent financial information
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the
Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 420 $ 454 $ 449
Interest cost 2,048 2,028 2,211 1,035 1,075 1,533
Expected return on plan assets (3,689) (3,953) (4,096) (1,867) (1,919) (2,247)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/
(credits) 10 10 10 (106) (98) (111)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,314 1,654 1,056 1,408 1,581 1,400
Curtailments and settlements — — — 22 35 26
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — 126 293 217
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (317) $ (261) $ (818) $ 1,039 $ 1,421 $ 1,267
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Service cost $ 17 $ 24 $ 26 $ 5 $ 7 $ 7
Interest cost 165 163 187 51 50 63
Expected return on plan assets 0 0 0 (6) (7) (9)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/
(credits) (7) (7) (7) (5) (5) (5)
Recognized actuarial losses 20 39 0 9 10 11
Curtailments and settlements — — — (38) 0 0
Total net periodic cost $195 $218 $206 $ 16 $55 $66
* The non-U.S. plans amount includes $56 million, $233 million and $148 million related to the IBM Spain pension litigation for 2016, 2015 and
2014, respectively. See page 142 for additional information.

===== PAGE 142 =====
140 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015
Change in benefi t obligation
Benefi t obligation at
January 1 $53,120 $56,643 $44,717 $49,834 $ 4,652 $ 5,053 $ 618 $ 817
Service cost — — 420 454 17 24 5 7
Interest cost 2,048 2,028 1,035 1,075 165 163 51 50
Plan participants’
contributions — — 30 34 50 52 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (63) 39 0 (8) 0 0
Actuarial losses/(gains) 602 (1,920) 3,217 (861) 16 (204) 16 (52)
Benefi ts paid from trust (3,430) (3,514) (1,792) (1,784) (400) (406) (5) (5)
Direct benefi t payments (123) (117) (381) (402) (30) (23) (27) (26)
Foreign exchange impact — — (2,222) (3,907) — — 35 (174)
Medicare/Government
subsidies — — — — — 1 — —
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — 20 235 — 0 0 0
Benefi t obligation at
December 31 $52,218 $53,120 $44,981 $44,717 $ 4,470 $ 4,652 $ 692 $ 618
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at
January 1 $51,716 $55,772 $35,748 $39,543 $ 71 $ 16 $ 59 $ 84
Actual return on plan assets 3,118 (542) 3,828 417 0 0 8 7
Employer contributions — — 464 474 305 409 0 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (73) 53 0 0 0 0
Plan participants’
contributions — — 30 34 50 52 — —
Benefi ts paid from trust (3,430) (3,514) (1,792) (1,784) (400) (406) (5) (5)
Foreign exchange impact — — (2,175) (3,004) — — 9 (26)
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — (10)* 14* — — 0 (1)
Fair value of plan assets at
December 31 $51,405 $51,716 $36,020 $35,748 $ 26 $ 71 $ 71 $ 59
Funded status at
December 31 $ (814) $ (1,405) $ (8,960) $ (8,969) $(4,444) $(4,582) $(622) $(558)
Accumulated benefi t
obligation** $52,218 $53,120 $44,514 $44,071 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan
assets to be returned to IBM. Return of assets to IBM over a three-year period began June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with
approximately $23 million returned in 2016 and $33 million returned during 2015. The remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2016 is
excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 143 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015
Prepaid pension assets $ 1,002 $ 429 $ 2,032 $ 1,304 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities—
compensation and benefi ts (118) (116) (303) (297) (368) (320) (15) (11)
Noncurrent liabilities—
retirement and nonpension
postretirement benefi t
obligations (1,698) (1,718) (10,689) (9,976) (4,076) (4,262) (607) (547)
Funded status—net $ (814) $(1,405) $ (8,960) $(8,969) $(4,444) $(4,582) $(622) $(558)
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in
OCI and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for
the retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015 2016 2015
Net loss at January 1 $19,363 $18,442 $20,724 $21,676 $609 $ 852 $128 $189
Current period loss/(gain) 1,173 2,576 1,251 661 16 (204) 14 (51)
Curtailments and
settlements — — (22) (33) — — 20 0
Amortization of net loss
included in net periodic
(income)/cost (1,314) (1,654) (1,408) (1,581) (20) (39) (9) (10)
Net loss at December 31 $19,222 $19,363 $20,544 $20,724 $605 $609 $154 $128
Prior service costs/(credits)
at January 1 $ 101 $ 110 $ (294) $ (386) $ 30 $ 23 $ (21) $ (26)
Current period prior service
costs/(credits) — — — (6) — — — 0
Curtailments and
Settlements — — 0 — — — 18 —
Amortization of prior service
(costs)/credits included in
net periodic (income)/cost (10) (10) 106 98 7 7 5 5
Prior service costs/(credits)
at December 31 $ 90 $ 101 $ (188) $ (294) $ 37 $ 30 $ 1 $ (21)
Transition (assets)/liabilities
at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition
assets/(liabilities)
included in net periodic
(income)/cost — — 0 0 — — 0 0
Transition (assets)/
liabilities at
December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in
accumulated other
comprehensive income/
(loss)* $19,313 $19,464 $20,356 $20,429 $642 $ 639 $154 $106
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.

===== PAGE 144 =====
142 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2017.
($ in millions)
Defi ned Benefi t Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,348 $1,434 $21 $6
Prior service costs/(credits) 16 (93) (7) 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities — 0 — 0
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
defined contribution plans. During the fourth quarter of 2016, periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
an arbitration ruling related to the defined contribution plan use participant-specific information such as salary, age and
resulted in an additional charge of $56 million. For the years years of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most
ended December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, the company significant of which include estimates of discount rates,
recorded pre-tax retirement-related obligations of $56 million, expected return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases,
$233 million and $148 million, respectively, in selling, general interest crediting rates and mortality rates. The company
and administrative expense in the Consolidated Statement of evaluates these assumptions, at a minimum, annually, and
Earnings. These obligations are reflected in “Non-U.S. Plans— makes changes as necessary.
Multi-employer plans/other costs” in the table on page 139.
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for
retirement-related benefit plans.
Defi ned Benefi t Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure net periodic (income)/cost
for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 4.00% 3.70% 4.50% 2.40% 2.34% 3.32%
Expected long-term returns on plan
assets 7.00% 7.50% 8.00% 5.53% 5.67% 6.08%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.40% 2.49% 2.52%
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure benefi t obligations at
December 31
Discount rate 3.80% 4.00% 3.70% 1.80% 2.40% 2.34%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.45% 2.40% 2.49%
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefi t Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2016 2015 2014 2016 2015 2014
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure net periodic cost for the
year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.70% 3.40% 4.10% 7.06% 7.51% 7.78%
Expected long-term returns on plan
assets N/A N/A N/A 9.95% 10.17% 10.22%
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure benefi t obligations at
December 31
Discount rate 3.60% 3.70% 3.40% 8.26% 7.06% 7.51%
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 145 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Discount Rate For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the expected long-
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related term rate of return on plan assets for the years ended
benefit plans accounting reflect the yields available on high- December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014 was 7.0 percent,
quality, fixed-income debt instruments at the measurement 7.5 percent and 8 percent, respectively. The change in the rate
date. For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of in 2016 resulted in a decrease in 2016 net periodic income of
high-quality corporate bonds is used to construct a yield curve. $268 million. For the year ended December 31, 2015, the
The cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation change in the rate resulted in a decrease in net periodic income
payments are then matched to the yield curve to derive the of $264 million. There was no impact on net periodic income for
discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where the markets the year ended December 31, 2014 as the rate was flat at
for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as well 8 percent compared to the prior year. For 2017, the projected
developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used long-term rate of return on plan assets is 5.75 percent. The 125
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate basis point year-to-year decline is primarily driven by a change
corporate bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of in investment strategy.
each plan, as the benchmark for developing the respective
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the
discount rates.
company maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the timely payments are made. As a result, for the years ended
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/ December 31, 2016, 2015 and 2014, the expected long-term
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions return on plan assets and the actual return on those assets were
resulted in an increase in 2016 net periodic income of not material.
$103 million, a decrease in 2015 net periodic income of
$286 million and an increase in 2014 net periodic income of Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
$275 million. The changes in the discount rate assumptions The rate of compensation increases is determined by the
resulted in an increase in the PBO of $998 million and a decrease company, based upon its long-term plans for such increases.
of $1,621 million at December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S.
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased
changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material December 31, 2007 for all participants. Mortality rate
impact on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31, assumptions are based on life expectancy and death rates for
2016, 2015 and 2014, and resulted in an increase in the APBO different types of participants. Mortality rates are periodically
updated based on actual experience. In the U.S., the Society of
of $33 million and a decrease of $109 million at December 31,
Actuaries released new mortality tables in 2014 and updated
2016 and 2015, respectively.
them in 2015 and 2016. The company utilized these tables in
For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, the its plan remeasurements at December 31, 2016 and 2015. For
change in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase the U.S. retirement-related plans, the change in mortality
in the benefit obligation of approximately $4.8 billion at assumptions resulted in a decrease to the plan benefit
December 31, 2016 and a decrease of approximately $2.4 billion obligations of $0.6 billion and a decrease of $0.7 billion at
at December 31, 2015. December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets Interest Crediting Rate
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan a cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic
assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into (income)/cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis
account long-term expectations for future returns and the for projecting the expected interest rate that participants will
investment policies and strategies as described on page 144. earn on the benefits that they are expected to receive in the
These rates of return are developed by the company and are following year and is based on the average from August to
tested for reasonableness against historical returns. The use of October of the one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield
expected long-term returns on plan assets may result in plus one percent.
recognized pension income that is greater or less than the actual
returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over time, For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to
however, the expected long-term returns are designed to 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, 2016 from
approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result 1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2015 resulted in
in a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely a decrease in 2016 net periodic income of $7 million. The
matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees. interest crediting rate of 1.1 percent for the year ended
Differences between actual and expected returns are recognized December 31, 2015, was unchanged from December 31, 2014
as a component of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized and therefore, had no impact on the decrease in 2015 net
as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service periodic income. The change in the interest crediting rate to
lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending on 1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2014, from
the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds 1.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2013, resulted
provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of in an increase in 2014 net periodic income of $8 million.
plan assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets
systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on
plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost.

===== PAGE 146 =====
144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate The assets are managed by professional investment firms and
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the investment professionals who are employees of the company.
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for They are bound by investment mandates determined by the
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. company’s management and are measured against specific
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given,
effect on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer
the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. concentration, investment style and reliance on particular active
The company assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for and passive investment strategies.
2017 will be 6.75 percent. In addition, the company assumes
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $5,010 million
that the same trend rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next
of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2016 invested
seven years. A one percentage point increase or decrease in the
in private market assets consisting of private equities and private
assumed healthcare cost trend rate would not have had a
real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly
material effect on 2016, 2015 and 2014 net periodic cost or the
traded securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had
benefit obligations as of December 31, 2016 and 2015.
$2,142 million in commitments for future investments in private
markets to be made over a number of years. These commitments
Plan Assets are expected to be funded from plan assets.
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized
and measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment
of valuations, these fair value measurements may not objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
necessarily reflect the amounts the company could realize in strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed
current market transactions. income management, including duration, interest rate
management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
manage currency and commodity strategies.
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted-
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 25 percent
obligations will be settled depends on future events, including equity securities, 60 percent fixed-income securities, 3 percent
the retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ real estate and 12 percent other investments, which is
participants. The obligations are estimated using actuarial consistent with the allocation decisions made by the company’s
assumptions, based on the current economic environment and management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation
other pertinent factors described on pages 142 through 143. to fixed income is required to manage solvency and funding
The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strategy balances the risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments
requirement to generate returns, using potentially higher typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent of
yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to control members elected by employees and retirees. This can result in
risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed- slight differences compared with the strategies previously
income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in
volatility in equity values and changes in interest rates that could illiquid assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the
cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby increasing its U.S. plan and mainly for currency hedging, interest
dependence on contributions from the company. To mitigate any rate risk management, credit exposure and alternative
potential concentration risk, careful consideration is given to investment strategies.
balancing the portfolio among industry sectors, companies and
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are
geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity,
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company
dependence on economic growth, currency and other factors
maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure
that affect investment returns. In 2016, the company changed
timely benefit payments.
its investment strategy, modifying the target asset allocation,
primarily by reducing equity securities and increasing debt
securities. This change was designed to reduce the potential
negative impact that equity markets might have on the
funded status of the plan. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s target
allocation is 70 percent fixed-income securities, 20 percent
equity securities, 5 percent real estate and 5 percent
other investments.

===== PAGE 147 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 145
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
December 31, 2016. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the
company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $5,778 $ 1 $ — $ 5,779 $4,080 $ 0 $ — $ 4,080
Equity mutual funds (2) 93 — — 93 35 — — 35
Fixed income
Government and
related (3) — 14,897 — 14,897 — 7,577 16 7,593
Corporate bonds (4) — 18,063 101 18,164 — 2,045 1 2,045
Mortgage and asset-
backed securities — 652 5 656 — 4 — 4
Fixed-income mutual
funds (5) 359 — — 359 22 — — 22
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,137 — 1,137
Cash and short-term
investments (6) 55 1,927 — 1,982 294 707 — 1,001
Real estate — — — — — — 294 294
Derivatives (7) 18 20 — 38 43 752 — 796
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 114 — — 114
Subtotal 6,303 35,560 106 41,969 4,589 12,223 310 17,122
Investments measured at
net asset value using the
NAV practical
expedient (9) — — — 9,641 — — — 18,946
Other (10) — — — (205) — — — (48)
Fair value of plan assets $6,303 $35,560 $106 $51,405 $4,589 $12,223 $310 $36,020
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $28 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $15 million, representing 0.04 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies
(4) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $4 million, representing 0.01 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM
corporate bonds of $1 million representing 0.003 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5) Invests predominantly in fixed-income securities
(6) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities
(7) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities
(9) Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical e xpedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships
(10) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets

===== PAGE 148 =====
146 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of The following table presents the company’s defined benefit
$26 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement December 31, 2015. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP
benefit plan assets of $71 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the
lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested company’s subsidiaries. In the following table, some Level 2 and
primarily in government and related fixed-income securities Level 3 assets have been reclassified to reflect the FASB
and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair guidance removing investments using NAV as a practical
value hierarchy. expedient from the fair value hierarchy. The December 31, 2015
Level 3 reconciliation tables have also been reclassified to
reflect this change. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
additional information.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $11,210 $ 1 $ — $11,211 $4,631 $ 0 $ — $ 4,631
Equity mutual funds (2) 99 — — 99 90 — — 90
Fixed income
Government and
related (3) — 9,854 — 9,854 — 7,482 16 7,499
Corporate bonds (4) — 17,088 2 17,090 — 1,896 4 1,899
Mortgage and asset-
backed securities — 633 10 643 — 6 — 6
Fixed-income mutual
funds (5) 313 — — 313 38 — — 38
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,079 — 1,079
Cash and short-term
investments (6) 244 2,305 — 2,549 142 422 — 564
Real estate — — — — — — 411 411
Derivatives (7) (82) 2 — (80) (1) 481 — 480
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 115 — — 115
Subtotal 11,784 29,884 12 41,680 5,016 11,366 431 16,812
Investments measured at
net asset value using the
NAV practical
expedient (9) — — — 10,179 — — — 18,986
Other (10) — — — (143) — — — (50)
Fair value of plan assets $11,784 $29,884 $12 $51,716 $5,016 $11,366 $431 $35,748
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $34 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $14 million, representing 0.04 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies
(4) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $23 million, representing 0.04 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM
corporate bonds of $1 million representing 0.004 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities
(6) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities
(7) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities
(9) Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships
(10)R epresents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested
$71 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and
fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value
benefit plan assets of $59 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a hierarchy.

===== PAGE 149 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 147
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended
December 31, 2016 and 2015 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset-
Corporate Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2016 $ 2 $10 $ 12
Return on assets held at end of year (3) 0 (2)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 1 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 103 (5) 99
Transfers, net (2) (2) (3)
Balance at December 31, 2016 $101 $ 5 $106
($ in millions)
Mortgage
and Asset-
Corporate Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2015 $ 4 $20 $24
Return on assets held at end of year 0 0 0
Return on assets sold during the year 1 0 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (5) (2) (7)
Transfers, net 2 (8) (6)
Balance at December 31, 2015 $ 2 $10 $12
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended
December 31, 2016 and 2015 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Real
and Related Bonds Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2016 $16 $ 4 $411 $431
Return on assets held at end of year 1 0 (22) (21)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 35 35
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 0 (3) (68) (72)
Transfers, net 0 — — 0
Foreign exchange impact 0 0 (62) (63)
Balance at December 31, 2016 $16 $ 1 $294 $310

===== PAGE 150 =====
148 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Government Corporate
and Related Bonds Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2015 $ 32 $1 $411 $444
Return on assets held at end of year (2) 0 28 26
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 42 42
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (10) 3 (51) (58)
Transfers, net — — — —
Foreign exchange impact (3) 0 (20) (23)
Balance at December 31, 2015 $ 16 $4 $411 $431
Valuation Techniques Contributions
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used Defined Benefit Pension Plans
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for
valuation techniques during 2016 and 2015. pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth
in applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the
time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded.
deems appropriate.
IBM common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the
New York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued The company contributed $169 million in cash and $295 million
based on quoted market prices. These assets are generally in U.S. Treasury Securities to non-U.S. defined benefit pension
classified as Level 1. plans as well as $43 million in cash to multi-employer plans for
the year ended December 31, 2016. The contribution of U.S.
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated
Treasury securities is considered a non-cash transaction in the
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For the year ended
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally
December 31, 2015, the company contributed $474 million in
classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the
cash to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $40 million
closing price reported on the major market on which the
in cash to multi-employer plans. The cash contributions to multi-
individual securities are traded.
employer plans represent the annual cost included in net periodic
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. Earnings. The company’s participation in multi-employer plans
Short-term investments represent securities with original has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as
In 2017, the company is not legally required to make any
Level 1 or Level 2.
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified
and the long-term nature of such assets. These assets are PPP during the year.
initially valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law
available and relevant market data, including appraisals, to
in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other
determine if the carrying value of these assets should be
provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain
adjusted. These assets are classified as Level 3.
U.S. defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price pension plan assets and pension obligations for funding
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are purposes and raises tax deduction limits for contributions to
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close retirement-related benefit plans. The additional funding
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using requirements by the Act apply to plan years beginning after
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by the Worker, Retiree
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which revised the funding
and foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension plans may
as Level 1 or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months. At
market prices. December 31, 2016, no mandatory contribution was required
for 2017.
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net
asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical In 2017, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
expedient. These investments, which include commingled funds, defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are $500 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined
typically valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the benefit pension plans in the UK, Japan and Spain. This amount
administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV represents the legally mandated minimum contributions.
is based on the value of the underlying assets owned by the fund,
minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units
outstanding. In accordance with FASB guidance, these
investments have not been classified in the fair value hierarchy.
Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes.”

===== PAGE 151 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 149
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial market performance in 2017 could increase the legally December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. The $305 million
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which contribution in 2016 consisted of $80 million in cash and
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. $225 million in U.S. Treasury securities. The $408 million
The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally contribution in 2015 consisted of $328 million in cash and
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors. $80 million in U.S. Treasury securities. The contribution of U.S.
Treasury securities is considered a non-cash transaction in the
Defined Contribution Plans
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The company contributed $1,046 million and $1,117 million in
cash to the defined contribution plans during the years ended
December 31, 2016 and 2015, respectively. In 2017, the Expected Benefit Payments
company estimates cash contributions to the defined Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
contribution plans to be approximately $1.0 billion. The following table presents the total expected benefit
payments to defined benefit pension plan participants. These
payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2016 and
The company contributed $305 million and $408 million to the
include benefits attributable to estimated future compensation
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended
increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefi t
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2017 $ 3,519 $120 $1,689 $ 306 $ 5,634
2018 3,519 121 1,705 301 5,646
2019 3,504 121 1,730 312 5,668
2020 3,589 122 1,741 358 5,809
2021 3,525 123 1,783 376 5,806
2022–2026 16,970 594 9,077 2,121 28,762
The 2017 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions
Statement of Financial Position. used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2016.
($ in millions)
Total
Qualifi ed Nonqualifi ed Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefi t
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2017 $ 396 $ 6 $ 30 $ 432
2018 397 6 32 435
2019 403 6 34 443
2020 405 6 37 448
2021 395 7 39 441
2022–2026 1,743 36 219 1,998
The 2017 expected benefit payments to nonpension Other Plan Information
postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the The following table presents information for defined benefit
respective plan assets represent a component of compensation pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated excess of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the
Statement of Financial Position. funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans,
see the table on page 140.

===== PAGE 152 =====
150 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
2016 2015
Benefi t Plan Benefi t Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $29,182 $16,374 $29,784 $17,677
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 28,770 16,272 29,135 17,492
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 68,017 71,051 68,053 69,786
NOTE T. SEGMENT INFORMATION Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-
In January 2016, the company made a number of changes to its length, market-based transfer price. Systems that are used by
organizational structure and management system consistent Technology Services & Cloud Platforms in outsourcing
with its ongoing transformation to a cognitive solutions and cloud engagements are primarily sourced internally from the Systems
platform business. With these changes, the company updated segment and software is sourced from various segments.
its reportable segments. The company filed a recast 2015 Software used by Technology Services & Cloud Platforms on
Annual Report in a Form 8-K on June 13, 2016 to recast its external engagements is sourced internally through Cognitive
historical segment information to reflect these changes. The Solutions and the Systems segments. For providing IT services
company’s five reportable segments are as follows: that are used internally, Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
and Global Business Services recover cost, as well as a
The Cognitive Solutions segment includes solutions units that reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length value
address many of the company’s strategic areas, including of providing the services. They enter into arm’s-length loans at
analytics, commerce and security, several of the new initiatives prices equivalent to market rates with Global Financing to
around Watson Platform, Watson Health, Watson Internet of
facilitate the acquisition of equipment and software used in
Things and Transaction Processing Software. The Technology
services engagements. All internal transaction prices are
Services & Cloud Platforms segment includes the company’s reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
cloud infrastructure and platform capabilities, the previously
reported Global Technology Services business and Integration The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
Software. Operating Systems Software has been aligned with to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As
the underlying hardware platforms in the Systems segment. a result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of
The Global Business Services and Global Financing segments the segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage,
remain unchanged. certain marketing functions and support functions such as
Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources
The company also realigned a portion of its software support and Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses
revenue, which was previously managed and reported in are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g.,
Integrated Technology Services within Global Technology headcount. When a clear and measurable driver cannot be
Services, to the underlying software product areas. identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis
The segments represent components of the company for which that is consistent with the company’s management system, e.g.,
separate financial information is available that is utilized on a advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of
regular basis by the chief operating decision maker (the chief the segments. A portion of the shared expenses, which are
executive officer) in determining how to allocate resources and recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments.
evaluate performance. The segments are determined based on These expenses are associated with the elimination of internal
several factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, transactions and other miscellaneous items.
technology, delivery channels and similar economic The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations
characteristics. of the company’s segments consistent with the management
Information about each segment’s business and the products and measurement system utilized within the company.
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income from
in the “Description of Business” section on pages 32 to 34, continuing operations. These results are used, in part, by the
and in the “Segment Details,” on pages 36 to 41 in the chief operating decision maker, both in evaluating
Management Discussion. the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of
the segments.

===== PAGE 153 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 151
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Cognitive Solutions &
Industry Services
Technology
Global Services &
Cognitive Business Cloud Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Solutions Services Platforms Systems Financing Segments
2016
External revenue $18,187 $16,700 $35,337 $ 7,714 $1,692 $79,630
Internal revenue 2,630 409 715 750 1,802 6,307
Total revenue $20,817 $17,109 $36,052 $ 8,464 $3,494 $85,936
Pre-tax income from continuing
operations $ 6,352 $ 1,732 $ 4,707 $ 933 $1,656 $15,380
Revenue year-to-year change 3.8% (3.1)% 0.6% (18.0)% (22.0)% (2.7)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (12.3)% (33.4)% (17.0)% (45.8)% (29.9)% (21.5)%
Pre-tax income margin 30.5% 10.1% 13.1% 11.0% 47.4% 17.9%
2015
External revenue $17,841 $17,166 $35,142 $ 9,547 $1,840 $81,535
Internal revenue 2,215 499 698 778 2,637 6,826
Total revenue $20,055 $17,664 $35,840 $10,325 $4,477 $88,361
Pre-tax income from continuing
operations $ 7,245 $ 2,602 $ 5,669 $ 1,722 $2,364 $19,602
Revenue year-to-year change (8.4)% (11.9)% (9.8)% (22.4)% (1.0)% (11.2)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (11.8)% (22.3)% (20.0)% 24.4% 8.0% (11.8)%
Pre-tax income margin 36.1% 14.7% 15.8% 16.7% 52.8% 22.2%
2014
External revenue $19,689 $19,512 $38,889 $12,294 $2,034 $92,418
Internal revenue 2,216 543 840 1,006 2,488 7,093
Total revenue $21,906 $20,055 $39,729 $13,300 $4,522 $99,512
Pre-tax income from continuing
operations $ 8,215 $ 3,347 $ 7,084 $ 1,384 $2,189 $22,219
Revenue year-to-year change (0.1)% (8.5)% (0.9)% (19.8)% 5.1% (5.1)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (5.2)% (2.9)% (7.3)% (21.5)% 0.8% (6.2)%
Pre-tax income margin 37.5% 16.7% 17.8% 10.4% 48.4% 22.3%

===== PAGE 154 =====
152 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
Cognitive Solutions assets are mainly goodwill, acquired
($ in millions)
intangible assets and accounts receivable. Global Business
For the year ended
December 31: 2016 2015 2014 Services assets are primarily goodwill and accounts receivable.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms assets are primarily
Revenue
goodwill, plant, property and equipment including the assets
Total reportable segments $85,936 $88,361 $99,512
associated with the outsourcing business, deferred services
Other revenue 289 206 374 arrangement transition costs, accounts receivable and acquired
Elimination of internal intangible assets. Systems assets are primarily goodwill, plant,
transactions (6,307) (6,826) (7,093) property and equipment, and manufacturing inventory. Global
Total IBM consolidated Financing assets are primarily financing receivables, cash and
revenue $79,919 $81,741 $92,793 marketable securities, and fixed assets under operating leases.
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and
equipment, several segments may share plant, property and
($ in millions)
equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership
For the year ended of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to
December 31: 2016 2015** 2014**
each user segment. This is consistent with the company’s
Pre-tax income from
management system and is reflected accordingly in the table on
continuing operations
page 153. In those cases, there will not be a precise correlation
Total reportable segments $15,380 $19,602 $22,219 between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (998) (677) (791) Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be
Acquisition-related
consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’
charges (5) (26) (12)
pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax
Non-operating retirement-
income reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment
related (costs)/income (598) (1,050) (353)
and are not specifically identified by the management reporting
Elimination of internal
system. Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment
transactions (1,160) (1,675) (1,746)
also are consistent with the landlord ownership basis of
Unallocated corporate
asset assignment.
amounts* (290) (230) 668
Total pre-tax income from Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
continuing operations $12,330 $15,945 $19,986 expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
associated with the Global Financing business, including the
* The 2014 amount includes the gain related to the Retail Store
intercompany financing activities discussed on page 34, as well
Solutions divestiture and the net gain related to the System x business
divestiture. as the income from investment in cash and marketable
** Reclassified to conform to 2016 presentation securities. The explanation of the difference between cost of
financing and interest expense for segment presentation versus
Immaterial Items presentation in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is
Investment in Equity Alliances and included on page 80 of the Management Discussion.
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the
segments did not have a material effect on the financial position
or the financial results of the segments.

===== PAGE 155 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 153
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Cognitive Solutions &
Industry Services
Technology
Global Services &
Cognitive Business Cloud Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Solutions Services Platforms Systems Financing Segments
2016
Assets $25,517 $8,628 $24,085 $3,812 $36,492 $98,534
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,228 104 2,224 375 317 4,248
Capital expenditures/investments in
intangibles 495 55 2,382 453 380 3,764
Interest income — — — — 1,547 1,547
Interest expense — — — — 371 371
2015
Assets $20,017 $8,327 $23,530 $3,967 $36,157 $91,999
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 921 81 1,944 321 343 3,610
Capital expenditures/investments in
intangibles 448 86 2,619 321 356 3,830
Interest income — — — — 1,720 1,720
Interest expense — — — — 469 469
2014
Assets $19,525 $8,831 $22,512 $4,219 $38,845 $93,933
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,040 98 1,982 734 455 4,308
Capital expenditures/investments in
intangibles 413 79 2,321 627 482 3,921
Interest income — — — — 1,951 1,951
Interest expense — — — — 518 518
* Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.

===== PAGE 156 =====
154 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Revenue by Classes of Similar Products
or Services
($ in millions)
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes
At December 31: 2016 2015 2014
of products or services within the company’s reportable
Assets segments. Client solutions often include IBM software and
Total reportable systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution
segments $ 98,534 $ 91,999 $ 93,933 requires it. For each of the segments that include services;
Elimination of internal Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other
transactions (5,670) (4,709) (5,193) product-related services are included as services. For each of
Unallocated amounts these segments, software includes product license charges and
Cash and marketable ongoing subscriptions.
securities 6,752 6,634 7,182
Notes and accounts
($ in millions)
receivable 2,660 2,333 4,253
For the year ended
Deferred tax assets 5,078 4,693 6,465 December 31: 2016 2015 2014
Plant, other property Cognitive Solutions
and equipment 2,656 2,650 2,169 Software $13,969 $14,557 $16,502
Pension assets 3,034 1,734 2,160 Services 4,111 3,175 3,143
Other 4,425 5,161 6,303 Systems 107 108 44
Total IBM consolidated Global Business Services
assets $117,470 $110,495 $117,271
Services $16,399 $16,851 $19,202
Software 179 164 186
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the Systems 121 151 124
company’s total revenue in 2016, 2015 or 2014. Technology Services &
Cloud Platforms
Geographic Information Services $24,311 $23,947 $26,462
The following provides information for those countries that are Maintenance 5,862 6,085 6,790
10 percent or more of the specific category. Software 3,818 3,907 4,332
Systems 1,346 1,203 1,304
Revenue* Systems
($ in millions) Servers $ 3,567 $ 5,032 $ 7,177
For the year ended Storage 2,083 2,325 2,641
December 31: 2016 2015 2014
Software 1,586 1,749 2,053
United States $30,194 $30,514 $32,021
Services 478 442 423
Japan 8,339 7,544 8,382
Global Financing
Other countries 41,386 43,683 52,390
Financing $ 1,231 $ 1,386 $ 1,543
Total IBM consolidated
Used equipment sales 461 454 491
revenue $79,919 $81,741 $92,793
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the
client.
NOTE U. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
Plant and Other Property—Net
On January 31, 2017, the company announced that the Board
($ in millions) of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.40 per common
At December 31: 2016 2015 2014 share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2017 to shareholders
United States $ 4,701 $ 4,644 $ 4,388 of record on February 10, 2017.
Other countries 5,607 5,532 5,690 On January 24, 2017, the company issued $2.75 billion in bonds
Total $10,308 $10,176 $10,078 as follows: $500 million of 3-year floating-rate bonds priced at
LIBOR plus 23 basis points, $750 million of 3-year fixed-rate
bonds with a 1.9 percent coupon, $1.0 billion of 5-year fixed-
rate bonds with a 2.5 percent coupon and $500 million of
10-year fixed-rate bonds with a 3.3 percent coupon.

===== PAGE 157 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 155
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
Revenue $ 79,919 $ 81,741 $ 92,793 $ 98,367 $102,874
Income from continuing operations $ 11,881 $ 13,364 $ 15,751 $ 16,881 $ 16,999
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (9) $ (174) $ (3,729) $ (398) $ (395)
Net income $ 11,872 $ 13,190 $ 12,022 $ 16,483 $ 16,604
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 13,031 $ 14,659 $ 16,702 $ 18,356 $ 18,022
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 12.39 $ 13.60 $ 15.59 $ 15.30 $ 14.71
Discontinued operations $ (0.01) $ (0.18) $ (3.69) $ (0.36) $ (0.34)
Total $ 12.38 $ 13.42 $ 11.90 $ 14.94 $ 14.37
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 12.44 $ 13.66 $ 15.68 $ 15.42 $ 14.88
Discontinued operations $ (0.01) $ (0.18) $ (3.71) $ (0.36) $ (0.35)
Total $ 12.43 $ 13.48 $ 11.97 $ 15.06 $ 14.53
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 13.59 $ 14.92 $ 16.53 $ 16.64 $ 15.60
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 5,256 $ 4,897 $ 4,265 $ 4,058 $ 3,773
Per share of common stock $ 5.50 $ 5.00 $ 4.25 $ 3.70 $ 3.30
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 3,567 $ 3,579 $ 3,740 $ 3,623 $ 4,082
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 74.0% 101.1% 72.5% 83.8% 81.6%
At December 31: 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
Total assets $117,470 $110,495 $117,271 $125,641 $118,965
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 10,830 $ 10,727 $ 10,771 $ 13,821 $ 13,996
Working capital $ 7,613 $ 8,235 $ 7,797 $ 9,610 $ 4,413
Total debt $ 42,169 $ 39,890 $ 40,722 $ 39,637 $ 33,209
Total equity $ 18,392 $ 14,424 $ 12,014 $ 22,929 $ 18,984
* Refer to the “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 63 of the company’s 2014 Annual Report for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for
2013 and 2012. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 48, 49 and 66 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2016, 2015
and 2014.

===== PAGE 158 =====
156 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth
2016 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Full Year
Revenue $18,684 $20,238 $ 19,226 $ 21,770 $ 79,919
Gross profi t $ 8,686 $ 9,702 $ 9,013 $10,893 $38,294
Income from continuing operations $ 2,016 $ 2,505 $ 2,854 $ 4,505 $11,881
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (3) $ 0 $ (1) $ (4) $ (9)
Net income $ 2,014 $ 2,504 $ 2,853 $ 4,501 $11,872
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,270 $ 2,835 $ 3,149 $ 4,776 $13,031
Earnings per share of common stock**
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.09 $ 2.61 $ 2.98 $ 4.73 $ 12.39
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.01)
Total $ 2.09 $ 2.61 $ 2.98 $ 4.72 $ 12.38
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.09 $ 2.62 $ 2.99 $ 4.75 $ 12.44
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.01)
Total $ 2.09 $ 2.62 $ 2.99 $ 4.74 $ 12.43
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.35 $ 2.95 $ 3.29 $ 5.01 $ 13.59
Dividends per share of common stock $ 1.30 $ 1.40 $ 1.40 $ 1.40 $ 5.50
Stock prices++
High $151.45 $155.35 $163.53 $168.51
Low $ 117.85 $143.50 $151.68 $ 149.63
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth
2015 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Full Year
Revenue $19,590 $20,813 $19,280 $22,059 $81,741
Gross profi t $ 9,452 $10,390 $ 9,436 $11,407 $40,684
Income from continuing operations $ 2,415 $ 3,526 $ 2,962 $ 4,460 $13,364
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (88) $ (77) $ (12) $ 3 $ (174)
Net income $ 2,328 $ 3,449 $ 2,950 $ 4,463 $13,190
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,890 $ 3,790 $ 3,272 $ 4,707 $14,659
Earnings per share of common stock**
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.44 $ 3.58 $ 3.02 $ 4.59 $ 13.60
Discontinued operations $ (0.09) $ (0.08) $ (0.01) $ 0.00 $ (0.18)
Total $ 2.35 $ 3.50 $ 3.01 $ 4.59 $ 13.42
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.45 $ 3.59 $ 3.04 $ 4.60 $ 13.66
Discontinued operations $ (0.09) $ (0.08) $ (0.01) $ 0.00 $ (0.18)
Total $ 2.36 $ 3.51 $ 3.03 $ 4.60 $ 13.48
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.91 $ 3.84 $ 3.34 $ 4.84 $ 14.92
Dividends per share of common stock $ 1.10 $ 1.30 $ 1.30 $ 1.30 $ 5.00
Stock prices++
High $164.83 $174.40 $173.22 $152.39
Low $151.55 $159.18 $140.96 $131.75
* Refer to page 71 of the company’s first-quarter 2016 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2016, page 87 of the company’s second-quarter 2016 Form 10-Q
filed on July 26, 2016, page 87 of the company’s third-quarter 2016 Form 10-Q filed on October 25, 2016, and page 55 under the heading “GAAP
Reconciliation” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the quarterly periods of 2016 and 2015. Also see “GAAP
Reconciliation,” on pages 48 and 49 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2016 and 2015.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for
the full year is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does
not equal the full-year EPS.
++ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.

===== PAGE 159 =====
Performance Graph 157
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Comparison of Five- and Ten-Year Cumulative Total required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index
Return for IBM, S&P 5OO Stock Index and S&P used for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-
Information Technology Index business index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such
The following graphs compare the five- and ten-year cumulative an index. IBM is also included in this index.
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable
Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the
cumulative return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices.
initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and
Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500
$100 invested on the same date in each of the S&P indices.
Stock Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the
The comparisons assume that all dividends are reinvested.
Five-Year
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
11 12 13 14 15 16
(U.S. Dollar) 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
IBM Common Stock $100.00$105.93 $105.74$ 92.63$ 82.06$102.73
S & P 500 Index 100.00 116.00 153.58 174.60 177.01 198.18
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 114.82 147.47 177.13 187.63 213.61
Ten-Year
280
240
200
160
120
80
40
0
06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
(U.S. Dollar) 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016
IBM Common Stock $100.00$112.84 $89.41$141.81$162.07$206.50$218.76$218.36$191.29$169.46$212.15
S & P 500 Index 100.00 105.49 66.46 84.05 96.71 98.75 114.56 151.66 172.42 174.81 195.72
S & P Information
Technology Index 100.00 116.31 66.13 106.95 117.85 120.69 138.58 177.98 213.78 226.45 257.81

===== PAGE 160 =====
158 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Kenneth I. Chenault Shirley Ann Jackson Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer President Chairman, President and
American Express Company Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Chief Executive Officer
IBM
Michael L. Eskew Andrew N. Liveris
Retired Chairman and Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Joan E. Spero*
Chief Executive Officer The Dow Chemical Company Adjunct Senior Research Scholar
United Parcel Service, Inc. Columbia University School of International
W. James McNerney, Jr.
and Public Affairs
David N. Farr Retired Chairman and
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Chief Executive Officer Sidney Taurel
Emerson Electric Co. The Boeing Company Chairman
Pearson plc
Mark Fields Hutham S. Olayan
President and Chief Executive Officer President and Chief Executive Officer Peter R. Voser
Ford Motor Company Olayan America Chairman
Principal, Director and Senior Executive ABB Ltd.
Alex Gorsky
The Olayan Group
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Johnson & Johnson James W. Owens
Retired Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer
Caterpillar Inc.
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Simon J. Beaumont Martin Jetter Christina M. Montgomery
Vice President Senior Vice President Vice President
Tax and Treasurer IBM Global Technology Services Assistant General Counsel
and Secretary
Michelle H. Browdy James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Robert J. Picciano
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, Transformation and Operations Senior Vice President
and General Counsel IBM Cognitive Systems
John E. Kelly III
Erich Clementi Senior Vice President Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President IBM Cognitive Solutions Senior Vice President
IBM Global Markets and IBM Research IBM Watson Business Development
Robert F. Del Bene David W. Kenny Virginia M. Rometty
Vice President and Controller Senior Vice President Chairman, President and
IBM Watson and Chief Executive Officer
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen
IBM Cloud Platform
Senior Vice President Thomas W. Rosamilia
IBM Global Markets Kenneth M. Keverian Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President IBM Systems
Mark Foster
Corporate Strategy
Senior Vice President Martin J. Schroeter
IBM Global Business Services Arvind Krishna Senior Vice President and
Senior Vice President Chief Financial Officer
Diane J. Gherson
IBM Hybrid Cloud and
Senior Vice President Bridget A. van Kralingen
Director of IBM Research
Human Resources Senior Vice President
Robert J. LeBlanc IBM Industry Platforms
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President
Marketing and Communications
* Term on the Board ends on April 25, 2017.

===== PAGE 161 =====
Stockholder Information 159
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services IBM Stock
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact: IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Stockholder Communications
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of
Rico should call (781) 575-2727. the Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to
N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations,
New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a
telecommunications device (TDD) can communicate directly
Annual Meeting
with Computershare Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,
1493. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada
April 25, 2017, at 10 a.m. at the Tampa Marriott Waterside Hotel
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
& Marina, Tampa, Florida.
IBM on the Internet
Literature for IBM Stockholders
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without
www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products,
charge from:
services and other activities can also be found at that website.
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700.
(SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
other filings required by the SEC. Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly
amount of information about IBM, including the company’s reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s
annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, business. The 10-K report is released by the end of February;
current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those 10-Q reports are released by early May, August and November.
reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is
An audio recording of the 2016 Annual Report will be available
electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. These materials
for sight-impaired stockholders in June 2017.
are available free of charge on or through our website.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values
The public may read and copy any materials the company files
and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including
with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street,
its innovative strategies to transform communities through
NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information
global citizenship. The full Corporate Responsibility Report is
on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the
available online at www.ibm.com/responsibility. It is also
SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC maintains a website (www.sec.
available in printed form by downloading the report at www.ibm.
gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements,
com/responsibility.
and other information regarding issuers that file electronically
with the SEC.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive account information and
Computershare Investment Plan
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder
(formerly IBM Investor Services Program)
accounts online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a
record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports
number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential
and Proxy Statements online through this site.
IBM investors, including the reinvestment of dividends, direct
purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for For answers to general questions about IBM from within
safekeeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of the brochure. the continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call
Rico should call (781) 575-2727. (914) 499-1900.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder
Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.

===== PAGE 162 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AIX, AlchemyAI, Aspera, Blekko, Blue Box, Bluemix,
Bluewolf, Clearleap, Cleversafe, Cloudant, Explorys, Gravitant,
IBM, IBM Flex Systems, IBM MobilFirst, IBM Watson, Kenexa, Merge
Healthcare, OpenPOWER, Phytel, POWER, Power Systems, Resilient,
The Weather Company, Silverpop, StrongLoop, Ustream, Watson,
Watson Health, Watson IoT, z/OS and z System are trademarks or
registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation
or its wholly owned subsidiaries. GLOBALFOUNDRIES is a registered
trademark of GLOBALFOUNDRIES Inc. Lenovo is a trademark of
Lenovo Group Limited in the United States, other countries, or both.
Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States,
other countries, or both. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open
Group in the United States and other countries. Other company,
product and service names may be trademarks or service marks
of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-16
Design: Havas Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 163 =====


===== PAGE 164 =====
You, with IBM.
2016
IBM
Annual
Report

2016 IBM Annual Report