

===== PAGE 1 =====
2017
IBM
Annual
Report
Let’s put
smart
to work.
2017
Annual
Report

===== PAGE 2 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
The businesses
of the world are
changing the
way they work.
We have prepared
your company
for this moment.
During the past five years, propelled
by our belief that the phenomenon
of data would reorder technology and
business, we have undertaken one
of the most ambitious reinventions
in IBM’s modern history. This phase
is largely complete. IBM is now a
cognitive solutions and cloud platform
company. IBM now possesses
capabilities that are unmatched in our
industry to address our clients’ most
pressing needs.
In my letter to you this year, I will
describe our performance in 2017,
which reflects the progress we have
made in building these capabilities.
And I will explain why we believe
this moment marks an inflection
point, not just for our company, but
for business and society at large.

===== PAGE 3 =====
2
The substantial progress we made last year In addition, our Technology Services and Cloud Platform team
is working with clients worldwide to integrate public, private
We achieved operating earnings per share of $13.80, up and managed cloud environments through a single architecture.
2 percent. Our revenue for the year was $79.1 billion, with
operating pre-tax income of $13.9 billion. In the fourth quarter, IBM is the clear leader in quantum computing. The world’s first
we grew revenue 4 percent, 1 percent adjusted for the effects (and only) prototype 50-qubit system, announced in 2017, was
of currency (as are all other revenue numbers in this letter). a major step toward systems that can tackle problems beyond
the scope of classical computation. Through IBM Q Experience,
We did so in significant part because our strategic imperatives the world’s first publicly available quantum computers, more
reached critical mass. With revenue of $36.5 billion and growing than 75,000 users have run more than 2.5 million quantum
11 percent, these products and services now contribute experiments. A dozen clients, including partners JPMorgan Chase,
46 percent of IBM’s revenue. And we expect to achieve our Daimler AG, Samsung and JSR, are now exploring practical
goal of growing these new products and services to $40 billion applications on our latest commercial systems.
in 2018.
We have also achieved global leadership in blockchain.
Watson strengthened its position as the AI platform for By providing a permissioned and immutable shared ledger,
business. We are embedding AI into more of what we offer— blockchain is doing for trusted transactions what the Internet
including security, the Internet of Things, commerce and did for information. Hundreds of leading organizations already
verticals, such as Watson Health. Together, these helped IBM’s have embraced IBM’s blockchain platform. Walmart, Nestlé,
Cognitive Solutions business generate more than $18 billion Dole, Kroger and others are applying blockchain to improve
in revenue in 2017. food safety. Early in 2018, we announced a joint venture with
Maersk to apply blockchain to the complex world of international
We also remained the global leader in cloud for the enterprise. shipping. We also are working with The Depository Trust &
In 2017, our cloud revenue grew 24 percent, to $17 billion. Clearing Corporation (DTCC) on new blockchain approaches
Cloud by itself is now more than 21 percent of our total revenue. for complex derivatives, such as credit default swaps.
Our reinvented systems franchises generated strong growth. Finally, 2017 saw a milestone in innovation as IBM, for the
Mainframes enjoyed a very strong fourth quarter, thanks to the 25th year in a row, led the world in U.S. patents earned, setting
launch of the new z14, the world’s first system that can encrypt a new record of 9,043. Importantly, nearly half of those patents
data pervasively without requiring changes to applications were in AI, cloud, blockchain, quantum, security and other
and with no downtime. We expect this breakthrough will drive technologies that will power our portfolio for years to come.
significant expansion of the mainframe’s already broad market.
We did all this while continuing to invest heavily for long-term
Similarly, we are reinventing our services business. Global competitiveness—$5.6 billion in research and development and
Business Services saw signings growth throughout the year, $3.3 billion in net capital expenditures, adding to the capabilities
as clients engaged with our high-value consulting practices in of our high-growth strategic businesses.
areas such as AI, blockchain, and digital strategy and design.
We also returned $9.8 billion to you, our owners, including
dividends of $5.5 billion and $4.3 billion in gross share
repurchases. We raised our dividend for the 22nd consecutive
year—it was IBM’s 102nd straight year of providing one. All of
this is due to the creativity and passion of IBMers. They are the
reason we have reached an inflection point, and they are our
greatest competitive advantage.

===== PAGE 4 =====
3
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 5 =====
4
Today’s IBM: Built For over a century, IBM has reinvented services grounded in their professions
itself again and again to help its clients and industries. And they need a
for smarter businesses move from one era to the next. Today, technology infrastructure infused with
we are witnessing another such transition, intelligence, protected with advanced
at the dawn of smarter business. All security and future-proofed against the
companies need an enterprise-strength flow of new breakthroughs and risks.
cloud platform. They need AI capable of
understanding all their data. They need That is, they need today’s IBM.
IBM Cloud: 58 10 1,900+
The platform for smarter businesses cloud data centers of the largest global cloud-technology patents
IBM Cloud uniquely provides a single architecture across 19 countries banks and 9 of the top awarded in 2017
that unifies infrastructure and higher-value services, 10 retailers use IBM
including AI, IoT, quantum computing and blockchain. Cloud-as-a-Service
IBM Watson: 100,000+ 70+ percent 1,400+
AI for the enterprise patients and consumers growth in organizations artificial intelligence
Watson offers the fullest spectrum of cognitive touched by Watson Health using Watson patents awarded in 2017
technologies to professionals who are transforming
work and decision-making in healthcare, transportation,
retail, insurance, education and more.
IBM Services: 1,000+ Half 38 IBM iX studios
Business and technology clients served from the of the world’s where clients co-create
partners of choice IBM Services Platform telecommunications IT with IBM strategists and
with Watson infrastructure managed designers
Teams of global experts in business strategy,
by IBM Services
technology and design, with professional experience
across multiple industries, help companies transform
for competitive advantage.
IBM Systems: z14 87 percent POWER9
The industry’s most is the only server that of all credit card introduced as the most
powerful infrastructure can encrypt all data transactions and nearly advanced servers for
pervasively without $8 trillion in payments enterprise AI and data-
IBM’s mainframe, cognitive systems and storage
requiring application are supported by intensive workloads
offerings provide the world’s most powerful, secure
changes or downtime IBM Z systems
and flexible foundation for AI and data-intensive
applications and workloads.
IBM Security: 60 billion 22 of 25 X-Force Command
The gold standard for security events of the world’s largest opened as the industry’s
cyber protection monitored each day banks protected first commercial cyber
range, allowing clients
IBM’s industry-leading enterprise security offerings
to experience simulated
have been taken to the next level through AI and
cyberattacks
advanced analytics.
IBM Research: 50-qubit 5 nanometer MIT-IBM
The world’s premier private prototype quantum transistors developed, Watson AI Lab
research organization system debuted which will lead to launched as a large, long-
Twelve global research labs bring an unmatched high-performance, term collaboration with
range of scientific expertise—from AI, to blockchain, low-power chips MIT for joint research in
to quantum computing and more—to bear on the AI science and technology
needs of clients and their industries.

===== PAGE 6 =====
The world’s incumbents own the
most valuable sources of data:
the 80 percent not on the Web.
Inflection points • Businesses are becoming smarter by making their systems
and processes intelligent—which is why IBM’s services and
This is not just an inflection point for IBM. It is also an inflection solutions are grounded in deep knowledge of our clients’
point for our clients—the enterprises and institutions of industries. This has made IBM the partner of choice for
the world. smarter businesses’ digital and cognitive transformation and
IT services. Clients include RBS, Autodesk and Hyundai Card,
Until a year or so ago, you would find many who believed as well as the large client bases of our strategic partners,
that “digital disruption” was here to stay. They believed that such as Salesforce, Workday, Apple, SAP and VMware.
the world’s incumbent businesses were at risk of being This deep industry dimension is also what has allowed us
marginalized. to establish successful new solutions businesses, such as
Watson Health, Watson IoT and Watson Financial Services.
We had a different point of view. We did not believe the platform
giants alone would dominate a data-centric economy—in large • Businesses are becoming smarter by embedding AI and data
measure because they lack access to the most valuable sources to change how work is done, equipping themselves for an
of the world’s data: the 80 percent that is not searchable on the era of man + machine. Watson for Oncology is helping doctors
Web. The world’s incumbent businesses and institutions own identify treatment options for their patients at more than
and generate this data, coming from their professional expertise, 150 hospitals around the world, including Gachon University
their industry’s practices and market dynamics, their processes Gil Medical Center in South Korea, Svet Zdravia in Slovakia
and operations, their people and cultures. Therefore, we believe and Taipei Medical University in Taiwan. A year ago, Watson
they are positioned to lead. for Oncology was trained in four types of cancer. Today,
it is trained in multidisciplinary support for 13 cancer types.
In this letter and throughout this report, you will find the names Watson is helping tax preparers at H&R Block provide the
of many of the world’s great enterprises and institutions. This is best advice to millions of clients. Bankers and customer
not a coincidence. It is a reflection of an important new reality: service representatives at Crédit Mutuel, Banco Bradesco,
The incumbents of the world understand that they can be the Orange Bank and other financial institutions are reinventing
new disruptors, and they are going on offense to seize this banking. Woodside Energy chose Watson to help it preserve
opportunity and to capture this moment. the institutional knowledge—and reinvent the work—of
petroleum engineers.
They are doing so by becoming smarter businesses.
You can read in this report how these and other leaders are
• Businesses are becoming smarter by leveraging intelligent making their companies smarter, in all dimensions. They are
digital platforms. The IBM Cloud has emerged as the placing big bets on the future to increase their competitiveness
platform of choice for business—built for all applications, and to reconnect with their company’s true reason for being.
ready for AI and secure to the core. It is the unifying platform
for IBM’s capabilities, integrated into a single architecture
that spans public and private clouds. Through this powerful
platform, we are delivering to the world’s businesses a
continuous stream of innovative capabilities: computation
and storage, data and Watson services, IoT and blockchain
services, and IBM Q.

===== PAGE 7 =====
6
We also stand at an inflection point for society, everywhere
IBM patent leadership is building
in the world.
the future for smarter businesses
IBM does not believe that the future belongs to the few.
We believe it belongs to all of us—and we translate that belief
IBMers received a record-breaking 9,043 U.S. patents
during 2017—the 25th consecutive year that the company into practice and policy.
has led the world.
On data and AI responsibility: As the world’s new natural
Even more important, nearly half of IBM’s new patents are
resource, unleashed by the maturation of AI, data holds the
advancing AI, cloud computing, blockchain, quantum
potential to generate growth, prosperity and societal progress.
computing, cybersecurity and other technologies that will
change the way the world works—again. But it will only do so if the world can trust that data is being
collected, managed and analyzed responsibly.
At a time when many are questioning the power and behavior
Five 2017 patents that are of some companies, IBM is stepping forward as a responsible
shaping the future: steward of data and AI. We believe that AI’s purpose is to
augment, not replace, human intelligence. We are clear on
Luring Hackers the need for transparency—on where AI is used, who trained
U.S. Patent 9,560,075: Cybersecurity it and what data sets were ingested. We also believe that
technology that enables AI systems to lure
data and the insights it generates belong to their creators.
malicious hackers with email exchanges
and websites that divert their attacks. No one should have to give up ownership or control of their
data to benefit from AI and cloud computing. We have built
and are deploying Watson accordingly.
Personalizing AI Communication
U.S. Patent 9,601,104: A system that analyzes,
Trust also requires the protection of data through strong
interprets and mirrors a user’s unique speech
and linguistic traits. encryption and security systems that are constantly tested
and strengthened. The privacy of data must be respected.
Those, too, are core dimensions of the IBM Cloud with Watson.
Forecasting Cloud Resources
U.S. Patent 9,755,923: A system to predict cloud
On jobs: Without question, new technology will eliminate work;
computing needs, based on human behaviors and
current events. it always has. At the same time, new job categories will emerge.
The challenge, however, is that AI will transform the skills
required for all jobs. There still will be doctors, lawyers,
Improving Quantum Signal Fidelity
salespeople, teachers and engineers. But the tasks and tools
U.S. Patent 9,818,064: A method for improving
they need to perform their work will be different.
a quantum computer’s ability to read signals,
which can lead to efficiency in the system’s
components.
Speeding Trust on Blockchain
U.S. Patent 9,824,031: A method to remove
steps for settling transactions among multiple
parties, even untrusted ones, without involving
a third party.

===== PAGE 8 =====
For more than a century,
IBMers have earned the world’s
trust. We continue that legacy.
This is why building skills for the jobs of the future—not blue We also are clear on the markets we serve. IBM is global
collar or white collar, but “new collar” jobs—will require in presence and mind-set.
a major reinvention of education. We at IBM are leading that
transformation, in the U.S. and worldwide, through public-private We earn trust. We take positions—and act—on issues that
partnerships to create the revolutionary Pathways in Technology matter for our time. Today, that begins with data, AI and
Early College High Schools (P-TECH) education model, security, and extends to inclusion and trust.
21st century apprenticeships and retraining programs. This
includes investing $5 billion over 10 years in the continuous Put it all together, and you have a company that always has been
renewal of IBMers and the re-skilling of mid-career unique in combining innovative technology with deep industry
professionals looking to get back into the tech workforce. expertise, underpinned by security, trust and responsible
stewardship. In helping businesses move from era to era,
On inclusion: Today, we proudly carry forward a global we seek to be essential—to our clients and to the world.
commitment to inclusion that has defined IBM for more
than a century. We are stepping forward to support the open Let me close by expressing my gratitude to the treasured clients
exchange of people, information and ideas, as well as to we serve, and to the hundreds of thousands of IBMers whose
protect cross-border data flows for international privacy brilliance and resilience make it possible for us all to achieve
and security agreements. our life’s work at the world’s most essential enterprise.
IBM is the recognized gold standard for inclusion, reflected I never have been more optimistic in my IBM career—optimistic
in winning the 2018 Catalyst Award for advancing women in about our technology, about our clients, about IBM and about
business. IBM is the first company to win this award four times. the world we are building together.
We advocate for fairness and equality—as everyone is, and
always has been, welcome at IBM.
For more than a century, IBMers have earned the world’s
trust by building progress with responsibility. We continue
this legacy today.
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
Rediscovering IBM
At the deepest level, the most important fact about IBM’s
2017 was not our return to revenue growth in the fourth quarter
or the continued scaling of our new products and services
or our patent achievement. It is our reaffirmation of IBM’s
essential identity.
IBM is an enterprise technology company. We deliver services In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s
financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally
with the simplicity, speed and delight of the best consumer
accepted accounting principles (GAAP), these materials contain certain non-GAAP
products and services, but we are very clear on whom we serve. financial measures on a continuing operations basis, including revenue at constant
currency, strategic imperatives revenue at constant currency, cloud revenue at
We are dedicated to our clients’ success, and our reinvention
constant currency, operating pre-tax income, operating (non-GAAP) research,
during the past five years has been driven by helping our clients development and engineering and operating earnings per share. The rationale for
management’s use of this non-GAAP information is included on pages 26, 27 and
serve their customers. This unrelenting focus on the client is
68 of the company’s 2017 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K
a particular source of pride. submitted with the SEC on February 27, 2018. For reconciliation of these non-GAAP
financial measures to GAAP and other information, please refer to pages 28, 43,
49 and 50 of the company’s 2017 Annual Report.

===== PAGE 9 =====


===== PAGE 10 =====
This is smart
at work.
It’s a business remaking itself on
platforms infused with digital intelligence.
An enterprise whose operations and
processes are designed to learn with
intelligent systems. A company of experts
whose knowledge is augmented by
systems that learn.
This is smarter business—a new era,
brought to the world by a new IBM.

===== PAGE 11 =====
IBM Cloud
The platform
for smarter
businesses
Many types of clouds exist, but only the IBM Cloud
is built for the enterprise, is able to handle all kinds
of data and applications, and provides seamless
integration of artificial intelligence, world-leading
security and the ability to evolve over time. IBMers deliver the IBM Cloud’s Left to right:
broad array of services and AI to surface new insights
expertise. They help the world’s and augment decision-making
To support innovation, the public cloud allows smarter businesses transform Vivian Lee,
their processes, assimilate new IBM Watson Development
businesses to quickly create, deploy and manage
technologies and capabilities,
new cloud-native apps; they can also easily and pivot quickly to new Cloud-based services
market opportunities. to manage IT complexity
isolate specific computing workloads to ensure
and capitalize on the
performance and security. IBM’s private cloud speed of innovation
Twannia Arnold,
offerings let leading enterprises re-architect
Global Technology Services
critical applications for the cloud, while
maintaining regulatory compliance and security
on their own premises.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Security to help protect all NVIDIA GPUs to boost Blockchain to digitize Workday implementation
data and ensure regulatory artificial intelligence and transactions through a secured, for workforce insight and HR
compliance deep-learning workloads shared and replicated ledger management
Cameron Will, IBM Security Glen Wiedemeier, Noi Sukaviriya, Mickey Patel,
IBM Systems IBM Blockchain Solutions Global Business Services
Data Science Experience
to help data scientists learn, Video streaming to deliver VMware implementation to Storage to provide consistent,
create and collaborate in high-quality content to audiences easily deploy workloads from highly secure and fast data
a single workspace of any size, anywhere on-premises to the cloud delivery
Armand Ruiz Gabernet, Arpad Kun, IBM Cloud Video Camilla Sharpe, Sam Werner, IBM Systems
Watson Machine Learning Global Technology Services
Quantum computing to tackle Developer tools to rapidly
The Internet of Things business and scientific problems SAP implementation to bring build, deploy and manage
to capture data and insights that are intractable with classical optimized business operations cloud services
from the physical world computers to the cloud Remko De Knikker,
Lisa Seacat DeLuca, Jerry Chow, IBM Research Bridget Jones, IBM Industry Platforms
IBM Watson IoT Global Business Services

===== PAGE 13 =====
A single, integrated
architecture for all the needs
of smarter businesses
z14 pervasively encrypts data at
scale, all the time. The z14, the
world’s most powerful transaction
system, is the first that can encrypt
every piece of data at the silicon
level, without requiring changes to
applications or downtime. Open and
connected in the cloud, the z14 is
capable of running 12.5 billion fully
encrypted transactions per day.
IBM Cloud is the most flexible and intelligent
cloud for business—a fully managed, unified
platform built on secure containers across
public and private clouds, with 170+ services for
developers to build, deploy and manage cloud-
native applications, as well as the capacity
to easily integrate new products and offerings.
Left: Above:
POWER9 is built for data- IBM Cloud Private is a scalable
intensive workloads, including cloud platform that runs on a
AI and scientific discovery. company’s own infrastructure
POWER9 systems and software and behind its firewalls. This
are designed for the compute- offers the benefits of the public
intensive workloads of smarter cloud but gives customers the
businesses. POWER9 systems power to address proprietary
cut deep learning training times data, regulatory requirements
by at least 4x, unleashing and security threats on-premises.
mission-critical insights that
would otherwise be trapped in
massive data sets. POWER9
servers with NVIDIA GPUs
substantially boost AI accuracy
and accelerate the performance
of AI frameworks.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Quantum computing will solve problems that require exploring
the previously unsolvable. an exponential number of
Quantum computers embody possibilities—like drug discovery,
the most radical new computing alternative fuel design and
technology in generations. financial risk optimization.
They encode information in Already, the IBM Q Experience,
quantum bits, or qubits, which available via the IBM Cloud, is
can represent tremendous being used by more than 75,000
amounts of data, and can interact early adopters who are getting
with one another in ways that “quantum ready”: learning and
are impossible for classical bit- exploring the implications of
based computers. As a result, quantum computing for science
quantum computers may offer and business.
paths to finding solutions to hard

===== PAGE 15 =====
IBM Services
and Solutions
Making
smarter real,
industry
by industry
Walmart uses blockchain
to provide traceability from
“farm to fork” and to improve
transparency, efficiency and
food safety.
The leading businesses and institutions of the
world are going on offense, moving from the
disrupted to the disruptors. To do so, they rely
on the deep industry and technology expertise
of IBM Services and solutions professionals
and consultants around the world. These
Maersk’s blockchain platform
IBMers—experts in industries ranging from
eliminates millions of pieces of
healthcare, to financial services, to retail and paperwork, reduces fraud
and increases transparency for
more—help organizations transform at scale
global shipping.
and become smarter.

===== PAGE 16 =====
CEMEX’s digital transformation
provides its customers with real-
time tracking and analytics that
help them make better decisions
and improve their supply chains.
London Stock Exchange Group
and the Santiago Stock Exchange
are building blockchain solutions
to take cost and complexity out
of trading and settlement.
Japan Airlines’ custom mobile app
frees up engineers’ time, improves its
aircraft quality and on-time arrivals
and has eliminated 3.3 million paper
documents in one year.

===== PAGE 17 =====
The Port of Rotterdam is fully Mercedes-Benz Stadium’s
digitizing—with IoT and artificial technology infrastructure and
intelligence—to maximize cargo mobile apps create personalized
loads and speed shipping traffic. game-day experiences for fans
in Atlanta.
Goldcorp is using artificial Toronto Western Hospital’s
intelligence to sift through drilling Movement Disorders Clinic has
logs, geological surveys and reviewed thousands of drugs to
other data to pinpoint where identify medications that might be
to explore next. repurposed for Parkinson’s disease.

===== PAGE 18 =====
17
Welgevonden Game Reserve
uses the Internet of Things and
predictive analytics to track
animal movements and protect
endangered rhinos.
ABB applies artificial intelligence
and the Internet of Things on
factory floors to quickly identify
defects not always picked up by
the naked eye.
Plastic Bank’s blockchain-based
system turns trust into sustainability,
as recyclers in developing countries
earn credits, helping to alleviate
poverty and reduce ocean waste.

===== PAGE 19 =====
IBM Watson
Empowering
professionals
with AI
IBM Watson’s enterprise-strength artificial
intelligence is transforming the way people work in
nearly every industry. It helps organizations derive
insight from complex and unstructured information.
And it allows professionals to scale their expertise
and focus their efforts on higher-value work.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Left: Bottom left: 19
Working with Watson for Cyber Elementary school instructors
Security allows experts to are using Teacher Advisor With
identify threats up to 60 times Watson to tailor high-quality
faster than traditional methods. instructional resources to the
specific needs of their students.
Carlos Aguilera,
Security Expert, IBM Lisnerva Nuez,
Kindergarten Teacher,
New York City
“ We trained
Watson
Virtual Agent
in Brazilian
Portuguese
so it can
answer
customers’
questions in
seconds.”
Customer service
representatives at Banco
Bradesco use Watson Virtual
Agent to answer questions
quickly, which boosts
customer satisfaction.
Jacqueline Pessoa Ferreira,
Digital Channels Analyst
and Trainer, Banco Bradesco

===== PAGE 21 =====


===== PAGE 22 =====
Watson helps KONE’s data 21
scientists provide technicians
with real-time information
from elevators and escalators
around the world, to predict
maintenance issues and
help keep people moving.
Aleksi Seppänen,
Data Scientist, KONE
“ Watson
speeds up
how we find
important
patterns—
and ones we
Trained by H&R Block on millions
of customer conversations and
didn’t know
returns, Watson helps tax
pros engage with their clients
to look for.”
in new ways.
Gloria Bridges,
Tax Professional, H&R Block
AI, machine learning and analytics
are allowing Kraft Heinz experts
to evaluate thousands of variables
in real time and address previously
unsolvable problems, leading to
reductions in food loss.
Pat Doyle,
Supply Chain Expert,
Kraft Heinz Company

===== PAGE 23 =====


===== PAGE 24 =====
A smarter
future does not
belong to the
few. It belongs
to all of us.
The coming era offers vast new opportunities to
change the way the world works—but it will take more
than technology and more than business. At IBM
we are working to build new levels of trust and new
forms of collaboration across all sectors of society.
Data and AI: Only an economy where data is
protected will produce a society where data is trusted.
In 2017, IBM issued principles for AI and for Data
Responsibility, ensuring that wherever our cognitive
technology is used, we will be transparent about
how it was trained and clear about who owns its data
and insights.
Jobs: To build the “new collar” skills required for
the future of work, we are pioneering new models
of education, including P-TECH, a six-year high
school and community college program that enables
students to earn an associate degree. From its
roots in 2010 with one school in Brooklyn, New York,
P-TECH is on track to serve more than 60,000
students on four continents, and build upon
partnerships with more than 430 other companies.
Workforce inclusion: New technology can lift
everyone up—and it must. We have led in inclusion
for more than a century, hiring our first women and
African American employees in 1899. And in 2005,
IBM became the first company to protect employees’
Gabriel Rosa, a 2015 graduate
genetics privacy. We are committed to extending
of P-TECH, now works in IBM’s
Digital Business Group, following an that legacy into the future.
internship guided by Maria Arbusto,
who still acts as his mentor.
Gabriel Rosa (left), Front-End
Engineer, and Maria Arbusto,
Director, Marketing

===== PAGE 25 =====
24 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016
Revenue $ 79,139 $ 79,919
Net Income $ 5,753* $ 11,872
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758* $ 11,881
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 12,935 $ 13,031
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution $ 6.14* $ 12.39
Basic $ 6.17* $ 12.44
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 13.80 $ 13.59
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 16,724 $ 17,084***
Capital expenditures, net $ 3,312 $ 3,726
Share repurchases $ 4,340 $ 3,502
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 5,506 $ 5,256
Per share of common stock $ 5.90 $ 5.50
At December 31: 2017 2016
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities $ 12,580 $ 8,527
Total assets $125,356 $117,470
Working capital $ 12,373 $ 7,613
Total debt $ 46,824 $ 42,169
Total equity $ 17,725 $ 18,392
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 922 946
Stock price per common share $ 153.42 $ 165.99
* Includes a one-time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform in 2017.
** See page 49 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
***Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on share-based compensation.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Financials 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Overview 26 A Significant Accounting Policies 84
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 27 B Accounting Changes 94
Management Discussion Snapshot 27 C Acquisitions/Divestitures 96
Description of Business 30 D Financial Instruments 100
Year in Review 35 E Inventories 107
Prior Year in Review 56 F Financing Receivables 107
Other Information 66 G Property, Plant and Equipment 111
Looking Forward 66 H Investments and Sundry Assets 111
Liquidity and Capital Resources 67 I Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 111
Critical Accounting Estimates 70 J Borrowings 112
Currency Rate Fluctuations 73 K Other Liabilities 115
Market Risk 74 L Equity Activity 116
Cybersecurity 75 M Contingencies and Commitments 119
Employees and Related Workforce 75 N Taxes 121
O Research, Development and Engineering 124
Report of Management 76 P Earnings Per Share of Common Stock 124
Report of Independent Registered Q Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 125
Public Accounting Firm 77
R Stock-Based Compensation 125
S Retirement-Related Benefits 128
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS T Segment Information 142
Earnings 78
U Subsequent Events 146
Comprehensive Income 79
Financial Position 80
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
Cash Flows 81
Selected Quarterly Data 148
Changes in Equity 82
Performance Graphs 149
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 150
Stockholder Information 151

===== PAGE 27 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW than growth reported at actual exchange rates. See “Currency
The financial section of the International Business Machines Rate Fluctuations” on page 73 for additional information.
Corpor ation (IBM or the company) 2017 Annual Report includes
• Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual
the Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial
Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to
Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State-
the use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
ments. This Over view is designed to provide the reader with
Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying
some perspective regarding the information contained in the
whole-dollar numbers.
financial section.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
Organization of Information
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers
results of the business, the company separates business
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the
results into operating and non-operating categories. Operating
company’s financial results and certain factors that may
earnings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure
affect its future prospects from the perspective of the
that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges,
company’s management. The “Management Discussion
intangible asset amortization expense resulting from basis
Snap shot,” beginning on page 27, presents an overview of
differences on equity method investments, retirement-related
the key performance drivers in 2017.
costs, discontinued operations and related tax impacts. For
• Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 35, the the fourth-quarter and full-year 2017, operating (non-GAAP)
Management Discussion contains the results of operations earnings also exclude a one-time charge associated with the
for each reportable segment of the business and a enactment of U.S. tax reform due to its unique and non-recurring
discussion of the company’s financial position and cash nature. For acquisitions, operating (non-GAAP) earnings exclude
flows. Other key sections within the Management Discussion the amortization of purchased intangible assets and acquisition-
include: “Looking Forward” on page 66, and “Liquidity and related charges such as in-process research and development,
Capital Resources” on page 67, which includes a description transaction costs, applicable restructuring and related
of management’s definition and use of free cash flow. expenses and tax charges related to acquisition integration.
These charges are excluded as they may be inconsistent in
• The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on
amount and timing from period to period and are dependent
pages 78 through 83. These statements provide an overview
on the size, type and frequency of the company’s acquisitions.
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and its
All other spending for acquired companies is included in both
financial position.
earnings from continuing operations and in operating (non-
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. GAAP) earnings. Throughout the Management Discussion and
Among other items, the Notes contain the company’s Analysis, the impact of acquisitions over the prior 12-month
accounting policies (pages 84 to 93), acquisitions and period may be a driver of higher expense year to year. For
divestitures (pages 96 to 99), detailed information on specific retirement-related costs, the company characterizes certain
items within the financial statements, certain contingencies items as operating and others as non-operating. The company
and commitments (pages 119 to 121) and retirement- includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement
related plans information (pages 128 to 142). benefit plan service cost, amortization of prior service cost and
the cost of defined contribution plans in operating earnings.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have
Non-operating retirement-related cost includes defined benefit
been prepared in accordance with accounting principles
plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan interest cost,
generally accepted in the United States (GAAP).
expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses,
• On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“U.S. tax the impacts of any plan curtailments/settlements and multi-
reform”) was enacted in the U.S. This Act resulted in the employer plan costs, pension insolvency costs and other costs.
company recognizing a fourth quarter provisional one-time Non-operating retirement-related costs are primarily related
charge of $5.5 billion. Refer to note N, “Taxes,” on pages to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied
121 to 124 for additional information. to financial market performance, and the company considers
these costs to be outside of the operational performance of the
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant
business. Effective January 1, 2018, the company adopted the
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include
new Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) guidance
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in
on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension
foreign currency rates. When the company refers to growth
postretirement benefits costs, and as a result, the company
rates at constant currency or adjusts such growth rates for
will align its presentation for operating (non-GAAP) earnings
currency, it is done so that certain financial results can be
to conform to the FASB presentation of these costs included in
viewed without the impact of fluctuations in foreign
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Operating (non-GAAP)
currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-
earnings will no longer include amortization of prior service costs
period comparisons of its business performance. Financial
and will now include multi-employer plan costs. The full-year
results adjusted for currency are calculated by translating
2018 operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation has
current period activity in local currency using the comparable
been calculated under this new definition.
prior year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach
is used for countries where the functional currency is the Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a
local currency. Generally, when the dollar either strengthens view of operating earnings as described here provides increased
or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the
currency rates or adjusting for currency will be higher or lower business and the performance of the company’s pension plans;

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts forward-looking statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of
on operational performance; enables better comparison to peer the date on which it is made; the company assumes no obligation
companies; and allows the company to provide a long-term to update or revise any such statements. Forward-looking
strategic view of the business going forward. The company’s statements are based on the company’s current assumptions
reportable segment financial results reflect operating earnings regarding future business and financial performance; these
from continuing operations, consistent with the company’s statements, by their nature, address matters that are uncertain
management and measurement system. to different degrees. Forward-looking statements involve a
number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause
actual results to be materially different, as discussed more fully
FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s filings with
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the
constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning
company’s 2017 Form 10-K filed on February 27, 2018.
of the Private Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
Revenue $ 79,139 $ 79,919 (1.0)%*
Gross profit margin 45.8% 47.9% (2.1) pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 24,827 $ 25,964 (4.4)%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 31.4% 32.5% (1.1 ) pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 11,400 $ 12,330 (7.5)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 5,642** $ 449 NM
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758** $ 11,881 (51.5)%
Income from continuing operations margin 7.3% 14.9% (7.6) pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (5) $ (9) (44.7)%
Net income $ 5,753** $ 11,872 (51.5)%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ 6.14** $ 12.39 (50.4)%
Consolidated earnings per share — assuming dilution $ 6.14** $ 12.38 (50.4)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 937.4 958.7 (2.2)%
Assets+ $125,356 $117,470 6.7%
Liabilities+ $107,631 $ 99,078 8.6%
Equity+ $ 17,725 $ 18,392 (3.6)%
* (1.3) percent adjusted for currency.
** Includes a one-time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform, or $5.84 of diluted earnings per share in 2017.
+ At December 31
NM — Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s (non-GAAP) operating earnings for 2017 and 2016.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Percent Change
Net income as reported $ 5,753** $11,872 (51.5)%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (5) (9) (44.7)
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758** $11,881 (51.5)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 718 735 (2.3)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 983 415 137.0
U.S. tax reform one-time charge 5,475 — NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $12,935 $13,031 (0.7)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 13.80 $ 13.59 1.5%
* See page 49 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
** Includes a one-time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform in 2017.
NM — Not meaningful

===== PAGE 29 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2017, the company reported $79.1 billion in revenue and $5.8 From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue
billion in income from continuing operations, which includes a increased 1.5 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for
one-time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment currency with growth in Solutions Software and Transaction
of U.S. tax reform. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings were $12.9 Processing Software as reported and adjusted for currency.
billion, which excludes the one-time charge. Diluted earnings Solutions Software performance included growth in annuity
per share from continuing operations were $6.14 as reported revenue, led by as-a-Service solutions. Global Business Services
and $13.80 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company (GBS) revenue decreased 2.1 percent as reported and 2 percent
generated $16.7 billion in cash from operations, $13.0 billion in adjusted for currency with declines across all lines of business.
free cash flow and delivered shareholder returns of $9.8 billion However, GBS strategic imperatives revenue increased
in gross common stock repurchases and dividends. 10 percent as reported and adjusted for currency year to year.
The GBS business continued to shift resources and move into
Total consolidated revenue in 2017 decreased 1.0 percent as the high-value strategic areas of digital, cloud and analytics.
reported and 1.3 percent year to year adjusted for currency. The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue decreased
company returned to revenue growth in the fourth quarter with an 3.0 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency,
increase of 3.6 percent as reported and 0.9 percent adjusted for primarily driven by a decline in Infrastructure Services. Within
currency. Year-to-year revenue performance improved sequentially Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, strategic imperatives
in the second half of 2017 compared to first-half performance. revenue was up 19 percent as reported and 18 percent adjusted
Contributors to the second-half improvement included: for currency year to year, driven by hybrid cloud services, security
momentum in cloud and as-a-Service offerings, strong Systems and mobile. Systems revenue increased 6.2 percent as reported
growth across IBM Z, Power and Storage, improved software and 5 percent adjusted for currency driven by contributions from
transactional performance and improved growth in Consulting. the z14 mainframe in the second half of 2017 and growth in
Storage Systems.
In 2017, the company continued to deliver solid revenue growth in
its strategic imperatives which generated $36.5 billion of revenue From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue was essentially
and grew 11 percent as reported and adjusted for currency, with flat year to year as reported (decreased 1 percent adjusted for
double-digit growth in cloud, security and mobile, as the company currency) with the U.S. decline of 1.4 percent, partially offset
continues to build new products and offerings and continuously by growth in Latin America (5.1 percent as reported, 3 percent
reinvent its platforms. These are not separate businesses, they adjusted for currency) and Canada (4.9 percent as reported,
are offerings across the segments that address opportunities 3 percent adjusted for currency). Europe/Middle East/Africa
in analytics, cloud, security and mobile. The company is (EMEA) revenue decreased 1.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for
embedding cloud and cognitive capabilities across the business currency) driven primarily by declines in the UK (11.2 percent
and the strategic imperatives reflect the progress being made in as reported, 7 percent adjusted for currency) and Germany
helping enterprise clients extract value from data and become (3.2 percent as reported, 6 percent adjusted for currency). Asia
digital businesses. Strategic imperatives growth in 2017 largely Pacific revenue decreased 2.0 percent (1 percent adjusted for
represented organic growth as the acquisitive content leveled currency) with a decline in China of 10.6 percent (10 percent
on a year-to-year basis. Total Cloud revenue of $17.0 billion adjusted for currency). Japan declined 1.1 percent as reported
increased 24 percent as reported and adjusted for currency, with (increased 2 percent adjusted for currency) and India grew 8.6
as-a-Service revenue up 31 percent as reported and adjusted percent (5 percent adjusted for currency).
for currency. The annual exit run rate for as-a-Service revenue
increased to $10.3 billion in 2017 compared to $8.6 billion in The consolidated gross margin of 45.8 percent decreased 2.1
2016. Analytics revenue of $20.6 billion increased 6 percent as points year to year and reflects investments, mix and higher
reported and adjusted for currency. Mobile revenue increased retirement-related costs, partially offset by benefits from
19 percent as reported and adjusted for currency and Security productivity. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 47.4
revenue increased 55 percent (54 percent adjusted for currency), percent decreased 1.6 points versus the prior year primarily
driven by security software solutions and strong demand for the driven by the same factors, excluding the impact of higher non-
pervasive encryption capabilities in the new z14 mainframe. operational retirement-related costs.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) decreased 4.4 percent in At December 31, 2017, the balance sheet remains strong, and
2017 compared to the prior year. The year-to-year decrease with the newly reorganized financing entity, IBM Credit LLC, the
was primarily the result of continued focus on efficiency in company is better positioned to support the business over the
spending and reduced expenses for workforce transformation. long term. Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2017
This included a lower level of workforce rebalancing charges were $12.6 billion, an increase of $4.1 billion from December 31,
(3 points), lower operational spending (2 points) and a prior-year 2016. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows were:
charge for real estate actions (1 point). The year-to-year decrease
in expense and other (income) was partially offset by spending Total assets increased $7.9 billion ($3.0 billion adjusted for
related to acquisitions completed in the prior 12 months (1 point) currency) from December 31, 2016 driven by:
and a decline in intellectual property (IP) income (1 point). Total
• Increases in cash and marketable securities ($4.1 billion),
operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased
total receivables ($2.9 billion), retirement plan assets
6.2 percent year to year, driven primarily by the same factors.
($1.6 billion) and goodwill ($0.6 billion); partially offset by
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $11.4 billion • Decreases in intangible assets ($0.9 billion).
decreased 7.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 14.4
percent, a decrease of 1.0 points versus 2016. The continuing Total liabilities increased $8.6 billion ($4.0 billion adjusted for
operations effective tax rate for 2017 was 49.5 percent, which currency) from December 31, 2016 driven by:
includes a one-time charge of $5.5 billion from the enactment
• Increases in total debt ($4.7 billion) and taxes ($3.5 billion).
of U.S. tax reform in December 2017, compared to 3.6 percent
in 2016. The charge encompasses several elements, including
Total equity of $17.7 billion decreased $0.7 billion from
taxes on accumulated overseas profits and the revaluation of
December 31, 2016 as a result of:
certain deferred tax assets and liabilities. The tax rate in 2016
was primarily the result of a refund ($1.0 billion) of previously • Decreases from dividends ($5.5 billion) and share
paid Japan taxes plus interest in the first quarter of 2016. repurchases ($4.3 billion); partially offset by
Income from continuing operations of $5.8 billion decreased
• Increases from net income ($5.8 billion), retirement-related
51.5 percent, impacted by the one-time charge, and the net
benefit plans ($2.3 billion) and equity translation
income margin was 7.3 percent, a decrease of 7.6 points versus
adjustments ($0.8 billion).
2016. Losses from discontinued operations, net of tax, were
$5 million in 2017 compared to $9 million in 2016. Net income
The company generated $16.7 billion in cash flow provided
of $5.8 billion decreased 51.5 percent year to year. Operating
by operating activities, a decrease of $0.4 billion compared to
(non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations of $13.9
2016, driven primarily by performance-related declines within
billion decreased 0.5 percent year to year and the operating
net income and an increase in cash tax payments, partially
(non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing operations was
offset by an increase in cash provided by receivables. Net
essentially flat at 17.5 percent. Operating (non-GAAP) income
cash used in investing activities of $7.1 billion was $3.9 billion
from continuing operations of $12.9 billion decreased 0.7 percent
lower than the prior year, primarily driven by a decrease in cash
with an operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing
used for acquisitions ($5.2 billion). Net cash used in financing
operations of 16.3 percent, flat year to year. The operating (non-
activities of $6.4 billion increased $0.5 billion compared to
GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations in 2017 was
2016, driven primarily by increased gross common share
6.7 percent, which includes the effect of discrete tax benefits in
repurchases ($0.8 billion).
the first and second quarters of 2017.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $6.14
in 2017, which includes the one-time charge associated with U.S.
tax reform, decreased 50.4 percent year to year. In 2017, the
company repurchased 27.2 million shares of its common stock at
a cost of $4.3 billion and had $3.8 billion remaining in the current
share repurchase authorization at December 31, 2017. Operating
(non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $13.80 increased 1.5
percent versus 2016.

===== PAGE 31 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In January 2018, the company disclosed that it is expecting The IBM Cloud is uniquely:
GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations of at least
• Built for all applications: Applications require data. That
$11.70 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at least $13.80 per
data is in on-premise systems, in private clouds and in the
diluted share for 2018. The company expects free cash flow to
public cloud. The IBM Cloud enables one data platform
be approximately $12 billion in 2018. Free cash flow realization
that, regardless of data’s location, can run all applications.
is expected to be in excess of 100 percent of GAAP net income.
IBM’s hybrid cloud capabilities make this single platform
Refer to page 68 in the Liquidity and Capital Resources section
operate seamlessly.
for additional information on this non-GAAP measure. Refer to
the Looking Forward section on pages 66 and 67 for additional • Artificial intelligence (AI)-ready: The IBM Cloud is built
information on the company’s expectations. from the ground up to handle the demanding data and
computational requirements of AI.
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS • Secure to the Core: IBM has a long history of helping clients
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the keep data and transactions secure. Security is even more
SEC on February 27, 2018 for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.” important in an increasingly connected world, and IBM has
extended this unparalleled level of security to the cloud.
The company creates value for clients through integrated solu- For example, IBM’s cybersecurity offerings act as a business
tions and products that leverage: data, information technology, immune system, with AI technology at its core, delivered
deep expertise in industries and business processes, and a from the IBM Cloud. These systems help to defend and
broad ecosystem of partners and alliances. IBM solutions respond to cyber-attacks across an organization’s data,
typically create value by enabling new capabilities for clients applications, mobile and endpoint devices.
that transform their businesses and help them engage with
their customers and employees in new ways. These solutions The IBM Cloud is delivered with leading edge technology,
draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting and IT including:
implementation services, cloud and cognitive offerings, and
• Modern infrastructure: IBM’s systems, including servers,
enterprise systems and software which are all bolstered by one
storage and operating system software, have been refreshed
of the world’s leading research organizations.
and redesigned for cloud and enterprise AI workloads.
IBM’s new z14 is the world’s first system to offer pervasive
Strategy
encryption of data without requiring changes to applications,
The IBM strategy starts with its clients.
and with no performance degradation. With IBM’s systems,
clients can build an IT infrastructure that is optimized for
As a uniquely integrated technology and services company, IBM
the scalability, reliability and growth that businesses need in
helps clients change the way the world works by building smarter
today’s data-driven world.
businesses.
• Future infrastructure: The Q Network on the IBM Cloud enables
IBM’s clients include many of the world’s most successful clients around the world to explore quantum computing
enterprises. These clients are at an inflection point, facing capabilities. IBM is the leader in quantum computing.
tremendous new opportunity and incredible competition. Digital Clients are signing on to explore how to overcome foreseen
technologies are unlocking unparalleled insight from previously constraints in traditional computing models.
inaccessible data. Work processes are being reimagined for
speed and vastly smarter decision-making. AI and Data
Artificial intelligence can help clients extract insight and make
To win in these disruptive times requires that businesses learn — intelligent decisions from data. Like cloud, enterprise AI is very
learn by extracting insights from their data and by applying different from consumer AI. Enterprise applications deal with
those insights to how work is done. Smarter businesses do this more complex use cases that benefit from expert knowledge,
faster and more effectively supported by IBM’s combination of such as in healthcare or in the identification of business risk.
Innovative Technology, Industry Expertise and Trust and Security. Enterprise AI applications are trained by expert data, through
data sets of all sizes and with more specialization than those in
The company’s capabilities include: the general-knowledge consumer world. IBM AI — through the
Watson platform:
Cloud
• Learns more from less data: The ability to extract deep
Cloud is enabling the emergence of platforms through
insights from both large and small data sets is essential for
standardization, agility and innovation in both IT and business
enterprise applications. Watson excels at this and can
processes. Enterprise cloud is very different from consumer
produce more insights with less data than other AI systems.
cloud: enterprises must bridge together mission-critical assets
That means clients can get started more quickly and begin
from on-premise systems with private cloud and public cloud.
to gain experience deploying AI in the enterprise.
Hybrid cloud technology provides that bridge. All three must
coexist and interoperate as a single platform.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• Protects clients’ insights: While Watson builds on cumulative • Pragmatic journey to Cloud and AI: Global Business Services
experience and knowledge, IBM recognizes that data brings its deep experience when guiding clients through
and insights are clients’ most important assets and a true the journey to cloud and AI. Clients gain from the thorough
competitive advantage. Watson is built to safeguard this understanding of technology and the best ways to utilize it.
type of information.
As clients reinvent their businesses to be smarter, they need all
• Reimagines your workflows: Watson has been built for — and
of this to work together. This is what they expect from IBM, what
trained in — areas requiring deep expertise. Watson brings
they need from IBM and what sets IBM apart.
AI to professionals so that work can be done more efficiently,
and even more importantly, can improve as the systems
* * * *
learn from the data.
Responsible stewardship is an enduring principle that under-
Solutions scores all IBM endeavors. While IBM is constantly ushering in
Creating smarter businesses requires reimagining a company’s new technology it does so by:
core processes — for example, in healthcare, managing risk
• Leading in data responsibility, ethics and transparency;
or optimizing a supply chain. In addition to building solutions
based on IBM’s experience, IBM is also creating a series of AI • Preparing workforces of the world;
solutions — cognitive solutions — that embed artificial intelligence
• Continuing the company’s century-long commitment to
and data to change how work is done. Examples include:
diversity and inclusion, and
• Global Industry Platforms: provides cognitive, analytics,
• Remaining grounded in a set of enduring IBM Values:
security and cloud technology in comprehensive industry-
specific platforms to remove much of the cost and complexity • Dedication to every client’s success
of delivering core business functions. For example: Banking,
• Innovation that matters — for our company and for
wealth management, and insurance are some of the
the world
areas poised for dramatic change by using cognitive and AI
solutions from IBM Watson Financial Services. Watson • Trust and personal responsibility in all relationships
Health provides technology and expertise to empower
leaders, advocates and influencers in health to accelerate IBM has built a reputation and track record of trust with its clients
discovery, make essential connections and gain confidence for more than a century. IBM safeguards a client’s privacy, data
on their path to solving the world’s biggest health challenges. and insights. For example, IBM was one of the first companies to
appoint a Chief Privacy Officer, to develop and publish a genetics
• Blockchain Solutions: IBM is working with clients and
privacy policy, to be certified under the APEC Cross Borders
developers across multiple industries to use blockchain to
Privacy Rules system and to sign the EU Data Protection Code of
transform how business is done in areas such as banking
Conduct for Cloud Service Providers.
and financial services and supply chain. For example,
blockchain technology can be used to digitize global trade * * * *
processes, providing a more efficient and secure method of
moving goods across borders and trading zones. This is an era where being faster, more productive and lower
cost is important but frankly not enough. To win, a business
• Watson IoT: includes both a cloud-based platform and must be smarter: Being smarter means having deeper expertise,
industry solutions infused with AI, helping organizations extracting better insights from data and being capable of rapidly
mine intelligence from billions of connected devices. changing the way in which one does work.
Enterprise Services This is core to the strategy of IBM’s clients and is at the heart of
Through Global Business Services and Global Technology
the IBM strategy.
Services, IBM has helped the world’s most successful enterprises
transition from era to era. Using proven methods, IBM Services
Business Model
bring globally delivered outcomes using proven methods by
The company’s business model is built to support two principal
focusing on: goals: helping enterprise clients to move from one era to the
• Digital Reinvention for growth: a unique framework for next by bringing together innovative technology and industry
business transformation focused on growth opportunities. expertise, and providing long-term value to shareholders. The
business model has been developed over time through strategic
• End-to-end Services integration: Global Technology Services investments in capabilities and technologies that have long-term
brings the ability to connect previously disconnected growth and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver
parts of an organization. By embedding Watson into these to clients.
mission critical services, new levels of quality, resiliency
and automation are achieved.

===== PAGE 33 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, Global Business Services (GBS) provides clients with consulting,
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad application management services and business process services.
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide These professional services deliver value and innovation to
integrated solutions and platforms to the company’s clients. clients through solutions which leverage industry, technology
and business strategy and process expertise. GBS is the
The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously digital reinvention partner for IBM clients, combining industry
changing industry and economic environment, including the knowledge, functional expertise, and applications with the power
company’s transformation into cloud and as-a-Service delivery of business design and cognitive and cloud technologies. The
models. The company continues to strengthen its position full portfolio of GBS services is backed by its globally integrated
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher- delivery network and integration with technologies, solutions and
value areas, broadening its industry expertise and integrating AI services from IBM units including IBM Watson, IBM Cloud, IBM
into more of what the company offers. In addition, the company is Research, and Global Technology Services.
transforming into a more agile enterprise to drive innovation and
speed, as well as helping to drive productivity, which supports In 2017, GBS deployed a new operating model designed to
investments for participation in markets with significant long- address specific client digital transformation imperatives and
term opportunity. take full advantage of IBM and GBS’s competitive differentiators
in industry, cognitive and cloud. The operating model features
This business model, supported by the company’s financial Digital Strategy and iX, Cognitive Process Transformation and
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash Cloud Application Innovation. To bring value at scale to clients
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term. around the world, GBS has implemented global service lines
within each of the three focus areas, which are populated with
Business Segments and Capabilities new practices staffed by practitioners with deep domain skills
The company’s major operations consist of five business and industry expertise.
segments: Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services,
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Systems and Global GBS Capabilities
Financing. Consulting: provides business consulting services focused on
bringing to market solutions that help clients shape their digital
Cognitive Solutions comprises a broad portfolio of capabilities blueprints and customer experiences, define their cognitive
that help IBM’s clients to identify actionable new insights and operating models, unlock the potential in all data to improve
inform decision-making for competitive advantage. Leveraging decision-making, set their next-generation talent strategies and
IBM’s research, technology and industry expertise, this business create new technology architectures in a cloud-centric world.
delivers a full spectrum of capabilities, from descriptive,
predictive and prescriptive analytics to cognitive systems. Application Management: delivers system integration, application
Cognitive Solutions includes Watson, the first commercially management, maintenance and support services for packaged
available AI platform that has the ability to interact in natural software, as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is
language, process vast amounts of big data, and learn from delivered through advanced capabilities in areas such as security
interactions with people and systems. These solutions are and privacy, application testing and modernization, cloud
provided through the most contemporary delivery methods application migration and automation.
including through cloud environments and “as-a-Service”
models. Cognitive Solutions consists of Solutions Software and Global Process Services: delivers finance, procurement, talent
Transaction Processing Software. and engagement, and industry-specific business process
outsourcing services. These services deliver improved business
Cognitive Solutions Capabilities results to clients through our consult-to-operate model which
Solutions Software: provides the basis for many of the company’s includes the strategic change and/or operation of the client’s
strategic areas. IBM has established the world’s deepest processes, applications and infrastructure. GBS is redefining
portfolio of data and analytics solutions, including analytics process services for both growth and efficiency through the
and data management platforms, cloud data services, talent application of the power of cognitive technologies like Watson,
management solutions, and solutions tailored by industry. as well as the IoT, blockchain and deep analytics.
Watson Platform, Watson Health and Watson Internet of Things
(IoT) are certain capabilities included in Solutions Software. Technology Services & Cloud Platforms provides compre-
IBM’s world-class security platform delivers integrated security hensive IT infrastructure services creating business value for
intelligence across clients’ entire operations, including their clients. By leveraging insights and experience drawn from IBM’s
cloud, applications, networks and data, helping them to prevent, global scale, skills and technology, with applied innovation from
detect and remediate potential threats. IBM Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, high-quality
services with improved outcomes in productivity, flexibility
Transaction Processing Software: includes software that and cost.
primarily runs mission-critical systems in industries such as
banking, airlines and retail. Most of this software is on-premise
and annuity in nature.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms Capabilities Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients
Infrastructure Services: delivers a portfolio of cloud, project- to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital
based, outsourcing and other managed services focused on information and to fuel data-centric cognitive applications.
clients’ enterprise IT infrastructure environments to enable These solutions address critical client requirements for
digital transformation and deliver improved quality, flexibility, information retention and archiving, security, compliance and
risk management and financial value. The portfolio includes a storage optimization including data deduplication, availability
comprehensive set of hybrid cloud services and solutions to and virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of
assist clients in building and running enterprise IT environments software-defined storage solutions, flash storage, disk and tape
that utilize public and private clouds and traditional IT. The IBM storage solutions.
Cloud Platform offers leading-edge services to developers and
IBM’s Cloud Infrastructure-as-a-Service covers a wide variety Operating Systems Software: The company’s z/OS is a security-
of workloads with high-quality performance. These offerings rich, scalable, high-performance enterprise operating system for
integrate long-standing expertise in service management IBM Z. Power Systems offers a choice of AIX or Linux operating
and technology with the ability to utilize the power of new systems. These operating systems leverage POWER architecture
technologies, drawn from across IBM’s businesses and to deliver secure, reliable and high performing enterprise-class
ecosystem partners. The portfolio is built around a key set of workloads across a breadth of server offerings.
predictive and proactive solutions addressing systems, mobility,
resiliency, networking, cloud and security. The company’s Global Financing encompasses two primary businesses:
capabilities, including IBM Cloud, cognitive computing and hybrid financing, primarily conducted through IBM Credit LLC (IBM
cloud implementation, provide high-performance, end-to-end Credit), and remanufacturing and remarketing. In 2017, the
innovation and an improved ability to achieve business objectives. company reorganized its client and commercial financing
business as a wholly owned subsidiary, IBM Credit LLC, and
Technical Support Services: delivers comprehensive support it began accessing the capital markets directly in September
services to maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT 2017. IBM Credit, through its financing solutions, facilitates IBM
infrastructures. These offerings include maintenance for IBM clients’ acquisition of information technology systems, software
products and other technology platforms, as well as software and services in the areas where the company has the expertise.
and solution support, drawing on innovative technologies and The financing arrangements are predominantly for products or
leveraging the Watson platform’s predictive capabilities. services that are critical to the end users’ business operations.
The company conducts a comprehensive credit evaluation of its
Integration Software: delivers industry-leading hybrid cloud clients prior to extending financing. As a captive financier, Global
solutions that empower clients to achieve rapid innovation, Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge of its client
hybrid integration, and process transformation with choice base and a clear insight into the products and services financed.
and consistency across public, dedicated and local cloud These factors allow the business to effectively manage two of the
environments, leveraging the IBM Platform-as-a-Service major risks associated with financing, credit and residual value,
solution. Integration Software offerings and capabilities help while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financing also
clients address the digital imperatives to create, connect and maintains a long-term partnership with the company’s clients
optimize their applications, data and infrastructure on their through various stages of the IT asset life cycle — from initial
journey to become cognitive businesses. purchase and technology upgrades to asset disposition decisions.
Systems provides clients with innovative infrastructure Global Financing Capabilities
platforms to help meet the new requirements of hybrid cloud and Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan
cognitive workloads. Approximately half of Systems Hardware’s financing to end users and internal clients for terms up to seven
server and storage sales transactions are through the company’s years. Assets financed are primarily new and used IT hardware,
business partners, with the balance direct to end-user clients. software and services where the company has expertise. Internal
IBM Systems also designs advanced semiconductor and systems financing is predominantly in support of Technology Services &
technology in collaboration with IBM Research, primarily for use Cloud Platforms’ long-term client service contracts. All internal
in the company’s systems. financing arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are based
upon market conditions.
Systems Capabilities
Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to Commercial Financing: short-term working capital financing to
address computing capacity, security and performance needs suppliers, distributors and resellers of IBM and OEM products
of businesses, hyperscale cloud service providers and scientific and services. This includes internal activity where Global
computing organizations. The portfolio includes IBM Z, a trusted Financing factors a selected portion of the company’s accounts
enterprise platform for integrating data, transactions and insight, receivable primarily for cash management purposes, at arm’s-
and Power Systems, a system designed from the ground up for length rates.
big data and analytics, optimized for scale-out cloud and Linux,
and delivering open innovation with OpenPOWER.

===== PAGE 35 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: assets include used Research, Development and Intellectual Property
equipment returned from lease transactions, or used and surplus IBM’s research and development (R&D) operations differentiate
equipment acquired internally or externally. These assets may the company from its competitors. IBM annually invests 7 to
be refurbished or upgraded and sold or leased to new or existing 8 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth,
clients both externally or internally. Externally remarketed high-value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and
equipment revenue represents sales or leases to clients and the company’s business units through global labs on near-term
resellers. Internally remarketed equipment revenue primarily and mid-term innovations. It delivers many new technologies to
represents used equipment that is sold internally to Systems IBM’s portfolio every year and helps clients address their most
and Technology Services & Cloud Platforms. Systems may also difficult challenges. IBM Research scientists are conducting
sell the equipment that it purchases from Global Financing to pioneering work in artificial intelligence, quantum computing,
external clients. blockchain, security, cloud, nanotechnology, silicon and post-
silicon computing architectures and more — applying these
IBM Worldwide Organizations technologies across industries including healthcare, IoT,
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s education and financial services.
delivery of value to its clients:
In 2017, for the 25th consecutive year, IBM was awarded more
• Global Markets
U.S. patents than any other company. IBM’s 9,043 patents
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property awarded in 2017 represent a diverse range of inventions in
artificial intelligence, cloud, cybersecurity and other strategic
Global Markets growth areas for the company.
IBM has a global presence, operating in more than 175 countries
with a broad-based geographic distribution of revenue. The The company continues to actively seek IP protection for its
company’s Global Markets organization manages IBM’s global innovations, while increasing emphasis on other initiatives
footprint, working closely with dedicated country-based designed to leverage its IP leadership. Some of IBM’s
operating units to serve clients locally. These country teams technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM
have client relationship managers who lead integrated teams of products, while others are licensed and may be used in IBM
consultants, solution specialists and delivery professionals to products and/or the products of the licensee. As part of its
enable clients’ growth and innovation. business model, the company licenses certain of its intellectual
property, which is high-value technology, but may be in more
By complementing local expertise with global experience and mature markets. The licensee drives the future development of
digital capabilities, IBM builds deep and broad-based client the IP and ultimately expands the customer base. This would
relationships. This local management focus fosters speed generate IP income for the company both upon licensing, and
in supporting clients, addressing new markets and making with any ongoing royalty arrangements between it and the
investments in emerging opportunities. The Global Markets licensee. While the company’s various proprietary IP rights are
organization serves clients with expertise in their industry as important to its success, IBM believes its business as a whole
well as through the products and services that IBM and partners is not materially dependent on any particular patent or license,
supply. IBM is also expanding its reach to new and existing clients or any particular group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is
through digital marketplaces, digital sales and local Business licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration,
Partner resources. relating to its products.

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2017 versus 2016 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $18,453 $18,187 1.5% 1.0%
Gross margin 78.6% 81.9% (3.2) pts.
Global Business Services 16,348 16,700 (2.1)% (1.8)%
Gross margin 25.2% 27.0% (1.8) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 34,277 35,337 (3.0)% (3.4)%
Gross margin 40.4% 41.9% (1.5) pts.
Systems 8,194 7,714 6.2% 5.4%
Gross margin 53.2% 55.7% (2.5) pts.
Global Financing 1,696 1,692 0.3% (0.7)%
Gross margin 29.3% 38.7% (9.4) pts.
Other 171 289 (40.7)% (41.1)%
Gross margin (640.3)% (293.9)% (346.4) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $79,139 $79,919 (1.0)% (1.3)%
Total consolidated gross profit $36,227 $38,294 (5.4)%
Total consolidated gross margin 45.8% 47.9% (2.1) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 449 494 (9.2)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 799 316 153.2%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $37,475 $39,104 (4.2)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 47.4% 48.9% (1.6) pts.

===== PAGE 37 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue $18,453 $18,187 1.5% 1.0%
Solutions Software $12,806 $12,589 1.7% 1.3%
Transaction Processing Software 5,647 5,598 0.9 0.3
Cognitive Solutions revenue of $18,453 million grew 1.5 percent Cognitive Solutions total strategic imperatives revenue of $12.0
as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency in 2017 billion grew 2 percent year to year as reported and adjusted
compared to the prior year. On an as-reported and constant for currency. Cloud revenue of $2.5 billion grew 19 percent as
currency basis, there was growth in Solutions Software, which reported and adjusted for currency, with an as-a-Service exit run
addresses many of the company’s strategic areas, while rate of $2.1 billion.
Transaction Processing Software was relatively flat year to year.
($ in millions)
Solutions Software revenue of $12,806 million grew 1.7 percent Yr.-to-Yr.
as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the Percent/
Margin
prior year led by key areas including security, industry platforms For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
and Watson offerings, as the company continued to embed Cognitive Solutions
cognitive into its security offerings and drive vertical solutions.
External gross profit $14,510 $14,890 (2.6)%
In 2017, the company continued to expand the market for Watson
External gross profit
Health which had strong double-digit revenue growth as reported
margin 78.6% 81.9% (3.2) pts.
and adjusted for currency compared to the prior year. Most of the
Pre-tax income $ 6,817 $ 6,352 7.3%
strategic areas within Solutions Software have a Software-as-
a-Service (SaaS) delivery model and the company continues to Pre-tax margin 32.3% 30.5% 1.8 pts.
build scale in these areas. For the full year, there was year-to-year
growth in annuity revenue as reported and at constant currency
Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin decreased 3.2 points to
with strong double-digit growth in SaaS revenue as reported and
78.6 percent in 2017 compared to the prior year. The gross profit
adjusted for currency.
margin decline year to year was driven by continued investment
and an increasing mix toward SaaS which has a different margin
Transaction Processing Software revenue of $5,647 million
profile than traditional software delivery offerings and is not yet
grew 0.9 percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency) in 2017
at scale. Margins were impacted by a higher level of royalty cost
compared to the prior year. In the second half of 2017, there was
associated with IP licensing agreements in 2017 compared to
improved revenue performance with growth both sequentially
the prior year.
versus the first half 2017 and year to year as reported and
adjusted for currency reflecting clients’ ongoing long-term
Pre-tax income of $6,817 million increased 7.3 percent compared
commitment and the value the company’s platform provides
to the prior year with a pre-tax margin improvement of 1.8 points
to them. This portfolio predominately runs on-premise mission
to 32.3 percent as the company continues to invest to embed
critical workloads running on IBM Z in industries such as banking,
cognitive into offerings, scale platforms and build high-value
airlines and retail.
vertical solutions.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $16,348 $16,700 (2.1)% (1.8)%
Consulting $ 7,262 $ 7,332 (1.0)% (0.4)%
Global Process Services 1,265 1,388 (8.8) (9.0)
Application Management 7,821 7,980 (2.0) (1.9)
Global Business Services revenue of $16,348 million decreased ($ in millions)
2.1 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency in Yr.-to-Yr.
2017 compared to the prior year. The company continues to Percent/
Margin
transform this business and shift its practices to digital, cognitive For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
and cloud. GBS signings grew each quarter of the year as reported Global Business Services
and adjusted for currency, and strategic imperatives revenue for
External gross profit $4,112 $4,501 (8.6)%
the full year 2017 had strong growth year to year as reported
External gross profit
and adjusted for currency. However, this growth continues to be
margin 25.2% 27.0% (1.8) pts.
more than offset by declines in the more traditional areas that the
Pre-tax income $1,401 $1,732 (19.1)%
company is shifting away from such as large ERP and on-premise
enterprise application implementation. Pre-tax margin 8.4% 10.1% (1.7) pts.
Consulting revenue of $7,262 million decreased 1.0 percent
GBS gross profit margin decreased 1.8 points to 25.2 percent
year to year as reported (flat adjusted for currency). There was
year to year and pre-tax income of $1,401 million decreased 19.1
improved performance in the second half of 2017 with revenue
percent year to year. The pre-tax margin declined 1.7 points to
growth both sequentially versus the first half of 2017 and year
8.4 percent. Pre-tax income performance for the year included a
to year as reported and adjusted for currency. The improvement
lower level of charges related to workforce rebalancing and real
was driven by the company’s digital strategy and iX platform,
estate actions as compared to the prior year.
and a return to growth as reported and at constant currency
in the Consulting backlog. Global Process Services (GPS)
GBS margin has been impacted by investments to drive
revenue of $1,265 million decreased 8.8 percent as reported
transformation and reflects pricing and profit pressure in the
(9 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year.
more traditional IT services. The company will continue to focus
Application Management revenue of $7,821 million decreased
on improving productivity with a streamlined practice model and
2.0 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency).
new project management approaches.
The company continues to help clients implement new cloud-
centric architectures in their critical applications. However,
overall revenue performance in Application Management was
impacted by certain areas that are not as differentiated and
are experiencing pricing pressure, as well as the successful
completion of some large contracts.
Within GBS, total strategic imperatives revenue of $9.8 billion
grew 10 percent as reported and adjusted for currency year to
year. Cloud revenue of $4.0 billion grew 34 percent as reported
(35 percent adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run
rate of $1.3 billion.

===== PAGE 39 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue $34,277 $35,337 (3.0)% (3.4)%
Infrastructure Services $22,690 $23,543 (3.6)% (4.1)%
Technical Support Services 7,196 7,272 (1.0) (1.5)
Integration Software 4,390 4,521 (2.9) (3.4)
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue of $34,277 ($ in millions)
million decreased 3.0 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted Yr.-to-Yr.
for currency in 2017 compared to the prior year. For the full year, Percent/
Margin
there were declines across all lines of business, however, within For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
the segment there was strong revenue growth year to year in Technology Services &
cloud, analytics, mobile and security, as reported and adjusted Cloud Platforms
for currency.
External Technology
Services gross profit $10,256 $10,969 (6.5)%
Infrastructure Services revenue of $22,690 million declined 3.6
External Technology
percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) compared Services gross profit
to the prior year. In Infrastructure Services, the business model margin 34.3% 35.6% (1.3) pts.
is to deliver productivity to clients and then grow by expanding External Integration
the scope of work and adding new clients to the platform. The Software gross profit $ 3,587 $ 3,830 (6.4)%
revenue decline in 2017 reflects the continued impact associated
External Integration
with contract conclusions at the end of 2016 and the shift away Software gross profit
from certain lower value work within this business. During margin 81.7% 84.7% (3.0) pts.
2017, there were some substantial new transactions signed External total gross profit $13,842 $14,800 (6.5)%
to implement hybrid cloud environments. Technical Support
External total gross
Services revenue of $7,196 million decreased 1.0 percent as
profit margin 40.4% 41.9% (1.5) pts.
reported (2 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Within
Pre-tax income $ 4,344 $ 4,707 (7.7)%
this line of business, the company is focused on growing its
Pre-tax margin 12.4% 13.1% (0.6) pts.
multi-vendor support services which provide clients with a
single source of expertise and visibility across different vendor
solutions. Integration Software full-year revenue of $4,390 Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin
million decreased 2.9 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted decreased 1.5 points year to year in 2017 to 40.4 percent driven
for currency) compared to the prior year. While the annuity base primarily by large contract conclusions, delays in productivity
remains relatively stable and there was strong double-digit improvements, mix from Integration Software and investments
growth in SaaS offerings, transactional revenue declined year to in cloud. The current-year margin reflects savings from the prior-
year as more of this portfolio shifts to the IBM Cloud. year workforce transformation action. Pre-tax income of $4,344
million decreased 7.7 percent. The pre-tax margin declined 0.6
Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, strategic points year to year to 12.4 percent. The year-to-year performance
imperatives revenue of $10.4 billion grew 19 percent year to year in 2017 compared to the prior year includes a lower level of
as reported (18 percent adjusted for currency). Cloud revenue charges related to workforce and real estate actions.
of $7.1 billion grew 21 percent as reported (20 percent adjusted
for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $6.9 billion. The company continues to focus on scaling its platforms,
delivering productivity through automation, infusing AI into
its offerings and investing to expand its cloud infrastructure.
There are approximately 60 cloud centers across 19 countries
providing clients with flexibility in how and where they store
their data. However, these investments to transform the business
continued to impact margins in 2017.

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Services Backlog and Signings
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Total backlog $121.0 $118.7 1.9% (3.4)%
The estimated total services backlog at December 31, 2017 was Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the
$121 billion, an increase of 1.9 percent as reported (decrease value of a client’s commitment under a services contract. There
of 3 percent adjusted for currency). There was growth in Global are no third-party standards or requirements governing the
Technology Services backlog as reported, but a decrease year calculation of signings. The calculation used by management
to year adjusted for currency. GBS backlog decreased year to involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s
year as reported and adjusted for currency compared to the commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement,
December 31, 2016 balance. and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Total services backlog includes Infrastructure Services, Signings include Infrastructure Services, Consulting, Global
Consulting, Global Process Services, Application Management Process Services and Application Management contracts.
and Technical Support Services. Total backlog is intended to be Contract extensions and increases in scope are treated as
a statement of overall work under contract for these businesses signings only to the extent of the incremental new value.
and therefore includes Technical Support Services. It does not Technical Support Services is not included in signings as the
include as-a-Service offerings that have flexibility in contractual maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
commitment terms. Backlog estimates are subject to change and revenues equal renewals.
are affected by several factors, including terminations, changes
in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
revenue not materialized and adjustments for currency. positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or
coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Total signings $42,869 $44,645 (4.0)% (4.4)%
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $8,194 $7,714 6.2% 5.4%
Systems Hardware $6,494 $5,926 9.6% 8.6%
IBM Z 24.0 22.3
Power Systems (3.7) (4.3)
Storage Systems 7.7 7.0
Operating Systems Software 1,701 1,788 (4.9) (5.3)
Systems revenue of $8,194 million grew 6.2 percent year to Within Systems Hardware, IBM Z revenue grew 24.0 percent as
year as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2017 reported (22 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, driven by
driven by a combination of strong z14 market acceptance and the successful launch of the z14 mainframe in the third quarter of
four consecutive quarters of growth as reported and adjusted 2017. This success is due to the strong demand for technology that
for currency in Storage Systems. Systems Hardware revenue of helps address the growing threat of global data breaches and the
$6,494 million grew 9.6 percent as reported (9 percent adjusted need for clients to operate within regulated environments. With
for currency) with growth in IBM Z and Storage Systems partially unprecedented encryption capabilities, there has been strong
offset by a decrease in Power Systems, as reported and adjusted demand for the z14 across a mix of industries and geographies
for currency. Operating Systems Software revenue of $1,701 since its introduction. The company’s mainframe is a franchise
million decreased 4.9 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted that continues to deliver a high value, secure and scalable
for currency) compared to the prior year. platform that clients rely on for their mission critical applications.

===== PAGE 41 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Power Systems revenue decreased 3.7 percent as reported The Systems gross profit margin decreased 2.5 points to 53.2
(4 percent adjusted for currency) year to year with revenue growth percent in 2017 compared to the prior year. The overall decrease
in the company’s high-end portfolio more than offset by declines year to year was driven by margin declines across all product
in mid-range and low-range products, as reported and adjusted lines, partially offset by product mix primarily toward the higher
for currency. Overall performance reflects the company’s margin IBM Z, reflecting product cycle dynamics.
continued shift to a growing Linux market while continuing to
serve a high-value, but declining UNIX market. Linux revenue Pre-tax income of $1,135 million grew 21.6 percent and pre-tax
grew year to year as reported and adjusted for currency, while margin increased 1.7 points year to year to 12.7 percent driven
UNIX revenue declined as reported and adjusted for currency by the strong performance in Systems Hardware.
in 2017. In the fourth quarter of 2017, Power Systems revenue
returned to growth as reported and adjusted for currency, and Overall Systems performance in 2017 reflected a successful
the company released its next generation POWER9 system in the repositioning of the business through continuous reinvention of
low-end Linux portfolio. With the new POWER9 processor, these core platforms and expansion into new workloads.
systems bring unprecedented speed to AI workloads.
Global Financing
Storage Systems revenue increased by 7.7 percent as reported Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as
(7 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. With the a stand-alone entity. Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’
company’s most competitive storage offerings in some time, acquisition of information technology systems, software and
there was growth as reported and adjusted for currency in each services by providing financing solutions in the areas where the
quarter of the year. All-flash array offerings were a catalyst for company has the expertise, while generating strong returns on
Storage Systems growth in 2017 with strong double-digit growth equity. Global Financing also optimizes the recovery of residual
as reported and adjusted for currency throughout the year. values by selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used
equipment to new clients, or extending lease arrangements
Within Systems, total strategic imperatives revenue of $4.3 billion with current clients. Sales of equipment include equipment
grew 28 percent year to year as reported (26 percent adjusted returned at the end of a lease, surplus internal equipment
for currency). Cloud revenue of $3.4 billion grew 26 percent as and used equipment purchased externally. Residual value is a
reported (25 percent adjusted for currency). risk unique to the financing business and management of this
risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately project future
($ in millions) equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing has
Yr.-to-Yr. insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under
Percent/ lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change continually monitors projections of future equipment values and
Systems compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio.
External Systems
Hardware gross profit $2,894 $2,720 6.4% Results of Operations
External Systems ($ in millions)
Hardware gross Yr.-to-Yr.
profit margin 44.6% 45.9% (1.3) pts. Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
External Operating
Systems Software External revenue $1,696 $1,692 0.3 %
gross profit $1,469 $1,577 (6.9)% Internal revenue 1,471 1,802 (18.4)
External Operating Total revenue $3,168 $3,494 (9.3 )%
Systems Software Pre-tax income $1,279 $1,656 (22.7)%
gross profit margin 86.4% 88.2% (1.8) pts.
External total
gross profit $4,363 $4,298 1.5%
External total gross
profit margin 53.2% 55.7% (2.5) pts.
Pre-tax income $1,135 $ 933 21.6%
Pre-tax margin 12.7% 11.0% 1.7 pts.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2017, Global Financing delivered external revenue of $1,696 Total unguaranteed residual value of leases at December 31,
million and total revenue of $3,168 million, with a decline in 2017 and 2016 were $724 million and $725 million, respectively.
gross margin of 6.7 points. Total pre-tax income of $1,279 million In addition to the unguaranteed residual value, on a limited basis,
decreased 22.7 percent compared to 2016 and return on equity Global Financing will obtain guarantees of the future value of the
increased 2.3 points to 32.9 percent. equipment to be returned at end of lease.
Global Financing total revenue of $3,168 million decreased 9.3 Third-party residual value guarantees increase the minimum
percent compared to the prior year. This was due to a decline lease payments as provided for by accounting standards that
in internal revenue of 18.4 percent, driven by a decrease in are utilized in determining the classification of a lease as a
internal used equipment sales (down 25.2 percent to $1,111 sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating lease. The
million) partially offset by an increase in internal financing (up aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees of sales-
13.9 percent to $360 million). External revenue grew 0.3 percent type leases were $716 million and $329 million for the financing
due to an increase in external used equipment sales (up 14.9 transactions originated during the years ended December 31,
percent to $530 million), partially offset by a decline in external 2017 and December 31, 2016, respectively. In 2017, the residual
financing (down 5.2 percent to $1,167 million). value guarantee program resulted in the company recognizing
approximately $452 million of revenue that would otherwise have
The decrease in external financing revenue was due to lower been recognized in future periods as operating lease revenue. If
asset yields, partially offset by an increase in average asset the company had chosen to not participate in a residual value
balances. The increase in internal financing revenue was primarily guarantee program in 2017 and prior years, the 2017 impact
due to higher average asset balances and higher asset yields. would be substantially mitigated by the effect of prior year
asset values being recognized as operating lease revenue in
Global Financing pre-tax income decreased 22.7 percent year to the current year. The aggregate asset values associated with
year in 2017 primarily driven by a decrease in gross profit ($430 the guarantees of direct financing leases were $154 million and
million), partially offset by a decline in financing receivables $169 million for the financing transactions originated during the
provisions ($52 million). This decrease was primarily due to lower years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. The
reserves in Brazil in the current year. At December 31, 2017 the associated aggregate guaranteed future values at the scheduled
overall allowance for credit losses coverage rate was 1.1 percent, end of lease were $45 million and $19 million for the financing
a decrease of 48 basis points year over year primarily due to the transactions originated during the years ended December 31,
write-off of previously reserved receivables. 2017 and 2016, respectively. The cost of guarantees was $4
million and $2 million for the years ended December 31, 2017
The increase in return on equity from 2016 to 2017 was primarily and 2016, respectively.
due to a lower average equity balance. See page 48 for the details
of the after-tax income and return on equity calculations.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic
basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Total revenue $79,139 $79,919 (1.0)% (1.3)%
Geographies $78,793 $79,594 (1.0)% (1.4)%
Americas 37,479 37,513 (0.1) (0.6)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 24,345 24,769 (1.7) (2.8)
Asia Pacific 16,970 17,313 (2.0) (1.1)
Total geographic revenue of $78,793 million in 2017 decreased 1.0 percent as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) compared
to the prior year.

===== PAGE 43 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Americas revenue was essentially flat year to year as reported, Selling, General and Administrative
but decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency with a decline in
($ in millions)
North America partially offset by growth in Latin America, both
Yr.-to-Yr.
as reported and adjusted for currency. Within North America, the
Percent
U.S. decreased 1.4 percent and Canada increased 4.9 percent For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
(3 percent adjusted for currency). In Latin America, Brazil Selling, general and
increased 7.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and administrative expense
Mexico increased 9.2 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency). Selling, general and
administrative — other $16,568 $16,971 (2.4)%
EMEA revenue decreased 1.7 percent as reported and 3 percent Advertising and promotional
adjusted for currency. Revenue declined in the UK and Germany, expense 1,445 1,327 8.9
while there was growth in France and Spain. The UK decreased Workforce rebalancing
11.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and Germany charges 199 1,038 (80.9)
decreased 3.2 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency). France Retirement-related costs 959 742 29.3
increased 6.3 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), and
Amortization of acquired
Spain was up 8.3 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency). intangible assets 496 503 (1.4)
Stock-based compensation 384 401 (4.1)
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 2.0 percent as reported and
Bad debt expense 55 87 (36.5)
1 percent adjusted for currency. Japan decreased 1.1 percent
as reported, but increased 2 percent adjusted for currency. Total consolidated
selling, general and
India grew 8.6 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for
administrative expense $20,107 $21,069 (4.6)%
currency. China decreased 10.6 percent (10 percent adjusted
Non-operating adjustments
for currency) and Australia decreased 5.8 percent (9 percent
adjusted for currency). Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (496) (503) (1.4)
Total Expense and Other (Income) Acquisition-related charges (13) 2 NM
Non-operating retirement-
($ in millions)
related (costs)/income (472) (253) 86.6
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Operating (non-GAAP)
Margin selling, general and
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change administrative expense $19,126 $20,315 (5.9)%
Total consolidated expense
and other (income) $24,827 $25,964 (4.4)% NM — Not meaningful
Non-operating adjustments
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense
Amortization of acquired
decreased 4.6 percent in 2017 versus 2016, driven primarily by
intangible assets (496) (503) (1.4)
the following factors:
Acquisition-related charges (52) (5) NM
• Lower workforce rebalancing charges (4 points); and
Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income (669) (282) 137.2 • Lower spending (2 points); partially offset by
Operating (non-GAAP)
expense and • Spending related to acquisitions in the prior 12 months
other (income) $23,609 $25,174 (6.2)% (1 point); and
Total consolidated • Higher retirement-related costs (1 point).
expense-to-revenue ratio 31.4% 32.5% (1.1) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) Operating (non-GAAP) expense decreased 5.9 percent year to
expense-to-revenue ratio 29.8% 31.5% (1.7) pts. year driven primarily by the same factors.
NM — Not meaningful
Bad debt expense decreased $32 million in 2017 compared
For additional information regarding total expense and other to 2016. The receivables provision coverage was 1.6 percent
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following at December 31, 2017, a decrease of 40 basis points from
analyses by category. December 31, 2016.

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
Total consolidated Other (income) and expense
research, development Foreign currency transaction
and engineering $5,787 $5,751 0.6% losses/(gains) $ 405 $(116) NM
Non-operating adjustment (Gains)/losses on derivative
Non-operating retirement- instruments (341) 260 NM
related (costs)/income (197) (29) 575.5 Interest income (144) (108) 33.5%
Operating (non-GAAP) Net (gains)/losses from
research, development securities and investment
and engineering $5,590 $5,722 (2.3)% assets (20) 23 NM
Other (116) 85 NM
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense was Total consolidated other
7.3 percent of revenue in 2017 and 7.2 percent of revenue in 2016. (income) and expense $(216) $ 145 NM
Non-operating adjustment
RD&E expense increased 0.6 percent in 2017 versus 2016 Acquisition-related
primarily driven by: charges (39) (7) 444.6
Operating (non-GAAP) other
• The impact of acquisitions completed in the prior 12-month
(income) and expense $(255) $ 138 NM
period (1 point); and
NM — Not meaningful
• The effects of currency; partially offset by
• Lower spending, net of higher retirement-related costs Total consolidated other (income) and expense was income of
(1 point). $216 million in 2017 compared to expense of $145 million in
2016. The decrease in expense of $361 million year over year
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense decreased 2.3 percent in was primarily driven by:
2017 compared to the prior year, driven primarily by the same
• Real estate capacity charges (reflected in Other in the table
factors, excluding higher non-operating retirement-related costs.
above) in the prior year related to workforce transformation
($328 million);
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
• Lower net exchange losses ($81 million);
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. • Reduced losses from securities and investment assets
Percent ($43 million), primarily related to the sale of Lenovo shares
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
in 2016; and
Licensing of intellectual
property including • Higher interest income ($36 million); partially offset by
royalty-based fees $1,193 $1,390 (14.1)%
• Lower gains on divestitures ($61 million).
Custom development income 252 214 17.5
Sales/other transfers of
Interest Expense
intellectual property 21 27 (24.2)
Total $1,466 $1,631 (10.2)% ($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based fees
Interest expense
decreased 14.1 percent in 2017 compared to 2016. The company
entered into new partnership agreements in 2017, which included Total $615 $630 (2.3)%
three transactions with period income greater than $100 million,
compared to four transactions greater than $100 million in 2016.
Interest expense decreased $15 million compared to 2016.
The company licenses IP to partners who allocate their skills
Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the
to extend the value of assets that are high value, but may be in
Consolidated Statement of Earnings only if the related external
mature markets. The timing and amount of licensing, sales or
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
other transfers of IP may vary significantly from period to period
Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest) in 2017
depending upon the timing of licensing agreements, economic
was $1,273 million, an increase of $67 million year to year,
conditions, industry consolidation and the timing of new patents
primarily driven by higher average interest rates.
and know-how development.

===== PAGE 45 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock-Based Compensation As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $534 million pages 26 and 27, the company characterizes certain retirement-
decreased $10 million compared to 2016. This was due related costs as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing
primarily to decreases related to the conversion of stock-based this characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2017
awards previously issued by acquired entities ($23 million) and were $1,388 million, a decrease of $17 million compared to
performance share units ($14 million); partially offset by an 2016, primarily driven by lower defined contribution plans cost
increase in restricted stock units ($27 million). Stock-based ($23 million). Non-operating costs of $1,468 million increased
compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected $871 million in 2017 compared to 2016, driven primarily by lower
in the following categories: Cost: $91 million, up $3 million; SG&A expected return on plan assets ($1,217 million) and an increase
expense: $384 million, down $16 million and RD&E expense: $59 in recognized actuarial losses ($120 million); partially offset by
million, up $3 million. lower interest costs ($339 million) and other costs ($162 million)
primarily due to impacts from pension litigation in both years.
Retirement-Related Plans Effective January 1, 2018, the company adopted the new FASB
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all guidance on presentation of net periodic pension and nonpension
retirement-related plans. These amounts are included in the postretirement benefit costs, and as a result, beginning in
Consolidated Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, 2018, the company will align its presentation of operating and
SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan participants. non-operating costs to the FASB presentation. Prior period non-
operating cost/(income) will be recast for comparability.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Income Taxes
Percent The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2017 was
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change
49.5 percent, an increase of 45.8 points versus the prior year. The
Retirement-related
fourth quarter charge of $5.5 billion related to the impact of the
plans — cost
enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act resulted in an increase
Service cost $ 429 $ 443 (3.0)%
to the effective tax rate of 48.0 points. Without this impact, the
Amortization of prior continuing operations tax rate would have been 1.5 percent
service costs/(credits) (88) (107) (18.5)
compared to a 2016 rate of 3.6 percent, with the remaining
Cost of defined change in the rate year to year driven by the following factors:
contribution plans 1,046 1,070 (2.2)
• An increased benefit year to year in the utilization of foreign
Total operating costs/
(income) $ 1,388 $ 1,405 (1.2)% tax credits of 5.4 points;
Interest cost $ 2,961 $ 3,300 (10.3)% • A benefit related to an intra-entity asset transfer in the first
Expected return on quarter of 2017 of 5.1 points;
plan assets (4,346) (5,563) (21.9)
• A benefit due to the tax write down of an investment in the
Recognized actuarial
fourth quarter of 2017 of 1.7 points; and
losses 2,871 2,751 4.4
Curtailments/settlements 19 (16) NM • A benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax earnings in
Multi-employer plan/other (36) 126 NM 2017 of 1.0 points; partially offset by
Total non-operating • The favorable resolution of the longstanding tax matter in
costs/(income) $ 1,468 $ 598 145.6% Japan in 2016 of 9.5 points; and
Total retirement-related
• An increase year to year in tax charges related to
plans — cost $ 2,857 $ 2,003 42.6%
intercompany payments of 1.5 points.
NM — Not meaningful
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
Total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost increased by $854 rate was 6.7 percent, an increase of 0.3 points versus 2016,
million compared to 2016, primarily driven by lower expected principally driven by the same factors described above. In
return on plan assets ($1,217 million) and an increase in 2017, the geographic and product mix of pre-tax earnings were
recognized actuarial losses ($120 million); partially offset by more favorable than the company expected and there was
lower interest costs ($339 million) and other costs ($162 million) increased utilization of foreign tax credits. These impacts drove
primarily due to impacts from pension litigation in both years. the underlying continuing operations operating (non-GAAP)
effective tax rate to approximately 12 percent before discrete
period benefits.
For more information on the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act impact, see
note N, “Taxes,” on pages 121 and 124.

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Earnings Per Share Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at
weighted-average number of shares of common stock December 31. At December 31, 2017, the overall net under-
outstanding during the period. Diluted earnings per share is funded position was $12,890 million, a decrease of $1,949
computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of million from December 31, 2016 driven by asset returns, partially
shares of common stock outstanding plus the effect of dilutive offset by interest cost and a decrease in discount rates. At year
potential common shares outstanding during the period using the end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans were well
treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include funded and the cash requirements related to these plans remain
outstanding stock options and stock awards. stable going forward at approximately $400 million per year
through 2020. In 2017, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension
Plan assets was 9.6 percent and the plan was 104 percent funded
Yr.-to-Yr. at December 31. Overall, global asset returns were 8.3 percent
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Change and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 100
Earnings per share of percent funded at December 31, 2017.
common stock from
continuing operations During 2017, the company generated $16,724 million in cash
Assuming dilution $ 6.14* $12.39 (50.4)% from operations, a decrease of $360 million compared to 2016.
In addition, the company generated $12,992 million in free
Basic $ 6.17 $12.44 (50.4)%
cash flow, an increase of $1,293 million versus the prior year.
Diluted operating
See page 68 for additional information on free cash flow. The
(non-GAAP) $13.80 $13.59 1.5%
company returned $9,847 million to shareholders in 2017, with
Weighted-average shares
$5,506 million in dividends and $4,340 million in gross share
outstanding (in millions)
repurchases. In 2017, the company repurchased 27.2 million
Assuming dilution 937.4 958.7 (2.2)%
shares and had $3.8 billion remaining in share repurchase
Basic 932.8 955.4 (2.4)% authorization at year end. The company’s cash generation
* Includes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. permits the company to invest and deploy capital to areas with
tax reform, or $5.84 of diluted earnings per share in 2017. the most attractive long-term opportunities.
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2017 and 2016 Global Financing Financial Position Key Metrics:
were 922.2 million and 945.9 million, respectively. The average
($ in millions)
number of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was
At December 31: 2017 2016
21.3 million shares lower in 2017 versus 2016. The decrease was
Cash and cash equivalents $ 2,696 $ 1,844
primarily the result of the common stock repurchase program.
Net investment in sales-type
Financial Position and direct financing leases 7,253 6,893
Dynamics Equipment under operating leases —
At December 31, 2017, the company continued to have the external clients (1) 477 548
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. Client loans 12,450 11,478
Cash and marketable securities at year end were $12,580 Total client financing assets 20,180 18,920
million. During the year, the company continued to manage the Commercial financing receivables 11,590 9,700
investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity
Intercompany financing receivables (2) (3) 5,056 4,959
objectives.
Total assets $41,096 $36,492
Debt 31,434 27,859
Total debt of $46,824 million increased $4,655 million from prior
year-end levels. The commercial paper balance at December 31, Total equity $ 3,484 $ 3,812
2017, was $1,496 million, an increase of $597 million from the
(1) Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on
prior year end. Within total debt, $31,434 million is in support products purchased from the company’s product divisions which is
of the Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 9.0 to eliminated in IBM’s consolidated results.
1 ratio. The company continues to have substantial flexibility in (2) Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results
the debt markets. During 2017, the company completed bond and therefore does not appear on page 80.
issuances totaling $7,986 million, with terms ranging from 2 to (3) T hese assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are
leveraged at the value in the table using Global Financing debt.
12 years, and interest rates ranging from 0.95 to 3.30 percent
depending on maturity. This includes IBM Credit’s first public
debt issuance of $3,000 million in September 2017. The company
has consistently generated strong cash flow from operations
and continues to have access to additional sources of liquidity
through the capital markets and its Credit Facilities.

===== PAGE 47 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2017, substantially all financing assets were IT Receivables and Allowances
related assets, and approximately 53 percent of the total external Roll Forward of Total IBM Receivables Allowance
portfolio was with investment-grade clients with no direct for Credit Losses
exposure to consumers. The improvement in investment-grade
($ in millions)
year to year (1 point) was driven primarily by rating changes within
January 1, December 31,
the existing portfolio, not by changing the company’s approach 2017 Additions* Write-offs** Other+ 2017
to the market. This investment-grade percentage is based on $776 $55 $(199 ) $37 $668
credit ratings of the companies in the portfolio. Additionally,
the company takes actions to transfer exposure to third parties. * Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense.
On that basis, the investment-grade content would increase by ** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 92 and 93
for additional information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs.
17 points to 70 percent, an increase of 5 points year to year.
+ Primarily represents translation adjustments.
The company has a long-standing practice of taking mitigation
The total IBM receivables provision coverage was 1.6 percent
actions, in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to
at December 31, 2017, a decrease of 40 basis points compared
third parties, including credit insurance, financial guarantees,
to December 31, 2016. The majority of the write-offs during
nonrecourse borrowings, transfers of receivables recorded as
2017 related to Global Financing receivables, which had been
true sales in accordance with accounting guidance or sales of
previously reserved.
equipment under operating lease.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
IBM Working Capital
The following table presents external financing receivables
($ in millions) excluding residual values, and the allowance for credit losses:
At December 31: 2017 2016
Current assets $49,735 $43,888 ($ in millions)
Current liabilities 37,363 36,275 At December 31: 2017 2016
Working capital $12,373 $ 7,613 Gross financing receivables $31,044 $28,043
Current ratio 1.33:1 1.21:1 Specific allowance for credit losses 258 335
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 78 103
Total allowance for credit losses 336 438
Working capital increased $4,760 million from the year-end 2016
Net financing receivables $30,709 $27,605
position. The key changes are described below:
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.1% 1.6%
Current assets increased $5,847 million ($3,239 million adjusted
for currency), as a result of: The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was
• An increase of $4,053 million ($3,105 million adjusted for 1.1 percent at December 31, 2017, compared to 1.6 percent
currency) in cash and marketable securities; and at December 31, 2016. In 2017, write-offs of $144 million of
receivables previously reserved, primarily in China, resulted in a
• An increase of $2,386 million ($993 million adjusted for 23 percent reduction in the specific reserves, from $335 million
currency) in receivables driven by financing receivables; at December 31, 2016, to $258 million at December 31, 2017.
partially offset by See note F, “Financing Receivables,” on page 107 for additional
• A decrease of $622 million ($841 million adjusted for information. Unallocated reserves decreased 24 percent
currency) in prepaid expenses and other current assets. from $103 million at December 31, 2016, to $78 million at
December 31, 2017 due to higher general reserve requirements
Current liabilities increased $1,087 million (a decrease of $542 in Brazil in the prior year.
million adjusted for currency), as a result of:
• An increase in taxes of $984 million ($849 million adjusted
for currency); and
• An increase in deferred income of $517 million driven by
currency-related increases of $583 million; partially offset by
• A decrease in short-term debt of $526 million ($537 million
adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables Allowance Debt
for Credit Losses (included in Total IBM) The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and
($ in millions)
liability profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient
January 1, December 31,
2017 Additions* Write-offs** Other+ 2017 flexibility to access global funding sources as needed.
$438 $17 $(144 ) $24 $336
($ in millions)
* Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense.
At December 31: 2017 2016
** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 92 and 93
Total company debt $46,824 $42,169
for additional information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs.
+ Primarily represents translation adjustments. Total Global Financing segment debt $31,434 $27,859
Debt to support external clients 27,556 24,034
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was $17 million in 2017, Debt to support internal clients 3,878 3,825
compared to $69 million in 2016. The year-to-year decrease in Non-Global Financing debt 15,390 14,309
bad debt expense was primarily due to lower general reserve
requirements in Brazil.
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under
contract by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for
($ in millions)
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, generate long-term,
At December 31: 2017 2016 stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing asset
Noncurrent assets $75,621 $73,582 portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Technology Services
Long-term debt $39,837 $34,655 & Cloud Platforms assets are leveraged with the balance of the
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $30,432 $28,147 Global Financing asset base. The increase in debt was consistent
with the company’s expectations in 2017 to increase leverage in
the Global Financing business.
The increase in noncurrent assets of $2,039 million (a decrease
of $233 million adjusted for currency) was driven by: Non-Global Financing debt of $15,390 million was up $1,081
• An increase in prepaid pension assets of $1,609 million million from prior year-end levels.
($1,357 million adjusted for currency) driven by the expected
returns on plan assets partially offset by interest costs. Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2017
was 72.5 percent, which includes a 5.7 point impact from the one-
Long-term debt increased $5,182 million ($4,120 million time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S.
adjusted for currency) driven by: tax reform in 2017, versus 69.6 percent at December 31, 2016.
• Bond issuances of $7,986 million; partially offset by Given the significant leverage, the company also presents a debt-
• Current upcoming maturities of long-term debt of to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and
$5,214 million. equity as management believes this is more representative of
the company’s core business operations. This ratio can vary
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $2,285 from period to period as the company manages its global
million ($378 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by: cash and debt positions. “Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio
(excluding Global Financing debt and equity) was 51.9 percent at
• An increase of $2,488 million ($1,953 million adjusted for December 31, 2017, which includes an 8.1 point impact from the
currency) in other liabilities driven by the charge associated charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax
with the enactment of U.S. tax reform. reform in 2017, compared to 49.5 percent at December 31, 2016.
At December 31: 2017 2016
Global Financing debt-to-equity ratio 9.0x 7.3x
The debt used to fund Global Financing assets is composed
of intercompany loans and external debt. Total debt changes
generally correspond with the level of client and commercial
financing receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents,
the change in intercompany and external payables and the
change in intercompany investment from IBM. The terms of
the intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially
match the term, currency and interest rate variability underlying
the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing.

===== PAGE 49 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the Net cash provided by operating activities decreased by $360
company’s external client assets, as well as for assets under million in 2017 driven by the following key factors:
contract by other IBM units. As previously stated, the company
• Performance-related declines within net income; and
measures Global Financing as a stand-alone entity, and
accordingly, interest expense relating to debt supporting Global • An increase in cash income tax payments of $519 million;
Financing’s external client and internal business is included in partially offset by
the “Global Financing Results of Operations” on page 40 and
• An increase in cash provided by receivables of $585 million.
in note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 142 to 146. In the
company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings, the external
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $3,881 million
debt-related interest expense supporting Global Financing’s
driven by:
internal financing to the company is reclassified from cost of
financing to interest expense. • A decrease in cash used related to acquisitions of $5,184
million, partially offset by an increase of net non-operating
Equity financing receivables of $1,137 million.
Total equity decreased by $667 million from December 31, 2016
as a result of an increase in treasury stock of $4,457 million Net cash used in financing activities increased $502 million as
mainly due to gross common stock repurchases, partially offset compared to the prior year driven by the following factors:
by lower accumulated other comprehensive losses of $2,806
• An increase of $838 million of cash used for gross common
million primarily due to retirement plan remeasurements, an
share repurchases; partially offset by
increase in common stock of $631 million and an increase in
retained earnings of $368 million. • An increase in net cash sourced from debt transactions
of $683 million driven by a higher level of issuances in the
Cash Flow current year.
The company’s cash flows from operating, investing and
financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement Global Financing Return on Equity Calculation
of Cash Flows on page 81 are summarized in the table below.
($ in millions)
These amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global
At December 31: 2017 2016
Financing business.
Numerator
($ in millions) Global Financing after-tax income (1) * $1,116 $1,126
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 Denominator
Net cash provided by/(used in) Average Global Financing equity (2) ** $3,394 $3,680
continuing operations Global Financing return on equity (1)/ (2) 32.9% 30.6%
Operating activities $16,724 $ 17,084*
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on
Investing activities (7,096) (10,976) Global Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for
Financing activities (6,418) (5,917)* income taxes is determined on a consolidated basis.
Effect of exchange rate changes on ** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five
quarters.
cash and cash equivalents 937 (51)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents $ 4,146 $ 140
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on share-based
compensation.

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ
from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on pages
26 and 27 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- Tax Reform
Related Related One-Time Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2017: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charge(1) (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $36,227 $ 449 $ 799 $ — $37,475
Gross profit margin 45.8% 0.6 pts. 1.0 pts. — pts. 47.4%
SG&A $20,107 $(509) $ (472) $ — $19,126
RD&E 5,787 — (197) — 5,590
Other (income) and expense (216) (39) — — (255)
Total expense and other (income) 24,827 (548) (669) — 23,609
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 11,400 997 1,468 — 13,886
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 14.4% 1.3 pts. 1.9 pts. — pts. 17.5%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,642 $ 279 $ 485 $(5,475) $ 931
Effective tax rate 49.5% (1.5) pts. (1.7) pts. (39.5) pts. 6.7%
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758 $ 718 $ 983 $ 5,475 $12,935
Income margin from continuing operations 7.3% 0.9 pts. 1.2 pts. 6.9 pts. 16.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 6.14 $0.77 $ 1.05 $ 5.84 $ 13.80
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
(1) Operating (non-GAAP) earnings excludes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform due to its unique non-recurring nature.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2016: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $38,294 $ 494 $ 316 $39,104
Gross profit margin 47.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 48.9%
SG&A $21,069 $ (501) $(253 ) $20,315
RD&E 5,751 — (29) 5,722
Other (income) and expense 145 (7) — 138
Total expense and other (income) 25,964 (508) (282) 25,174
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 12,330 1,003 598 13,931
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 15.4% 1.3 pts. 0.7 pts. 17.4%
Provision for income taxes* $ 449 $ 268 $ 183 $ 900
Effective tax rate 3.6% 1.7 pts. 1.2 pts. 6.5%
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $ 735 $ 415 $13,031
Income margin from continuing operations 14.9% 0.9 pts. 0.5 pts. 16.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 12.39 $ 0.77 $0.43 $ 13.59
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 51 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2017 2016 Change
Revenue $22,543 $21,770 3.6%*
Gross profit margin 48.2% 50.0% (1.9) pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 6,393 $ 5,907 8.2%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 28.4% 27.1% 1.2 pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 4,469 $ 4,986 (10.4)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 5,522** $ 480 NM
Income/(loss) from continuing operations $ (1,053)** $ 4,505 NM
Income/(loss) from continuing operations margin (4.7)% 20.7% NM
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (1) $ (4) (71.3)%
Net income/(loss) $ (1,054) $ 4,501 NM
Earnings/(loss) per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ (1.14)** $ 4.73 NM
Consolidated earnings/(loss) per share — assuming dilution $ (1.14)** $ 4.72 NM
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 924.5 952.7 (3.0)%
* 0.9 percent adjusted for currency.
** Includes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform, or $5.91 of diluted earnings per share in 2017.
NM — Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for the fourth quarter of 2017 and 2016.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2017 2016 Change
Net income/(loss) as reported $(1,054)** $4,501 NM
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (1) (4) (71.3)%
Income/(loss) from continuing operations (1,053)** 4,505 NM
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 181 193 (6.6)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 206 77 168.5
U.S. tax reform one-time charge 5,475 — NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 4,809 $4,776 0.7%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 5.18 $ 5.01 3.4%
* See page 55 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating (non-GAAP) earnings.
** Includes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform in December 2017.
NM — Not meaningful
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2017, the company reported $22.5 share from continuing operations was $(1.14) as reported and
billion in revenue and a loss from continuing operations of $1.1 operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share from continuing
billion, which included a charge of $5.5 billion associated with operations was $5.18. The company generated $5.7 billion in
the enactment of U.S. tax reform. Fourth-quarter operating cash from operations and $6.8 billion in free cash flow in the
(non-GAAP) earnings was $4.8 billion, which excludes the fourth quarter of 2017 and shareholder returns of $2.1 billion in
one-time charge. Fourth-quarter diluted earnings/(loss) per gross common stock repurchases and dividends.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In the fourth quarter, the company continued to deliver solid From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue increased
growth in its strategic imperatives which generated $11.1 billion 4.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, with
of revenue and grew 17 percent as reported and 14 percent growth in the U.S., Latin America and Canada. This represented
adjusted for currency, led by cloud and security, as the company sequential improvement of 6.6 points as reported (6 points
continues to embed AI and cloud into its offerings. The strategic adjusted for currency) compared to the year-to-year third quarter
imperatives are not separate businesses, they are offerings 2017 growth rates. EMEA revenue increased 6.3 percent as
across the segments that address opportunities in analytics, reported, but decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency. France
cloud, security and mobile. Strategic imperatives growth in the and Spain had growth as reported and adjusted for currency, but
fourth quarter continued to largely represent organic growth as were more than offset by declines in Germany, Italy and the UK,
the acquisitive content has leveled on a year-to-year basis. Total adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific revenue decreased 2.2 percent
Cloud revenue of $5.5 billion increased 30 percent as reported as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency). Within Asia Pacific,
and 27 percent adjusted for currency as the company enables declines in China and Australia were partially offset by growth in
clients to implement comprehensive cloud solutions. Cloud-as- Japan and India, as reported and adjusted for currency.
a-Service revenue was up 20 percent (18 percent adjusted for
currency) and the annual exit run rate for as-a-Service revenue The consolidated gross profit margin of 48.2 percent decreased
increased to $10.3 billion in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared 1.9 points year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of
to $9.4 billion in the third quarter of 2017. Analytics revenue of 49.5 percent decreased 1.4 points compared to the prior year.
$6.1 billion increased 9 percent as reported (6 percent adjusted The consolidated gross margin and the operating (non-GAAP)
for currency). Mobile revenue increased 23 percent (21 percent gross margin both improved sequentially compared to the
adjusted for currency) and Security revenue more than doubled respective third-quarter 2017 gross margins.
year to year, reflecting the strong demand for the pervasive
encryption capabilities in IBM Z and good performance in both Total expense and other (income) increased 8.2 percent in the
managed security services within Technology & Cloud Platforms fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the prior year. The year-to-
and in security software. year increase was primarily driven by the effects of currency
(4 points) and lower intellectual property income (3 points). The
From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue expense dynamics reflect continued efficiency in the underlying
increased 2.5 percent as reported, flat adjusted for currency, spending, offset by continued investment to build and reinvent
led by growth in Transaction Processing Software, driven new solutions and platforms. Total operating (non-GAAP)
by middleware as clients continued to invest and grow their expense and other (income) increased 6.2 percent year to year
high-value, mission critical workloads on the IBM Z platform. driven primarily by the same factors.
Solutions Software revenue increased year to year as reported,
but declined adjusted for currency. Cognitive Solutions Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $4.5 billion in the
performance in the fourth quarter included growth in annuity fourth quarter of 2017 decreased 10.4 percent year to year and
revenue, including double-digit growth in as-a-Service solutions. the pre-tax margin was 19.8 percent, a decrease of 3.1 points.
Global Business Services (GBS) revenue increased 0.7 percent The continuing operations effective tax rate for the fourth quarter
as reported, but decreased 2 percent adjusted for currency. of 2017 was 123.6 percent, which included a one-time charge of
Growth in Consulting, led by the digital offerings was partially $5.5 billion from the enactment of U.S. tax reform. Losses from
offset by declines in Global Process Services and Application continuing operations in the fourth quarter of 2017 were $1.1
Management. This was the second consecutive quarter of billion compared to income from continuing operations of $4.5
revenue growth in Consulting. GBS strategic imperatives revenue billion in the fourth quarter of 2016. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-
increased 9 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency), led by tax income from continuing operations of $5.1 billion decreased
the cloud practice, analytics and mobile. Technology Services 5.2 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin
& Cloud Platforms revenue decreased 1.2 percent as reported from continuing operations decreased 2.1 points to 22.7 percent.
and 4 percent adjusted for currency, primarily driven by a Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of
decline in Infrastructure Services. However, within Technology $4.8 billion increased 0.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP)
Services & Cloud Platforms, strategic imperatives revenue was income margin from continuing operations of 21.3 percent
up 15 percent as reported and 12 percent adjusted for currency, decreased 0.6 points. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
driven by hybrid cloud services, security and mobile. Systems rate from continuing operations in the fourth quarter of 2017 was
revenue increased 31.7 percent as reported and 28 percent 6.1 percent versus 11.5 percent in the prior year.
adjusted for currency with growth in all three brands — IBM Z,
Power Systems and Storage Systems. This was the first full Diluted earnings/(loss) per share from continuing operations was
quarter of revenue since the announcement of the z14, and with $(1.14) in the fourth quarter of 2017, which included the charge
pervasive encryption and the ability to address new technologies associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform, compared
such as blockchain, the company is adding new clients and new to $4.73 in the prior year. In the fourth quarter of 2017, the
workloads to the platform. company repurchased 4.4 million shares of its common stock at
a cost of $0.7 billion and had $3.8 billion remaining in the share
repurchase authorization at December 31, 2017. Operating (non-
GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $5.18 increased 3.4 percent
versus the fourth quarter of 2016.

===== PAGE 53 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2017 versus the fourth quarter of 2016 reportable segment external revenue and
gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-
length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2017 2016 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $ 5,432 $ 5,297 2.5% 0.0%
Gross margin 79.2% 82.7% (3.5) pts.
Global Business Services 4,152 4,121 0.7% (1.5)%
Gross margin 24.8% 26.9% (2.1) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 9,198 9,308 (1.2)% (4.0)%
Gross margin 40.9% 42.9% (2.0) pts.
Systems 3,332 2,530 31.7% 28.5%
Gross margin 55.7% 56.9% (1.2) pts.
Global Financing 450 447 0.8% (1.8)%
Gross margin 29.5% 36.2% (6.8) pts.
Other (20) 66 NM NM
Gross margin (1,093.4)% (289.7)% NM
Total consolidated revenue $ 22,543 $21,770 3.6% 0.9%
Total consolidated gross profit $ 10,862 $10,893 (0.3)%
Total consolidated gross margin 48.2% 50.0% (1.9) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 99 124 (19.8)%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 209 78 168.2%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 11,170 $11,095 0.7%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 49.5% 51.0% (1.4 ) pts.
NM — Not meaningful
Cognitive Solutions
Cognitive Solutions revenue of $5,432 million grew 2.5 percent Processing Software revenue of $1,641 million grew 5.8 percent
as reported and was flat adjusted for currency in the fourth as reported (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the
quarter of 2017 compared to the prior year. These results reflect fourth quarter of 2016 as clients continue to invest and grow their
growth as reported and adjusted for currency in Transaction high-value, mission-critical workloads on the IBM Z platform.
Processing Software. Within Solutions Software, there was strong This growth reflects clients’ ongoing long-term commitment and
performance in the areas the company is shifting to, including the value the company’s platform provides to them.
Watson offerings and SaaS.
Cognitive Solutions total fourth-quarter strategic imperatives
Solutions Software revenue of $3,791 million grew 1.2 percent as revenue of $3.5 billion was flat year to year as reported and
reported (decreased 1 percent adjusted for currency) compared decreased 3 percent adjusted for currency. Cloud revenue of
to the prior year. Within Solutions Software, the annuity content, $0.7 billion grew 8 percent as reported and 6 percent adjusted
which represents 80 percent of this unit’s revenue on an annual for currency, with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $2.1 billion.
basis, grew 5.4 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted for
currency) year to year compared to the fourth quarter of 2016. Cognitive Solutions gross profit margin decreased 3.5 points
There was continued double-digit growth in SaaS offerings as to 79.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the
the company continues to invest to build scale in its as-a-Service prior year. In the fourth quarter, pre-tax income of $2,279 million
businesses. Security contributed to year-to-year growth in the decreased 1.5 percent compared to the prior year with a pre-tax
fourth quarter. There was also continued focus on industry margin decline of 1.1 points to 37.5 percent driven by ongoing
verticals and strong performance in areas such as Watson investments in strategic areas and a mix of businesses into lower
Health and Watson IoT offerings. However, there was weakness margin offerings. Although SaaS margins continued to expand,
in certain more traditional analytics offerings that drove a the company is not yet at scale for these offerings. There was also
decline in revenue compared to the prior year. With a larger lower IP income and an increase in royalty costs associated with
mix of transactional content in the fourth quarter, this impacted IP licensing agreements in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared
overall revenue performance for Solutions Software. Transaction to the prior year contributing to the pre-tax margin decline.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Business Services business models. Technical Support Services revenue of $1,840
Global Business Services revenue of $4,152 million increased million increased 0.7 percent as reported (decreased 2 percent
0.7 percent as reported (decreased 2 percent adjusted for adjusted for currency) year to year. Integration Software revenue
currency) in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the prior of $1,364 million decreased 2.3 percent as reported (5 percent
year with growth in Consulting partially offset by declines in adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year. There was
Application Management and GPS as reported and at constant strong double-digit revenue growth as reported and adjusted for
currency. In the fourth quarter of 2017, there was growth in GBS currency in SaaS offerings across the portfolio with continued
signings as reported and adjusted for currency, marking the momentum in hybrid integration tools that are important to
fourth consecutive quarter of signings growth for the segment. enterprise cloud deployments. This was offset by declines in
on-premise offerings as more of this portfolio shifts to cloud.
Consulting revenue of $1,868 million increased 3.0 percent as
reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) led by the company’s Technology Services & Cloud Platforms strategic imperatives
digital strategy and iX platform. This was the second consecutive revenue of $2.9 billion grew 15 percent year to year as reported
quarter of growth in Consulting as reported and adjusted for (12 percent adjusted for currency). Cloud revenue of $2.0 billion
currency. The Consulting backlog has grown year to year in the grew 13 percent as reported (10 percent adjusted for currency),
third and fourth quarters of 2017. GPS revenue of $318 million with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $6.9 billion.
decreased 6.5 percent as reported (8 percent adjusted for
currency) compared to the prior year. Application Management Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin
revenue of $1,967 million decreased 0.1 percent as reported decreased 2.0 points year to year in the fourth quarter to
(3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by declines in traditional 40.9 percent driven primarily by some of the large contract
ERP managed services and the successful completion in prior conclusions and delays in productivity improvements. Pre-tax
periods of some large contracts. There is continued focus on income of $1,456 million decreased 22.7 percent. The pre-
offerings that help clients modernize their critical application suites tax margin declined 4.2 points year to year to 15.6 percent,
by implementing cloud-centric architectures and microservices. but improved sequentially compared to the third quarter of
2017. While there has been improvement in spending related
GBS strategic imperatives revenue of $2.6 billion grew 9 percent to prior-year workforce reduction transformation actions, the
as reported (7 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud company continues to invest to scale its cloud platforms, deliver
revenue of $1.1 billion grew 19 percent as reported (17 percent productivity through automation and infuse AI into its offerings.
adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run rate of
$1.3 billion. Systems
Systems revenue of $3,332 million grew 31.7 percent year to
GBS fourth-quarter gross profit margin decreased 2.1 points year as reported (28 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth
to 24.8 percent year to year. Pre-tax income of $337 million quarter of 2017. Systems Hardware revenue of $2,865 million
decreased 35.5 percent year to year. The pre-tax margin declined grew 38.2 percent as reported (35 percent adjusted for currency)
4.4 points to 7.9 percent. This decline in margins reflects with strong z14 revenue performance in its first full quarter,
fourth-quarter impacts from currency, continuing investment in growth in Power Systems (as reported and adjusted for currency),
skills to transform the GBS business, and continued price and and the fourth consecutive quarter of growth in Storage Systems,
profit pressure in some more traditional areas in Application as reported and adjusted for currency. Operating Systems
Management. Software revenue of $467 million grew 2.3 percent as reported
(flat adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms revenue of $9,198 million Within Systems Hardware, fourth-quarter IBM Z revenue grew
decreased 1.2 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for 74.9 percent as reported (71 percent adjusted for currency)
currency in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the prior year. year to year reflecting the strong client demand for this platform.
Although there was an overall year-to-year revenue decline, there The z14 adoption was broad based across many countries and
was continued double-digit growth as reported and adjusted for industries. In the fourth quarter, there were 14 new clients across
currency in strategic imperatives revenue within the segment. 10 countries, with strong revenue performance in North America
where clients continue to leverage traditional IT infrastructure
Infrastructure Services revenue of $5,995 million declined together with cloud. The company continues to address emerging
1.5 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) workloads across the IBM Z platform, such as blockchain, machine
compared to the prior year. This decline reflects the continued learning, dev ops and instant payments. Overall, the mainframe
impact associated with contract conclusions at the end of 2016 continues to deliver a high-value, secure and scalable platform
and the shift away from certain lower value work within the that is critical in managing clients’ complex environments.
business. Clients continue to look to cloud offerings to drive
efficiency and agility in their infrastructure and create new

===== PAGE 55 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Power Systems revenue grew 18.0 percent as reported Within Americas, revenue in the U.S. increased 2.9 percent
(15 percent adjusted for currency) year to year driven by compared to the prior year. Canada increased 15.7 percent as
double-digit growth in the low-end and high-end portfolios, reported and 10 percent adjusted for currency. Latin America
with cloud-enabled offerings serving new markets. The company increased 6.8 percent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for
continues to shift to the growing Linux market and in the fourth currency. Within Latin America, Brazil increased 13.1 percent
quarter released the next-generation Power System, with as reported and 12 percent adjusted for currency.
the new POWER9 processor. These POWER9 systems bring
unprecedented speed to AI workloads and enable clients to In the fourth quarter, EMEA revenue performance by country
compete and win in the data-intensive AI era. varied. The UK increased 2.4 percent as reported, but decreased
4 percent adjusted for currency. Germany increased 0.5 percent
Storage Systems revenue increased by 10.9 percent as reported as reported, but decreased 8 percent adjusted for currency.
(8 percent adjusted for currency) year to year with double-digit France increased 20.8 percent as reported and 10 percent
growth (as reported and adjusted for currency) in high-end adjusted for currency. Spain was up 18.9 percent as reported and
hardware products primarily from the demand for flash as well 8 percent adjusted for currency and Italy was essentially flat as
as the capacity increase linked to mainframe demand. There was reported, but down 9 percent adjusted for currency. Russia was
also continued growth as reported and adjusted for currency in up 12.3 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency).
all-flash array offerings in this high-growth market.
Within Asia Pacific, China decreased 16.2 percent as reported
Systems strategic imperatives revenue of $2.1 billion grew and 18 percent adjusted for currency primarily due to strong
91 percent year to year as reported (86 percent adjusted for sales in the banking industry in the prior year. Japan increased
currency). Cloud revenue of $1.7 billion grew 90 percent as 1.0 percent as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency and
reported (86 percent adjusted for currency). India increased 7.7 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted
for currency.
The Systems gross profit margin decreased 1.2 points to 55.7
percent in the fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the prior year, Total Expense and Other (Income)
but improved sequentially compared to the third quarter of 2017
($ in millions)
consistent with product cycle dynamics. The overall decrease
Yr.-to-Yr.
year to year was driven by margin declines across all product
Percent/
lines, partially offset by product mix primarily toward the higher- Margin
margin IBM Z. In the fourth quarter of 2017, pre-tax income of For the fourth quarter: 2017 2016 Change
$908 million grew 56.8 percent and pre-tax margin increased Total consolidated expense
and other (income) $6,393 $5,907 8.2%
4.3 points year to year to 25.9 percent driven by the strong
fourth quarter performance in Systems Hardware. The company Non-operating adjustments
continues to deliver innovation it its systems and remains focused Amortization of acquired
on continually reinventing this portfolio. intangible assets (115) (132) (13.5)
Acquisition-related
Global Financing charges (33) (4) NM
Global Financing revenue of $450 million increased 0.8 percent Non-operating retirement-
year to year. Global Financing fourth quarter pre-tax income related (costs)/income (195) (76) 156.9
decreased 1.2 percent to $443 million and the pre-tax margin Operating (non-GAAP)
of 44.4 percent decreased 4.9 points year to year. The decrease expense and other
in pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross profit and (income) $6,050 $5,696 6.2%
an increase in financing receivable provisions, partially offset by Total consolidated
a decrease in SG&A expense. expense-to-revenue ratio 28.4% 27.1% 1.2 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
Geographic Revenue expense-to-revenue ratio 26.8% 26.2% 0.7 pts.
Total geographic revenue of $22,450 million increased 3.6
NM — Not meaningful
percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency in the
fourth quarter of 2017 compared to the prior year. Americas
Total expense and other (income) increased 8.2 percent in the
revenue of $10,752 million increased 4.6 percent as reported
fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 28.4 percent
and 4 percent adjusted for currency. This represented sequential
compared to 27.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2016. Total
improvement compared to the year-to-year growth rate in the
operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased
third quarter of 2017 of 6.6 points as reported (6 points adjusted
6.2 percent year to year. The year-to-year increase in total
for currency). EMEA fourth quarter revenue of $7,159 million
expense and other (income) was primarily the result of the effects
increased 6.3 percent as reported, but decreased 1 percent
of currency (4 points) and lower intellectual property income
adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific revenue of $4,540 million
(3 points). The expense dynamics reflected continued efficiency
declined 2.2 percent and 2 percent adjusted for currency.
in the underlying spending offset by continued investment to
build and reinvent new solutions and platforms.

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow GAAP Reconciliation
The company generated $5.7 billion in cash flow from operating The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s
activities in the fourth quarter of 2017, an increase of $1.8 income statement results as reported under GAAP to its
billion compared to the fourth quarter of 2016, primarily due to operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure.
improved working capital. Net cash used in investing activities of The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as
$3.8 billion was $0.1 billion higher than the prior year, primarily presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported by
driven by an increase in cash from net purchases of marketable other companies. Refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings”
securities and other investments ($0.3 billion). Net cash used section on pages 26 and 27 for the company’s rationale for
in financing activities of $0.9 billion decreased $0.4 billion presenting operating earnings information.
compared to the prior year, primarily driven by higher net debt
issuances ($0.3 billion) and lower common stock repurchases
($0.2 billion).
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- Tax Reform
Related Related One-Time Operating
For the fourth quarter 2017: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charge(1) (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $10,862 $ 99 $ 209 $ — $11,170
Gross profit margin 48.2% 0.4 pts. 0.9 pts. — pts. 49.5%
SG&A $ 5,147 $(116) $(145) $ — $ 4,886
RD&E 1,427 — (50) — 1,378
Other (income) and expense 2 (32) — — (30)
Total expense and other (income) 6,393 (148) (195) — 6,050
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,469 247 404 — 5,120
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 19.8% 1.1 pts. 1.8 pts. — pts. 22.7%
Provision for income taxes* $ 5,522 $ 67 $ 197 $(5,475) $ 310
Effective tax rate 123.6% (4.7) pts. (5.9) pts. (106.9) pts. 6.1%
Income/(loss) from continuing operations $ (1,053) $ 181 $ 206 $ 5,475 $ 4,809
Income/(loss) margin from continuing operations (4.7)% 0.8 pts. 0.9 pts. 24.3 pts. 21.3%
Diluted earnings/(loss) per share from
continuing operations $ (1.14) $0.19 $0.22 $ 5.91 $ 5.18
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to
the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
(1) Operating (non-GAAP) earnings excludes a charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform due to its unique non-recurring nature.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the fourth quarter 2016: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $10,893 $ 124 $ 78 $11,095
Gross profit margin 50.0% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 51.0%
SG&A $ 4,976 $(136) $ (69) $ 4,771
RD&E 1,431 — (6) 1,425
Other (income) and expense (136) 0 — (136)
Total expense and other (income) 5,907 (136) (76) 5,696
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,986 260 154 5,399
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 22.9% 1.2 pts. 0.7 pts. 24.8%
Provision for income taxes* $ 480 $ 66 $ 77 $ 623
Effective tax rate 9.6% 0.8 pts. 1.2 pts. 11.5%
Income from continuing operations $ 4,505 $ 193 $ 77 $ 4,776
Income margin from continuing operations 20.7% 0.9 pts. 0.4 pts. 21.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 4.73 $0.20 $0.08 $ 5.01
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles applied
to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 57 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
This section provides a summary of the company’s financial performance in 2016 as compared to 2015. For additional information,
see the company’s 2016 Annual Report.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Revenue $ 79,919 $ 81,741 (2.2)%*
Gross profit margin 47.9% 49.8% (1.9) pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 25,964 $ 24,740 4.9%
Total expense and other (income)-to-revenue ratio 32.5% 30.3% 2.2 pts.
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 12,330 $ 15,945 (22.7)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 449 $ 2,581 (82.6)%
Income from continuing operations $ 11,881 $ 13,364 (11.1)%
Income from continuing operations margin 14.9% 16.3% (1.5) pts.
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (9) $ (174) (95.1)%
Net income $ 11,872 $ 13,190 (10.0)%
Earnings per share from continuing operations:
Assuming dilution $ 12.39 $ 13.60 (8.9)%
Consolidated earnings per share — assuming dilution $ 12.38 $ 13.42 (7.7)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 958.7 982.7 (2.4)%
Assets** $117,470 $110,495 6.3%
Liabilities** $ 99,078 $ 96,071 3.1%
Equity** $ 18,392 $ 14,424 27.5%
* (1.6) percent adjusted for currency.
** At December 31
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2016 and 2015.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Net income as reported $11,872 $13,190 (10.0)%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (9) (174) (95.1)
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $13,364 (11.1)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 735 562 30.9
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 415 734 (43.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $13,031 $14,659 (11.1)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 13.59 $ 14.92 (8.9)%
* See page 65 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot
In 2016, the company delivered $79.9 billion in revenue, $11.9 reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency led by growth
billion in income from continuing operations and $13.0 billion in Infrastructure Services as the company assisted clients in
in operating (non-GAAP) earnings, resulting in diluted earnings modernizing and transforming their infrastructures. Technology
per share from continuing operations of $12.39 as reported and Services & Cloud Platforms strategic imperatives revenue was
$13.59 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. On a consolidated up 39 percent (40 percent adjusted for currency) year to year.
basis, net income in 2016 was $11.9 billion, with diluted earnings Systems revenue decreased 19.2 percent (19 percent adjusted
per share of $12.38. The company generated $17.0 billion in for currency) with IBM Z down 27.1 percent (27 percent adjusted
cash from operations and $11.6 billion in free cash flow in 2016 for currency) and Power Systems down 27.1 percent (27 percent
and shareholder returns of $8.8 billion in gross common stock adjusted for currency).
repurchases and dividends.
The consolidated gross profit margin of 47.9 percent decreased
In 2016, the company: 1.9 points year to year and reflected the impact of the company’s
investments, including acquisitions, and mix to as-a-Service.
• Delivered strong results in the strategic imperatives;
The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 48.9 percent
• Made progress in building new businesses and creating decreased 1.9 points compared to 2015 driven primarily by the
new markets; same factors.
• Delivered innovation in the more traditional businesses and
Total expense and other (income) increased 4.9 percent in 2016
monetized core technologies; and
compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense
• Continued to return capital to shareholders. and other (income) increased 5.6 percent compared to 2015. The
year-to-year increase in total expense was driven primarily by the
Total consolidated revenue in 2016 decreased 2.2 percent as impact of acquisitions completed in the prior 12 months (5 points)
reported and 1.6 percent year to year adjusted for currency. and the impact from currency (2 points). Total expense and
Annuity revenue increased as reported and adjusted for currency other (income) in 2016 also included charges for actions taken
while transactional revenue declined year to year. In addition, to accelerate the transformation of the company’s workforce
acquisitions completed in the prior 12-month period contributed and shift its skill base, as well as increased investments in the
to revenue growth. strategic areas of cognitive, security and cloud. This included a
higher level of workforce rebalancing charges ($451 million) year
In 2016, the company had continued strong revenue growth to year and real estate capacity charges ($291 million) related to
in cloud, analytics, mobile and security, which together grew the workforce transformation. Partially offsetting these increases
13 percent year to year as reported and 14 percent adjusted was a higher level of IP income ($950 million) year to year driven
for currency. The strategic imperatives generated $32.8 billion primarily by the company’s software licensing arrangements.
in revenue, which represented 41 percent of the company’s
revenue, an increase of 6 points from 2015. Total Cloud revenue Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $12.3 billion
of $13.7 billion increased 35 percent both as reported and decreased 22.7 percent year to year and the pre-tax margin
adjusted for currency, with cloud as-a-Service revenue up was 15.4 percent, a decrease of 4.1 points versus 2015. The
55 percent as reported and 57 percent adjusted for currency. continuing operations effective tax rate for 2016 was 3.6 percent,
The company exited 2016 with an annual run rate for cloud as-a- a decrease of 12.5 points versus 2015. The tax rate in 2016
Service revenue of $8.6 billion, up from $5.3 billion at the end of was primarily the result of a refund ($1.0 billion) of previously
2015. Analytics revenue of $19.5 billion increased 9 percent as paid non-U.S. taxes plus interest in the first quarter of 2016.
reported and adjusted for currency. Mobile revenue increased Income from continuing operations of $11.9 billion decreased
34 percent year to year as reported (35 percent adjusted for 11.1 percent and the net income margin was 14.9 percent, a
currency) and Security revenue increased 13 percent as reported decrease of 1.5 points versus 2015. Losses from discontinued
(14 percent adjusted for currency). operations, net of tax, were $9 million in 2016 compared to
$174 million in 2015. Net income of $11.9 billion decreased
From a segment perspective, Cognitive Solutions revenue 10.0 percent year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax
increased 1.9 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for income from continuing operations of $13.9 billion decreased
currency with growth in Solutions Software, led by an increase 21.3 percent year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-
in Analytics and Security revenue; partially offset by a decline tax margin from continuing operations decreased 4.2 points to
in Transaction Processing Software. GBS revenue decreased 17.4 percent. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing
2.7 percent as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency operations of $13.0 billion decreased 11.1 percent and the
primarily driven by a decline in Consulting revenue. Revenue operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing operations
performance continued to be impacted by the company’s shift of 16.3 percent decreased 1.6 points. The operating (non-GAAP)
away from traditional businesses, such as ERP implementations. effective tax rate from continuing operations in 2016 was
GBS strategic imperatives revenue had double-digit growth 6.5 percent versus 17.2 percent in 2015.
year to year as reported and adjusted for currency. Technology
Services & Cloud Platforms revenue increased 0.6 percent as

===== PAGE 59 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $12.39 Total liabilities increased $3.0 billion ($3.9 billion adjusted for
in 2016 decreased 8.9 percent year to year. In 2016, the company currency) from December 31, 2015 driven by:
repurchased 23.3 million shares of its common stock at a cost
• Increases in total debt ($2.3 billion), retirement-related
of $3.5 billion. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share
liabilities ($0.6 billion), and taxes ($0.4 billion).
of $13.59 decreased 8.9 percent versus 2015. Diluted earnings/
(loss) per share from discontinued operations was $(0.01) in
Total equity of $18.4 billion increased $4.0 billion from
2016 compared to $(0.18) in 2015.
December 31, 2015 as a result of:
At December 31, 2016, the company continued to have the • Increases from net income ($11.9 billion) and stock-based
financial flexibility to support the business over the long term. compensation ($0.5 billion); partially offset by
Cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2016 were $8.5
• Decreases from dividends ($5.3 billion) and share
billion, an increase of $0.3 billion from December 31, 2015. Key
repurchases ($3.5 billion).
drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows were:
The company generated $17.0 billion in cash flow provided by
Total assets increased $7.0 billion ($7.7 billion adjusted for
operating activities, essentially flat compared to 2015, driven
currency) from December 31, 2015 driven by:
primarily by operational performance; offset by lower income tax
• Increases in goodwill ($4.2 billion), retirement plan assets payments. Net cash used in investing activities of $11.0 billion
($1.3 billion), net intangible assets ($1.2 billion), deferred was $2.8 billion higher than 2015, primarily driven by an increase
taxes ($0.4 billion) and cash and marketable securities in cash used related to acquisitions ($2.3 billion). Net cash used
($0.3 billion). in financing activities of $5.8 billion decreased $3.4 billion
compared to the prior year, driven primarily by higher net debt
issuances ($2.7 billion) and a decline in cash used for common
share repurchases ($1.1 billion).
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2016 versus 2015 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Revenue
Cognitive Solutions $18,187 $17,841 1.9% 2.7%
Gross margin 81.9% 85.1% (3.3) pts.
Global Business Services 16,700 17,166 (2.7)% (2.5)%
Gross margin 27.0% 28.2% (1.2) pts.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 35,337 35,142 0.6% 1.4%
Gross margin 41.9% 42.7% (0.8) pts.
Systems 7,714 9,547 (19.2)% (18.9)%
Gross margin 55.7% 55.8% (0.1) pts.
Global Financing 1,692 1,840 (8.0)% (6.9)%
Gross margin 38.7% 45.6% (6.9) pts.
Other 289 206 40.4% 41.3%
Gross margin (293.9)% (253.0)% (41.0) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $79,919 $81,741 (2.2)% (1.6)%
Total consolidated gross profit $38,294 $40,684 (5.9)%
Total consolidated gross margin 47.9% 49.8% (1.9) pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 494 373 32.6%
Retirement-related costs/(income) 316 469 (32.7)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $39,104 $41,526 (5.8)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 48.9% 50.8% (1.9) pts.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Solutions
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Cognitive Solutions external revenue $18,187 $17,841 1.9% 2.7%
Solutions Software $12,589 $12,021 4.7% 5.5%
Transaction Processing Software 5,598 5,819 (3.8) (3.1)
The growth in Solutions Software revenue, which addresses ($ in millions)
many of the company’s strategic areas, was led by analytics Yr.-to-Yr.
and security offerings. Analytics continued to grow in key areas Percent/
Margin
including Watson offerings such as Watson Health. Security also For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
contributed to year-to-year growth, as the company continued Cognitive Solutions
to invest to build its security platform. There was strong SaaS
External gross profit $14,890 $15,189 (2.0)%
performance during the year with double-digit growth in revenue
External gross profit
as reported and adjusted for currency. In 2016, five acquisitions,
margin 81.9% 85.1% (3.3) pts.
including The Weather Company and Truven, added substantial
Pre-tax income $ 6,352 $ 7,245 (12.3)%
new capabilities to the Solutions Software portfolio. Transaction
Processing Software revenue declined as reported and adjusted Pre-tax margin 30.5% 36.1% (5.6) pts.
for currency compared to the prior year. The majority of the
Transaction Processing Software is on-premise and annuity in
Profit performance in Cognitive Solutions in 2016 reflected
nature which is not a growing part of the software opportunity.
impacts of the company’s continued investment into strategic
areas, including acquisition content, and the mix toward the SaaS
Within Cognitive Solutions, total 2016 strategic imperatives
business which was not yet at scale, partially offset by the impact
revenue of $11.7 billion grew 7 percent as reported (8 percent
of IP partnership agreements entered into during the year.
adjusted for currency) year to year. Cloud revenue of $2.1 billion
grew 53 percent as reported (54 percent adjusted for currency),
with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.8 billion.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $16,700 $17,166 (2.7)% (2.5)%
Consulting $ 7,332 $ 7,678 (4.5)% (4.8)%
Global Process Services 1,388 1,435 (3.3) (2.0)
Application Management 7,980 8,053 (0.9) (0.5)
Global Business Services revenue decreased in 2016 compared ($ in millions)
to the prior year with declines across all services lines. The Yr.-to-Yr.
company continued to aggressively shift the GBS business in Percent/
Margin
2016 to the strategic imperatives which made up more than For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
half of GBS revenue in 2016. Within GBS, total 2016 strategic Global Business Services
imperatives revenue of $8.9 billion grew 16 percent as reported
External gross profit $4,501 $4,837 (6.9)%
and adjusted for currency year to year. Cloud revenue of $3.0
External gross profit
billion grew 68 percent as reported (66 percent adjusted for
margin 27.0% 28.2% (1.2) pts.
currency), with an as-a-Service exit run rate of $1.1 billion. This
Pre-tax income $1,732 $2,602 (33.4)%
growth was more than offset by declines in the more traditional
areas that the company is shifting away from, such as large ERP Pre-tax margin 10.1% 14.7% (4.6) pts.
implementations.

===== PAGE 61 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Profit performance for 2016 reflected the company’s invest- and shift resources to higher-value services around digital and
ments, additional spending in certain accounts to deliver on cognitive. The company invested in enablement, hiring top talent
client commitments, and price and profit pressure in more and bringing in new skills through acquisitions, and focused on
traditional engagements. The company continued to invest integrating and scaling these new skills.
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms external revenue $35,337 $35,142 0.6% 1.4%
Infrastructure Services $23,543 $23,075 2.0% 2.7%
Technical Support Services 7,272 7,426 (2.1) (1.0)
Integration Software 4,521 4,641 (2.6) (1.5)
In Technology Services & Cloud Platforms the business has been ($ in millions)
shifting from systems integration to services integration, which Yr.-to-Yr.
provided momentum in its new offerings. Infrastructure Services Percent/
Margin
revenue grew as reported and adjusted for currency, partially For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
offset by declines in Technical Support Services and Integration Technology Services &
Software. Within Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Cloud Platforms
total 2016 strategic imperatives revenue of $8.7 billion grew
External Technology
39 percent as reported (40 percent adjusted for currency) year Services gross profit $10,969 $11,008 (0.4)%
to year. Cloud revenue of $5.9 billion grew 49 percent as reported
External Technology
(50 percent adjusted for currency), with an as-a-Service exit run Services gross profit
rate of $5.8 billion. margin 35.6% 36.1% (0.5) pts.
External Integration
Software gross profit $ 3,830 $ 4,005 (4.4)%
External Integration
Software gross profit
margin 84.7% 86.3% (1.6) pts.
External total gross profit $14,800 $15,014 (1.4)%
External total gross profit
margin 41.9% 42.7% (0.8) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 4,707 $ 5,669 (17.0)%
Pre-tax margin 13.1% 15.8% (2.8) pts.

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms gross profit margin its delivery model and drive efficiencies. The Technical Support
year-to-year decline was partially due to mix within the segment Services margin decline reflected the mix to multi-vendor
and margin declines in Technical Support Services and Integration support offerings. The Integration Software margin declined as
Software, partially offset by an improved margin in Infrastructure the portfolio continued to shift to an as-a-Service model. The pre-
Services. The margin improvement in Infrastructure Services tax margin reflected the dynamics impacting gross profit and the
reflected the benefits from delivery transformation and ongoing continued investments to build out the cloud platform, partially
productivity actions related to automation, process optimization offset by the impact of IP partnership agreements entered into
and leveraging the company’s scale, technology and talent. The during the year.
company invested in cognitive capabilities to further improve
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $7,714 $9,547 (19.2)% (18.9)%
Systems Hardware $5,926 $7,574 (21.8)% (21.6)%
IBM Z (27.1) (26.8)
Power Systems (27.1) (26.8)
Storage Systems (10.0) (10.0)
Operating Systems Software 1,788 1,973 (9.4) (8.7)
The year-to-year decline in Systems revenue in 2016 reflected ($ in millions)
market shifts and product cycle dynamics. Within Systems Yr.-to-Yr.
Hardware, the IBM Z revenue decline reflected product cycle Percent/
Margin
dynamics. Throughout 2016, the company continued to optimize For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
IBM Z to drive new workloads such as blockchain and instant Systems
payments. The year-to-year decline in Power Systems revenue
External Systems
reflected the underlying dynamics of a declining market for
Hardware gross profit $2,720 $3,536 (23.1)%
UNIX, where IBM continued to be the market leader, partially
External Systems
offset by growth in the expanding Linux market. The decline in
Hardware gross
Storage Systems revenue year to year reflected the weakness profit margin 45.9% 46.7% (0.8) pts.
in the traditional disk storage market. Within Systems, total
External Operating
2016 strategic imperatives revenue of $3.4 billion decreased Systems Software gross
15 percent as reported and adjusted for currency year to year. profit $1,577 $1,790 (11.9)%
Cloud revenue of $2.7 billion decreased 11 percent as reported
External Operating
and adjusted for currency as a result of a strong 2015 with the Systems Software gross
mainframe cycle. profit margin 88.2% 90.7% (2.5) pts.
External total gross profit $4,298 $5,326 (19.3)%
External total gross
profit margin 55.7% 55.8% (0.1) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 933 $1,722 (45.8)%
Pre-tax margin 11.0% 16.7% (5.7) pts.
The Systems gross profit margin decline year to year was driven
by declines in Power and Storage partially offset by expansion in
IBM Z margins. The pre-tax income performance was consistent
with the product cycle and portfolio transition dynamics
impacting revenue and profit.

===== PAGE 63 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing The decline in Global Financing total revenue was due to
declines in both external revenue and internal revenue. External
($ in millions)
revenue decreased year to year due to a decrease in financing
Yr.-to-Yr.
revenue (down 11.2 percent), partially offset by an increase
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change in used equipment sales (up 1.6 percent). The decrease in
Results of Operations external financing revenue was due to lower asset yields, a
External revenue $1,692 $1,840 (8.0)% decrease in average asset balance and a decline in remarketing
lease revenue. Internal revenue decreased due to lower used
Internal revenue 1,802 2,637 (31.7)
equipment sales (down 35.5 percent) and financing revenue
Total revenue $3,494 $4,477 (22.0)%
(down 5.2 percent). The decrease in internal financing revenue
Pre-tax income $1,656 $2,364 (29.9)%
was primarily due to lower asset yields, partially offset by an
increase in average asset balance. The decrease in Global
Financing pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross profit
and an increase in SG&A expense, partially offset by a decrease
in financing receivables provisions.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic
basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change Currency*
Total revenue $79,919 $81,741 (2.2)% (1.6)%
Geographies $79,594 $81,430 (2.3)% (1.6)%
Americas 37,513 38,486 (2.5) (1.4)
Europe/Middle East/Africa 24,769 26,073 (5.0) (2.1)
Asia Pacific 17,313 16,871 2.6 (1.2)
Americas revenue decreased year to year as reported and Total Expense and Other (Income)
adjusted for currency with declines in North America and Latin
($ in millions)
America as reported and adjusted for currency. Within North
Yr.-to-Yr.
America, the U.S. decreased 0.9 percent and Canada decreased
Percent/
6.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency). In Latin America, Margin
Brazil decreased 10.5 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
and Mexico decreased 14.5 percent (7 percent adjusted Total consolidated expense
and other (income) $25,964 $24,740 4.9%
for currency).
Non-operating adjustments
EMEA revenue decreased as reported and adjusted for currency. Amortization of acquired
The UK decreased 12.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). intangible assets (503) (304) 65.7
Germany decreased 5.1 percent (5 percent adjusted for Acquisition-related charges (5) (26) (81.0)
currency). Revenue declined in France 3.4 percent (3 percent Non-operating retirement-
adjusted for currency). Italy increased 4.0 percent (4 percent related (costs)/income (282) (581) (51.4)
adjusted for currency) year to year. The Middle East and Africa Operating (non-GAAP)
region grew 0.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), while expense and other
there was a decline in the Central and Eastern European region (income) $25,174 $23,830 5.6%
as reported and adjusted for currency including a year-to-year Total consolidated expense-
decline in Russia of 27.1 percent. to-revenue ratio 32.5% 30.3% 2.2 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)
Asia Pacific revenue increased as reported, but declined adjusted expense-to-revenue ratio 31.5% 29.2% 2.3 pts.
for currency. Japan grew 10.5 percent as reported, but declined
1 percent adjusted for currency. India grew 5.2 percent as reported
and 10 percent adjusted for currency. China decreased 2.4 percent
as reported, but was flat on an adjusted for currency basis.
Australia decreased 9.7 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency).

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Selling, General and Administrative Operating (non-GAAP) expense increased 3.8 percent year to
year driven primarily by the same factors excluding the year-
($ in millions)
to-year decrease in charges for pension obligations related to
Yr.-to-Yr.
litigation which is not reflected in operating (non-GAAP) expense.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Selling, general and Bad debt expense decreased $144 million in 2016 compared
administrative expense to 2015. The receivables provision coverage was 2.0 percent
Selling, general and at December 31, 2016, a decrease of 60 basis points from
administrative — other $16,971 $16,643 2.0% December 31, 2015 due to write-offs of previously reserved
Advertising and promotional receivables in 2016.
expense 1,327 1,290 2.8
Workforce rebalancing Research, Development and Engineering
charges 1,038 587 76.7
($ in millions)
Retirement-related costs 742 1,052 (29.5)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Amortization of acquired Percent
intangible assets 503 304 65.7 For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Total consolidated
Stock-based compensation 401 322 24.3
research, development
Bad debt expense 87 231 (62.3) and engineering $5,751 $5,247 9.6%
Total consolidated Non-operating adjustment
selling, general and
Non-operating retirement-
administrative expense $21,069 $20,430 3.1%
related (costs)/income (29) (48) (38.6)
Non-operating adjustments
Operating (non-GAAP)
Amortization of acquired research, development
intangible assets (503) (304) 65.7 and engineering $5,722 $5,200 10.1%
Acquisition-related
charges 2 (21) NM
Non-operating retirement- RD&E expense was 7.2 percent of revenue in 2016 and 6.4 percent
related (costs)/income (253) (533) (52.6) of revenue in 2015.
Operating (non-GAAP)
selling, general and RD&E expense increased 9.6 percent in 2016 versus 2015
administrative expense $20,315 $19,573 3.8% primarily driven by:
NM — Not meaningful • The impact of acquisitions completed in the prior 12-month
period (7 points); and
Total SG&A expense increased 3.1 percent in 2016 versus 2015,
• Increased investment (4 points); partially offset by
driven primarily by the following factors:
• The effects of currency (1 point).
• The impact of acquisitions completed in the prior 12-month
period (4 points); and
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased 10.1 percent
• Higher workforce rebalancing charges (2 points); partially in 2016 compared to the prior year, driven primarily by the
offset by same factors.
• The effects of currency (1 point); and
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
• A year-to-year decrease in charges for pension obligations
($ in millions)
related to litigation in Spain (1 point).
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
Licensing of intellectual
property including
royalty-based fees $1,390 $407 241.8%
Custom development income 214 262 (18.4)
Sales/other transfers of
intellectual property 27 13 113.4
Total $1,631 $682 139.3%

===== PAGE 65 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based fees Interest Expense
increased year to year, primarily due to licensing of certain
($ in millions)
intellectual property in 2016 within the company’s Integration
Yr.-to-Yr.
Software and Cognitive Solutions software portfolio, which
Percent
included four transactions each with period income greater than For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change
$100 million. The company licenses IP to partners who allocate Interest expense
their skills to extend the value of assets that are high value, but Total $630 $468 34.4%
may be in mature markets. There were no significant individual IP
transactions in 2015. The timing and amount of licensing, sales or
other transfers of IP may vary significantly from period to period The increase in interest expense compared to 2015 was primarily
depending upon the timing of licensing agreements, economic driven by higher average debt levels and higher average interest
conditions, industry consolidation and the timing of new patents rates. Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest)
and know-how development. in 2016 was $1,206 million, an increase of $197 million year
to year.
Other (Income) and Expense
Income Taxes
($ in millions)
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2016 was
Yr.-to-Yr. 3.6 percent, a decrease of 12.5 points versus the prior year. The
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2016 2015 Change benefit resulting from the favorable resolution of the Japan tax
Other (income) and expense matter drove a 9.5 point reduction in the rate in 2016. Without
that discrete item, the continuing operations effective tax rate for
Foreign currency transaction
losses/(gains) $(116) $ 414 NM 2016 would have been 13.1 percent, with the remaining change
in the rate year to year driven primarily by the following factors:
(Gains)/losses on
derivative instruments 260 (853) NM • A benefit due to the year-to-year decrease in tax charges
Interest income (108) (72) 49.1% related to intercompany payments made by foreign
Net (gains)/losses from subsidiaries and the intercompany licensing of certain IP
securities and of 5.7 points; and
investment assets 23 47 (50.5)
• A reduced benefit year to year related to audit settlements
Other 85 (260) NM
of 2.3 points.
Total consolidated other
(income) and expense $ 145 $(724) NM
The continuing operations operating (non-GAAP) effective tax
Non-operating adjustment rate was 6.5 percent, a decrease of 10.7 points versus 2015
Acquisition-related principally driven by the same factors described above. Without
charges (7) (5) 35.2 the Japan benefits, the continuing operations (non-GAAP)
Operating (non-GAAP) other effective tax rate would have been 14.9 percent.
(income) and expense $ 138 $(729) NM
Financial Position
NM — Not meaningful
Cash and marketable securities at year end were $8,527
Total consolidated other (income) and expense was expense million. During the year, the company continued to manage the
of $145 million in 2016 compared to income of $724 million in investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation and liquidity
2015. The decrease in income of $869 million year over year was objectives.
primarily driven by:
Total debt of $42,169 million increased $2,279 million from
• Lower net exchange gains ($593 million); and December 31, 2015. The commercial paper balance at
• Real estate capacity charges related to the first-quarter December 31, 2016, was $899 million, an increase of $299
2016 workforce transformation ($291 million). million from the prior-year level. Within total debt, $27,859
million was in support of the Global Financing business which
was leveraged at a 7.3 to 1 ratio. The company continued to
have substantial flexibility in the debt markets. During 2016, the
company completed bond issuances totaling $7,873 million, with
terms ranging from 1.5 to 30 years, and interest rates ranging
from 0.50 to 4.70 percent depending on maturity. The company
generated strong cash flow from operations and continued to
have access to additional sources of liquidity through the capital
markets and its $10.25 billion global credit facility.

===== PAGE 66 =====
Management Discussion 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 98 percent
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans funded at December 31, 2016.
at December 31. At December 31, 2016, the overall net
underfunded position was $14,840 million, a decrease of During 2016, the company generated $17,084 million in cash
$674 million from December 31, 2015 driven by asset returns from operations, a decrease of $171 million compared to 2015.
partially offset by a decrease in discount rates. At December 31, In addition, the company generated $11,700 million in free
2016, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans were well cash flow, a decrease of $1,623 million versus the prior year.
funded. In 2016, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan The company returned $8,758 million to shareholders in 2016,
assets was 6.2 percent and the plan was 102 percent funded at with $5,256 million in dividends and $3,502 million in gross
December 31. Overall, global asset returns were 8.5 percent and share repurchases. In 2016, the company repurchased 23.3
million shares.
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ
from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on pages
26 and 27 for the company’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2016: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $38,294 $ 494 $ 316 $39,104
Gross profit margin 47.9% 0.6 pts. 0.4 pts. 48.9%
SG&A $21,069 $ (501) $(253) $20,315
RD&E 5,751 — (29) 5,722
Other (income) and expense 145 (7) — 138
Total expense and other (income) 25,964 (508) (282) 25,174
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 12,330 1,003 598 13,931
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 15.4% 1.3 pts. 0.7 pts. 17.4%
Provision for income taxes* $ 449 $ 268 $ 183 $ 900
Effective tax rate 3.6% 1.7 pts. 1.2 pts. 6.5%
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $ 735 $ 415 $13,031
Income margin from continuing operations 14.9% 0.9 pts. 0.5 pts. 16.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 12.39 $ 0.77 $0.43 $ 13.59
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2015: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $40,684 $ 373 $ 469 $41,526
Gross profit margin 49.8% 0.5 pts. 0.6 pts. 50.8%
SG&A $20,430 $(324) $ (533) $19,573
RD&E 5,247 — (48) 5,200
Other (income) and expense (724) (5) — (729)
Total expense and other (income) 24,740 (330) (581) 23,830
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 15,945 703 1,050 17,697
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 19.5% 0.9 pts. 1.3 pts. 21.6%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,581 $ 141 $ 316 $ 3,037
Effective tax rate 16.2% 0.2 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.2%
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $ 562 $ 734 $14,659
Income margin from continuing operations 16.3% 0.7 pts. 0.9 pts. 17.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 13.60 $0.57 $ 0.75 $ 14.92
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 67 =====
66 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The company’s strategies, investments and actions are all made Consistent with the long-term model, the company also
with an objective of optimizing long-term performance. A long- expects, over the course of 2018, to continue to acquire key
term perspective ensures that the company is well-positioned to capabilities, remix skills, invest in areas of growth and return
take advantage of the major shifts in technology, business and value to shareholders. The company will continue to invest to
the global economy. drive growth in the strategic areas and expects a year-to-year
headwind in expense in 2018 due to currency hedges. A high
As part of its strategic model, the company expects to continue to level of investment is important as the company continues to
allocate capital efficiently and effectively to investments, and to build its capabilities in AI, cloud, security and blockchain, among
return value to shareholders through a combination of dividends others. Additionally, the company will continue to look for more
and share repurchases. Over the long term, in consideration of productivity in spending, especially in the services businesses,
the opportunities it will continue to develop, the company expects along with a remix of skills to the new opportunities. This is all
to have the ability to generate low single-digit revenue growth, taken into account in the full-year view.
and with a higher-value business mix, high single-digit operating
(non-GAAP) earnings per share growth, with free cash flow Overall, the company expects GAAP earnings per share from
realization of GAAP net income in the 90 to 100 percent range. continuing operations for 2018 to be at least $11.70. Excluding
acquisition-related charges of $0.78 per share and non-operating
The company’s 2017 results reflect the work that has been retirement-related items of $1.32 per share, operating (non-
done to reposition the business through investment, shifting GAAP) earnings per share is expected to be at least $13.80.
skills and reallocating capital — all to enable clients to move to For the first quarter of 2018, the company expects operating
the future. In Cognitive Solutions, performance will be driven by (non-GAAP) earnings per share to be approximately 17 percent
the shift to AI, Watson, security and industry vertical solutions. to 18 percent of the full-year expectation. In each of the first
The company continued to move its offerings to as-a-Service quarters of 2017 and 2016, the company had a discrete tax
delivery models, and in 2018 will continue to build scale. In the benefit. The company expects a potential benefit again in the
services segments, there is momentum in Consulting driven by first quarter of 2018, and as in the past, will likely take actions
digital, and strong revenue growth in cloud, as the company that will offset some portion of the benefit. Two accounting
continues to assist clients to build out hybrid environments. changes, revenue recognition and pension cost, that were
The company’s expectations from the current services backlog adopted beginning January 1, 2018, are expected to essentially
point to an improved revenue trajectory in 2018 versus 2017. offset each other within the full-year 2018 operating (non-GAAP)
The Systems segment had a strong second half of 2017, with the earnings per share expectation. These items are reflected in the
introduction of the z14 with pervasive encryption. The company first-quarter skew expectations.
is ahead of the historical product cycle in the first two quarters
since its introduction and in the fourth quarter shipped the Free cash flow realization, which is defined as free cash flow to
most MIPS in history, providing evidence that the market has income from continuing operations (GAAP), is expected to be over
capacity demand and understands the value in the platform. In 100%. The company expects free cash flow to be approximately
addition, the introduction of the new POWER9 processor will $12 billion in 2018. Free cash flow expectations include a year-
bring unprecedented speed to AI workloads and the company to-year headwind from strong receivables collections in 2017,
has the most competitive storage offerings in some time. As a an approximate $600 million year-to-year headwind from cash
result, the company enters 2018 with a stronger revenue profile tax payments and an expected growth in capital expenditures.
than in 2017.
For 2018, the company expects the GAAP tax rate to be
For full-year 2018, the company expects revenue growth, at approximately 2 points lower than the operating (non-GAAP)
mid-January spot rates, and margin stabilization, driven by tax rate expectation. The company expects its operating (non-
continued scale in the cloud business and yield from services’ GAAP) tax rate for 2018 to be 16 percent, plus or minus 2 points
productivity improvements. The company expects year-to-year (excluding discrete items), which is a 4-point headwind year
revenue growth in the first quarter of 2018 versus 2017, at both to year. The tax rates reflect the implementation of U.S. tax
mid-January spot rates and constant currency, with growth rates reform, which includes a lower U.S. corporate tax rate, offset by
relatively consistent with the fourth quarter of 2017. the broader tax base and reduced foreign tax credit utilization.
The rate will change year to year based on nonrecurring events,
such as the settlement of income tax audits and changes in tax
laws, as well as recurring factors including the geographic mix
of income before taxes, state and local taxes and the effects of
various global income tax strategies.

===== PAGE 68 =====
Management Discussion 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company expects 2018 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost Standard and Poor’s lowered its ratings on the company’s senior
to be approximately $3.2 billion, an increase of approximately long-term debt to A+ from AA- and commercial paper to A-1 from
$300 million compared to 2017. This estimate reflects current A-1+. The Fitch ratings remain unchanged from December 31,
pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2017. Consistent with 2016. IBM remains a strong investment grade company with
the newly adopted FASB guidance for the presentation of net significant flexibility to execute its strategy and capital allocation
periodic pension and postretirement benefit costs, within total plans. The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and
retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan its various credit facilities each contain significant covenants
cost is expected to be approximately $1.5 billion, approximately which obligate the company to promptly pay principal and
flat versus 2017. Non-operating retirement-related plan cost interest, limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and
is expected to be approximately $1.7 billion, an increase of sale and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s
approximately $300 million compared to 2017, driven by lower consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s
income from expected return on assets and a year-to-year ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met.
impact due to the pension obligation adjustment resulting from The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s
UK litigation in 2017. Contributions for all retirement-related consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
plans are expected to be approximately $2.4 billion in 2018, than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect
approximately flat compared to 2017. to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
For a discussion of new accounting standards that the company The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
will adopt in future periods, please see note B, “Accounting covenants and provides periodic certification to its lenders. The
Changes,” beginning on page 94. For discussion of the company’s failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an
presentation of non-operating retirement-related cost, refer to event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions
the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on pages 26 and 27. apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and
interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would
Liquidity and Capital Resources become immediately due and payable.
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow
from operations, providing a source of funds ranging between The company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in
$16.7 billion and $17.8 billion per year over the past five years. its debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the
The company provides for additional liquidity through several holders to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate
sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating.
funding sources, committed global credit facilities and other The company’s contractual agreements governing derivative
committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. In 2017, instruments contain standard market clauses which can trigger
the company and IBM Credit entered into a $2.5 billion 364-day the termination of the agreement if the company’s credit rating
Credit Agreement and a $2.5 billion three-year Credit Agreement. were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2017, the
These new agreements permit borrowings up to an aggregate fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position was
of $5 billion on a revolving basis. The following table provides $415 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is
a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on
December 31, 2013 through 2017. the level of the company’s outstanding instruments and market
conditions. The company has no other contractual arrangements
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result in a
material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
($ in billions)
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Net cash from Moody’s
operating activities $16.7 $17.1 * $17.3 * $17.1 * $17.8 * Standard Investors Fitch
IBM and IBM Credit Ratings and Poor’s Service Ratings
Cash and short-
term marketable Senior long-term debt A+ A1 A+
securities $12.6 $ 8.5 $ 8.2 $ 8.5 $11.1 Commercial paper A-1 Prime-1 F1
Committed global
credit facility $15.3 $10.3 $10.0 $10.0 $10.0
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on share-based in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash
compensation. flow presentation on page 81 and highlights causes and events
underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 48.
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt
For the purpose of running its business, the company manages,
securities at December 31, 2017 appear in the following table.
monitors and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
On May 3, 2017, Moody’s Investors Service lowered its ratings
on the company’s senior long-term debt from Aa3 to A1, while
reaffirming its rating on commercial paper. On May 5, 2017,

===== PAGE 69 =====
68 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate of $1.3 billion compared to 2016. The increase was primarily
its operating results, plan share repurchase levels, strategic driven by lower capital expenditures and strong working capital
investments and assess its ability and need to incur and service performance due to mix of business and collections.
debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily available
for discretionary expenditures. The company defines free cash In 2017, the company continued to focus its cash utilization
flow as net cash from operating activities less the change in on returning value to shareholders including $5.5 billion in
Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures, dividends and $4.3 billion in gross common stock repurchases
including the investment in software. A key objective of the (27.2 million shares).
Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on equity,
and increasing receivables is the basis for growth. Accordingly, Over the past five years, the company generated over $65 billion
management considers Global Financing receivables as a in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested over
profit-generating investment, not as working capital that should $13 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned $64 billion to
be minimized for efficiency. Therefore, management includes shareholders through dividends and gross share repurchases.
presentations of both free cash flow and net cash from operating The company’s performance during this period demonstrates
activities that exclude the effect of Global Financing receivables. that there is fungibility across the elements of share repurchases,
Free cash flow guidance is derived using an estimate of profit, dividends and acquisitions. The amount of prospective returns
working capital and operational cash outflows. As previously to shareholders in the form of dividends and share repurchases
noted, the company views Global Financing receivables as a will vary based upon several factors including each year’s
profit generating investment which it seeks to maximize and operating results, capital expenditure requirements, research
therefore it is not considered when formulating guidance for free and development investments and acquisitions, as well as the
cash flow. As a result, the company does not estimate a GAAP factors discussed on page 69.
Net Cash from Operations expectation metric.
The company’s Board of Directors considers the dividend
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, payment on a quarterly basis. In the second quarter of 2017, the
in 2017, after investing $3.3 billion in capital investments Board of Directors increased the company’s quarterly common
primarily in cloud and in support of the services business, the stock dividend from $1.40 to $1.50 per share.
company generated free cash flow of $13.0 billion, an increase
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $16.7 $17.1 * $17.3* $ 17.1* $ 17.8 *
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables 0.4 1.7 0.2 0.7 (1.3)
Net cash from operating activities,
excluding Global Financing receivables 16.3 15.4* 17.1* 16.4* 19.1*
Capital expenditures, net (3.3) (3.7) (3.8) (3.8) (3.8)
Free cash flow (FCF) 13.0 11.7* 13.3* 12.6* 15.4*
Acquisitions (0.5) (5.7) (3.3) (0.7) (3.1)
Divestitures (0.2) (0.5) (0.4) 2.4 0.3
Share repurchase (4.3) (3.5) (4.6) (13.7) (13.9)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (0.2) (0.1)* (0.2)* (0.2)* (0.3)*
Dividends (5.5) (5.3) (4.9) (4.3) (4.1)
Non-Global Financing debt 1.1 1.3 (0.1) (1.3) 3.2
Other (includes Global Financing receivables
and Global Financing debt) 0.7 2.3 0.0 2.6 2.4
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term
marketable securities $ 4.1 $ 0.3 $ (0.3) $ (2.6) $ (0.1)
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations 226%** 98%* 100%* 80%* 91%*
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on share-based compensation.
** 116% excluding the one-time charge of $5.5 billion associated with the enactment of U.S. tax reform in 2017.

===== PAGE 70 =====
Management Discussion 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that require more
dynamics discussed previously include significant changes frequent remeasurement of the funded status. The company is
in operating results, material changes in geographic sources not quantifying any further impact from pension funding because
of cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future it is not possible to predict future movements in the capital
pension funding requirements during periods of severe downturn markets or pension plan funding regulations.
in the capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether
any litigation has such an adverse impact will depend on a In 2018, the company is not legally required to make any
number of variables, which are more completely described in contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 119 to
121. With respect to pension funding, in 2017, the company The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to
contributed $409 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit fund its current domestic operations and obligations, including
plans compared to $507 million in 2016. As highlighted in the investing and financing activities such as dividends and debt
Contractual Obligations table, the company expects to make service. The company’s U.S. operations generate substantial
legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. cash flows, and, in those circumstances where the company
plans of approximately $1.8 billion in the next five years. The has additional cash requirements in the U.S., the company has
2018 contributions are currently expected to be approximately several liquidity options available. These options may include the
$400 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related ability to borrow additional funds at reasonable interest rates,
plans is expected to be approximately $2.4 billion in 2018, utilizing its committed global credit facility, repatriating certain
approximately flat compared to 2017. Financial market foreign earnings and utilizing intercompany loans with certain
performance could increase the legally mandated minimum foreign subsidiaries.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Payments Due In
Total Contractual
Payment Stream 2018 2019–20 2021–22 After 2022
Long-term debt obligations $45,435 $ 5,215 $13,365 $ 9,481 $17,374
Interest on long-term debt obligations 10,021 1,202 1,854 1,363 5,602
Capital (finance) lease obligations 10 3 4 3 —
Operating lease obligations 6,568 1,614 2,596 1,462 896
Purchase obligations 3,404 1,048 1,285 895 177
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding
(mandated)* 1,800 400 800 600 —
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,771 188 412 460 711
Long-term termination benefits 1,069 173 172 127 598
Tax reserves** 4,630 1,062
Other 1,264 131 291 101 740
Total $75,973 $11,034 $20,779 $14,492 $26,098
* As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2022 could not be reasonably estimated.
** These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $1,062 million of the liability is
expected to be settled within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably
estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected
to be due within the next 12 months.

===== PAGE 71 =====
70 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total contractual obligations are reported in the previous table Critical Accounting Estimates
excluding the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial and assumptions about certain items and future events that
Position. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the directly affect its reported financial condition. The accounting
previous table as their future cash outflows are uncertain. This estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those
includes deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability that the company considers to be the most critical to its financial
benefits and other sundry items. Certain obligations related to statements. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both
the company’s divestitures are included. (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is material due to
the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the estimate
or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any and assumption is material to the company’s financial condition.
of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the Senior management has discussed the development, selection
company would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of
or (3) the company must make specified minimum payments the company’s Board of Directors. The company’s significant
even if it does not take delivery of the contracted products or accounting policies are described in note A, “Significant
services (take-or-pay). If the obligation to purchase goods or Accounting Policies,” on pages 84 to 93.
services is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is
included in the previous table. If the obligation is cancelable, A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that
but the company would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated
amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obligation. and provides material information to investors. The amounts
Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts used to assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are
are also included in the table as they represent the portion of included to allow users of the Annual Report to understand a
each contract that is a firm commitment. general direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates
and do not represent management’s predictions of variability. For
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a develop exactly as forecasted, and estimates require regular
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or review and adjustment.
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally
entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. Pension Assumptions
They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the
and, therefore, the company does not consider them to be measurement of the benefit obligation to employees and net
purchase obligations. periodic pension (income)/cost requires the use of certain
assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the rates and expected return on plan assets.
effective interest rate at December 31, 2017, plus the interest
rate spread associated with that debt, if any. Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements net periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet benefit obligation (PBO). The company decreased the discount
arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release rate assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-
67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and based defined benefit plan, by 40 basis points to 3.40 percent
Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate on December 31, 2017. This change will increase pre-tax cost
Contractual Obligations.” and expense recognized in 2018 by an estimated $120 million.
If the discount rate assumption for the PPP had increased by
At December 31, 2017, the company had no off-balance sheet 40 basis points on December 31, 2017, pre-tax cost and expense
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a recognized in 2018 would have decreased by an estimated
material current or future effect on financial condition, changes in $125 million. Further changes in the discount rate assumptions
financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, would impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact the company’s
liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See the funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis
table on page 69 for the company’s contractual obligations, point increase or decrease in the discount rate would cause a
and note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on page 119, corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s PBO
for detailed information about the company’s guarantees, of an estimated $1.2 billion based upon December 31, 2017 data.
financial commitments and indemnification arrangements. The
company does not have retained interests in assets transferred
to unconsolidated entities or other material off-balance sheet
interests or instruments.

===== PAGE 72 =====
Management Discussion 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is used Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability
in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. Expected to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility.
returns on plan assets are calculated based on the market- The company considers various factors, including a review of
related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the specific transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers,
fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in historical experience and market and economic conditions when
the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension calculating these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates.
plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets If these estimates were changed by 10 percent in 2017, net
are recognized over five years in the expected return on plan income would have been impacted by $40 million (excluding
assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a Global Financing receivables).
component of actuarial (gains)/losses, which are recognized over
the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending Costs to Complete Service Contracts
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are The company enters into numerous service contracts through
based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as its services businesses. During the contractual period, revenue,
provided by accounting standards. cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate
profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan of accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost.
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its
of $258 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic POC-based services contracts in order to determine whether
pension (income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at the latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed
December 31, 2017 and assuming no contributions are made by the company to estimate the future costs to complete each
in 2018). contract are future labor costs and product costs and expected
productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required, a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were
by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual $25 million and $13 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016,
results that differ from the estimates may result in more or less respectively.
future company funding into the pension plans than is planned
by management. Impacts of these types of changes on the Income Taxes
company’s pension plans in other countries worldwide would The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous
vary depending upon the status of each respective plan. foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in
determining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
In addition to the above, the company evaluates other pension
assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement During the ordinary course of business, there are many
age and mortality, and updates these assumptions to reflect transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax
experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in determination is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes
any given year can differ from actuarial assumptions because of tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes
economic and other factors. and interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized
when, despite the company’s belief that its tax return positions
For additional information on the company’s pension plans and are supportable, the company believes that certain positions
the development of these assumptions, see note S, “Retirement- may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. The
Related Benefits,” on pages 135 and 136. company believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate
for all open audit years based on its assessment of many factors,
Revenue Recognition including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related assessment relies on estimates and assumptions, and may
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, the extent that new information becomes available which causes
complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of
may require significant contract interpretation to determine existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact
the appropriate accounting, including whether the deliverables income tax expense in the period in which such determination
specified in a multiple-deliverable arrangement should be treated is made.
as separate units of accounting. Other significant judgments
include determining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the
principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts are
considered part of one arrangement.

===== PAGE 73 =====
72 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation • A significant pending litigation;
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing
• A more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit or a
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all
significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating
disposed of; and
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of
ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event that the company • An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax
assets that can be realized, the company will adjust its valuation The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine
allowance with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative
the period in which such determination is made. goodwill impairment test. This quantitative test is required only
if the company concludes that it is more likely than not that a
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount.
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring In the fourth quarter, the company performed its annual goodwill
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the impairment analysis. The qualitative assessment illustrated
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local evidence of a potential impairment triggering event as a result
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies. of the financial performance of the Systems reporting unit. The
quantitative analysis resulted in no impairment as the reporting
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/ unit’s estimated fair value exceeded the carrying amount by over
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations 100 percent.
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have
decreased/improved by $114 million in 2017. Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal
Valuation of Assets proceedings. At least quarterly, the company reviews the status
The application of business combination and impairment of each significant matter and assesses its potential financial
accounting requires the use of significant estimates and exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding
assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for business is considered probable and the amount can be reasonably
combinations requires the company to estimate the fair value estimated, the company accrues a liability for the estimated
of assets acquired including separately identifiable intangible loss. Significant judgment is required in both the determination
assets, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure
the acquiree to properly allocate purchase price consideration. is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related to
Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill and indefinite- these matters, accruals are based only on the best information
lived intangible assets, requires the allocation of cash flows to available at the time. As additional information becomes
those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair available, the company reassesses the potential liability related
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates to its pending claims and litigation, and may revise its estimates.
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could
which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These have a material impact on the company’s results of operations
valuations require the use of management’s assumptions, which and financial position.
would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that
may occur. Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
Valuation of Goodwill port folio on a regular basis in order to assess collectibility and
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and records adjustments to the allowance for credit losses at least
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the quarterly. A description of the methods used by management to
carrying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. In 2017, estimate the amount of uncollectible receivables is included in
the company assessed the qualitative risk factors to determine note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 93. Factors
whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting that could result in actual receivable losses that are materially
unit is less than its carrying amount. different from the estim ated reserve include significant changes
in the economy, or a sudden change in the economic health of
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its a significant client that represents a concentration in Global
reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events Financing’s receivables portfolio.
and circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units.
Examples include, but are not limited to, macroeconomic,
industry and market conditions; as well as other individual
factors such as:
• A loss of key personnel;
• A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of
the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition;

===== PAGE 74 =====
Management Discussion 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s same action. Consequently, the company believes that some of
estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global the currency-based changes in cost impact the prices charged to
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s income clients. The company also maintains currency hedging programs
from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher for cash management purposes which temporarily mitigate,
or lower by an estimated $34 million depending upon whether but do not eliminate, the volatility of currency impacts on the
the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than company’s financial results.
the estimates.
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
Residual Value U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period.
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency”
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates reflect adjustments based upon a simple mathematical formula.
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as However, this constant currency methodology that the company
operating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair utilizes to disclose this information does not incorporate any
value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing operational actions that management could take to mitigate
the current market for new and used equipment, and obtaining fluctuating currency rates. Currency movements impacted the
forward-looking product information such as marketing plans company’s year-to-year revenue and earnings per share growth
and technological innovations. Residual value estimates are in 2017. Based on the currency rate movements in 2017, total
periodically reviewed and “other than temporary” declines revenue decreased 1.0 percent as reported and 1.3 percent at
in estimated future residual values are recognized upon constant currency versus 2016. On an income from continuing
identification. Anticipated increases in future residual values operations before income taxes basis, these translation impacts
are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. offset by the net impact of hedging activities resulted in a
theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or sourcing actions)
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from increase of approximately $100 million in 2017, on both an
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment as-reported basis and operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology mathematical exercise resulted in an increase of approximately
innovations and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used $125 million in 2016 on an as-reported basis and an increase of
equipment. approximately $150 million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis.
The company views these amounts as a theoretical maximum
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than impact to its as-reported financial results. Considering the
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s operational responses mentioned above, movements of exchange
segment pre-tax income and the company’s income from rates, and the nature and timing of hedging instruments, it is
continuing operations before income taxes for 2017 would have difficult to predict future currency impacts on any particular
been lower by an estimated $72 million. If the actual residual period, but the company believes it could be substantially less
value recovery is higher than management’s estimates, the than the theoretical maximum given the competitive pressure
increase in income will be realized at the end of lease when the in the marketplace.
equipment is remarketed.
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
Currency Rate Fluctuations dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations.
U.S. dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities
position. At December 31, 2017, currency changes resulted by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars.
in assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies being
translated into more dollars than at year-end 2016. The company The company continues to monitor the economic conditions and
uses financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks currency exchange mechanisms in Venezuela. The company
related to financing transactions and other foreign currency- recorded a pre-tax loss of $43 million in the first quarter of 2016
based transactions. in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of
Earnings as a result of the elimination of the SICAD exchange and
During periods of sustained movements in currency, the devaluation of the new exchange. Total pre-tax loss for 2017 was
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates. For $10 million compared to $48 million in 2016. The company’s
example, when pricing offerings in the marketplace, the company operations in Venezuela comprised less than 1 percent of total
may use some of the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to 2017, 2016 and 2015 revenue, respectively.
improve its position competitively, and price more aggressively to
win the business, essentially passing on a portion of the currency
advantage to its customers. Competition will frequently take the

===== PAGE 75 =====
74 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Market Risk Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not
In the normal course of business, the financial position of necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the
the company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In company would incur under normal market conditions because,
addition to the market risk associated with interest rate and due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific
currency movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar market risk factor are held constant. In addition, the results
denominated assets and liabilities, other examples of risk include of the model are constrained by the fact that certain items
collectibility of accounts receivable and recoverability of residual are specifically excluded from the analysis, while the financial
values on leased assets. instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items
are included by definition. Excluded items include short-term
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the company’s
effects of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, reported
company does not anticipate any material losses from these risks. changes in the values of some of the financial instruments
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2017 and
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, 2016, are as follows:
as described in note D, “Financial Instruments — Derivative
Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 to 107. Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2017, a 10 percent decrease in the levels
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a of interest rates with all other variables held constant would
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial
exposures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt instruments of $201 million as compared with a decrease of
and other financial instruments. $147 million at December 31, 2016. A 10 percent increase in
the levels of interest rates with all other variables held constant
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity would result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s
analysis are comprised of the company’s cash and cash financial instruments of $232 million as compared to an increase
equivalents, marketable securities, short-term and long- of $142 million at December 31, 2016. Changes in the relative
term loans, commercial financing and installment payment sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s financial instrument
receivables, investments, long-term and short-term debt and portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest
derivative financial instruments. The company’s derivative rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s debt
financial instruments generally include interest rate swaps, maturities, interest rate profile and amount.
foreign currency swaps and forward contracts.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the At December 31, 2017, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would
in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market- result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s financial
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign instruments of $120 million as compared with a decrease of
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value $132 million at December 31, 2016. Conversely, a 10 percent
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other
attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount variables held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair
rates used for the present value computations were selected value of the company’s financial instruments of $120 million
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates compared with an increase of $132 million at December 31, 2016.
in effect at December 31, 2017 and 2016. The differences in
this comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated Financing Risks
with each type of risk. See the “Description of Business” on page 33 for a discussion of
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.

===== PAGE 76 =====
Management Discussion 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cybersecurity Employees and Related Workforce
While cybersecurity risk can never be completely eliminated,
(In thousands)
the company’s approach draws on the depth and breadth of its
For the year ended December 31: 2017
global capabilities, both in terms of its offerings to clients and its
internal approaches to risk management. The company offers IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 366.6
commercial solutions that deliver capabilities in areas such as Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 9.3
identity and access management, data security, application Complementary 21.9
security, network security and endpoint security. IBM’s solutions
include pervasive encryption, security intelligence, analytics,
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in
cognitive and artificial intelligence, and forensic tools that
more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift its business
can process information on customer IT security events and
to the higher-value segments of enterprise IT. The company
vulnerabilities and provide detailed information to customers
continues to remix its skills and people needs to match the best
about potential threats and security posture. The company also
opportunities in the marketplace.
offers professional solutions for security from assessment and
incident response to deployment and resource augmentation. In
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent
addition, the company offers managed and outsourced security
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and
solutions from multiple security operations centers around
limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific
the world. Finally, security is embedded in a multitude of IBM
business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
offerings through secure engineering processes and by critical
functions (encryption, access control, etc.) in servers, storage,
software, service, and other solutions.
From an enterprise perspective, IBM implements a multi-faceted
risk-management approach to identify and address cybersecurity
risks. The company has established policies and procedures that
provide the foundation upon which IBM’s infrastructure and data
are managed. IBM performs ongoing assessments regarding its
technical controls and its methods for identifying emerging risks
related to cybersecurity. The company uses a layered approach
with overlapping controls to defend against cybersecurity attacks
and threats on networks, end-user devices, servers, applications
and cloud solutions. The company also has a security monitoring
program and a global incident response process to respond to
cybersecurity threats and attacks. In addition, the company
utilizes a combination of online training, educational tools, videos
and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security
awareness and responsibility among its workforce.

===== PAGE 77 =====
76 Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
management. The accompanying financial statements have been Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
estimates and judgments as required. purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists,
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
control environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures
we carefully select and train our employees, develop and of the company are being made only in accordance with
disseminate written policies and procedures, provide appropriate authorizations of management and directors of the company;
communication channels and foster an environment conducive to and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
the effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition
for the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM financial statements.
Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into
numerous languages, are distributed to employees throughout Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
the world, and reemphasized through internal programs to assure financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
that they are understood and followed. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
responsible for recommending to the Board the independent
registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
year, subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria
meets regularly and privately with the independent registered established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013)
public accounting firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation,
internal control structure and financial reporting matters. management concluded that the company’s internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2017.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over
financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 27, 2018
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 27, 2018

===== PAGE 78 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included
International Business Machines Corporation: performing procedures to assess the risks of material
misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond
over Financial Reporting to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test
We have audited the accompanying Consolidated Statement basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
of Financial Position of International Business Machines consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included
Corporation and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2017 and evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
2016, and the related Consolidated Statements of Earnings, estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
Comprehensive Income, Changes in Equity, and Cash Flows overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included
2017, including the related notes (collectively referred to as obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and
the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness
December 31, 2017, based on criteria established in Internal of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also
Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee included performing such other procedures as we considered
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits
provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred
to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over
position of the Company as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, Financial Reporting
and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2017 in designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control
over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017, based on over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
(2013) issued by the COSO. detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable
Basis for Opinions assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
The Company’s management is responsible for these permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing on page timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition
76. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
consolidated financial statements and on the Company’s internal financial statements.
control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a
public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (“PCAOB”) and financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
are required to be independent with respect to the Company Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
Commission and the PCAOB. of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of
the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether
the consolidated financial statements are free of material
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether
New York, New York
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained
February 27, 2018
in all material respects.
We, or firms we have ultimately acquired, have served as the
Company’s auditor since 1923. For the period from 1923 to 1958,
the Company was audited by firms that a predecessor firm to
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP ultimately acquired.

===== PAGE 79 =====
78 Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2017 2016 2015
Revenue
Services $50,709 $51,268 $49,911
Sales 26,715 26,942 29,967
Financing 1,715 1,710 1,864
Total revenue T 79,139 79,919 81,741
Cost
Services 34,447 34,021 33,126
Sales 7,256 6,559 6,920
Financing 1,210 1,044 1,011
Total cost 42,913 41,625 41,057
Gross profit 36,227 38,294 40,684
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 20,107 21,069 20,430
Research, development and engineering O 5,787 5,751 5,247
Intellectual property and custom development income (1,466) (1,631) (682)
Other (income) and expense (216) 145 (724)
Interest expense D&J 615 630 468
Total expense and other (income) 24,827 25,964 24,740
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 11,400 12,330 15,945
Provision for income taxes N 5,642 449 2,581
Income from continuing operations 5,758 11,881 13,364
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax C (5) (9) (174)
Net income $ 5,753 $11,872 $13,190
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations P $ 6.14 $ 12.39 $ 13.60
Discontinued operations P 0.00 (0.01) (0.18)
Total P $ 6.14 $ 12.38 $ 13.42
Basic
Continuing operations P $ 6.17 $ 12.44 $ 13.66
Discontinued operations P 0.00 (0.01) (0.18)
Total P $ 6.17 $ 12.43 $ 13.48
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 937,385,625 958,714,097 982,700,267
Basic 932,828,295 955,422,530 978,744,523
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2017 2016 2015
Net income $5,753 $11,872 $13,190
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments L 152 (20) (1,379)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 1 (38) (54)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 1 34 86
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities 2 (3) 32
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (58) 243 618
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (363) 102 (1,072)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges (421) 345 (454)
Retirement-related benefit plans L
Prior service costs/(credits) 0 — 6
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 682 (2,490) (2,963)
Curtailments and settlements 19 (16) 33
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (88) (107) (100)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,889 2,764 3,304
Total retirement-related benefit plans 3,502 150 279
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax L 3,235 472 (1,523)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items
of other comprehensive income L (429) (263) (208)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) L 2,806 209 (1,731)
Total comprehensive income $8,559 $12,081 $11,459
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 81 =====
80 Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2017 2016
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 11,972 $ 7,826
Marketable securities D 608 701
Notes and accounts receivable — trade (net of allowances of
$297 in 2017 and $290 in 2016) 8,928 9,182
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $261 in 2017 and $337 in 2016) F 21,721 19,006
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $36 in 2017 and $48 in 2016) 981 1,057
Inventories E 1,583 1,553
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 3,942 4,564
Total current assets 49,735 43,888
Property, plant and equipment G 32,331 30,133
Less: Accumulated depreciation G 21,215 19,303
Property, plant and equipment — net G 11,116 10,830
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $74 in 2017 and $101 in 2016) F 9,550 9,021
Prepaid pension assets S 4,643 3,034
Deferred taxes N 4,862 5,224
Goodwill I 36,788 36,199
Intangible assets — net I 3,742 4,688
Investments and sundry assets H 4,919 4,585
Total assets $ 125,356 $ 117,470
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes N $ 4,219 $ 3,235
Short-term debt D&J 6,987 7,513
Accounts payable 6,451 6,209
Compensation and benefits 3,644 3,577
Deferred income 11,552 11,035
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,510 4,705
Total current liabilities 37,363 36,275
Long-term debt D&J 39,837 34,655
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations S 16,720 17,070
Deferred income 3,746 3,600
Other liabilities K 9,965 7,477
Total liabilities 107,631 99,078
Contingencies and commitments M
Equity L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 54,566 53,935
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2017 — 2,229,428,813; 2016 — 2,225,116,815)
Retained earnings 153,126 152,759
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2017 — 1,307,249,588; 2016 — 1,279,249,412) (163,507) (159,050)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (26,592) (29,398)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 17,594 18,246
Noncontrolling interests A 131 146
Total equity 17,725 18,392
Total liabilities and equity $ 125,356 $ 117,470
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 5,753 $ 11,872 $13,190
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 3,021 2,837 2,662
Amortization of intangibles 1,520 1,544 1,193
Stock-based compensation 534 544 468
Deferred taxes (931) (1,132) 1,387
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other 14 62 481
Loss on microelectronics business disposal — — 71
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) 1,297 712 812
Retirement related 1,014 54 (22)
Inventories 18 (14) 133
Other assets/other liabilities 4,437 408* (3,200)*
Accounts payable 47 197 81
Net cash provided by operating activities 16,724 17,084* 17,255*
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (3,229) (3,567) (3,579)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 460 424 370
Investment in software (544) (583) (572)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (4,964) (5,917) (3,073)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 3,910 5,692 2,842
Non-operating finance receivables — net (2,028) (891) (398)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (496) (5,679) (3,349)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred (205) (454) (401)
Net cash used in investing activities (7,096) (10,976) (8,159)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 9,643 9,132 5,540
Payments to settle debt (6,816) (6,395) (5,622)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days — net 620 26 101
Common stock repurchases (4,340) (3,502) (4,609)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (193) (126)* (248)*
Common stock transactions — other 175 204 322
Cash dividends paid (5,506) (5,256) (4,897)
Net cash used in financing activities (6,418) (5,917)* (9,413)*
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents 937 (51) (473)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents 4,146 140 (790)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1 7,826 7,686 8,476
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31 $11,972 $ 7,826 $ 7,686
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid — net of refunds received $ 1,597 $ 1,078 $ 2,657
Interest paid on debt $ 1,208 $ 1,158 $ 995
* Reclassified to reflect adoption of the FASB guidance on share-based compensation.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 83 =====
82 Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2015
Equity, January 1, 2015 $52,666 $137,793 $(150,715) $(27,875) $11,868 $146 $12,014
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 13,190 13,190 13,190
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) (1,731) (1,731) (1,731)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $11,459 $11,459
Cash dividends paid —
common stock (4,897) (4,897) (4,897)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(6,013,875 shares) 606 606 606
Purchases (1,625,820 shares)
and sales (1,155,558 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans — net 39 (102) (63) (63)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (30,338,647 shares) (4,701) (4,701) (4,701)
Changes in other equity (10) (10) (10)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 16 16
Equity, December 31, 2015 $53,262 $146,124 $(155,518) $(29,607) $14,262 $162 $14,424
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2016
Equity, January 1, 2016 $53,262 $146,124 $(155,518) $(29,607) $14,262 $162 $14,424
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 11,872 11,872 11,872
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) 209 209 209
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $12,081 $12,081
Cash dividends paid —
common stock (5,256) (5,256) (5,256)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(3,893,366 shares) 695 695 695
Purchases (854,365 shares)
and sales (383,077 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans — net 18 (77) (59) (59)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (23,283,400 shares) (3,455) (3,455) (3,455)
Changes in other equity (22) 0 (22) (22)
Changes in noncontrolling interests (16) (16)
Equity, December 31, 2016 $53,935 $152,759 $(159,050) $(29,398) $18,246 $146 $18,392
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2017
Equity, January 1, 2017 $53,935 $152,759 $(159,050) $(29,398) $18,246 $146 $18,392
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting principle* 102 102 102
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 5,753 5,753 5,753
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) 2,806 2,806 2,806
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 8,559 $ 8,559
Cash dividends paid —
common stock (5,506) (5,506) (5,506)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(4,311,998 shares) 631 631 631
Purchases (1,226,080 shares)
and sales (463,083 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans — net 18 (134) (116) (116)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (27,237,179 shares) (4,323) (4,323) (4,323)
Changes in other equity 0 0 0
Changes in noncontrolling interests (15) (15)
Equity, December 31, 2017 $54,566 $153,126 $(163,507) $(26,592) $17,594 $131 $17,725
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on intra-entity transfers of assets in the first quarter of 2017.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 84 through 146 are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 85 =====
84 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES accompanying disclosures. These estimates are based on
Basis of Presentation management’s best knowledge of current events, historical
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and experience, actions that the company may undertake in the
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation future and on various other assumptions that are believed to be
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with reasonable under the circumstances. As a result, actual results
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of may be different from these estimates. See “Critical Accounting
America (GAAP). Estimates” on pages 70 to 73 for a discussion of the company’s
critical accounting estimates.
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded Revenue
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain and earned. The company considers revenue realized or
prior year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the realizable and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an
current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable. arrangement, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or
determinable and collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery
On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (“U.S. tax does not occur until products have been shipped or services have
reform”) was enacted in the U.S. This Act introduced many been provided to the client, risk of loss has transferred to the
changes, including lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to client, and either client acceptance has been obtained, client
21 percent, changes in incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base acceptance provisions have lapsed, or the company has objective
erosion and significant changes in the taxation of international evidence that the criteria specified in the client acceptance
income, including provisions which allow for the repatriation of provisions have been satisfied. The sales price is not considered
foreign earnings without U.S. tax. to be fixed or determinable until all contingencies related to the
sale have been resolved.
The enactment of U.S. tax reform resulted in a provisional charge
of $5,475 million to tax expense in the fourth-quarter and year- The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers,
ended December 31, 2017. The charge was primarily the result resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when
of the one-time U.S. transition tax, and any foreign tax costs on the reseller has: economic substance apart from the company,
undistributed foreign earnings, as well as the remeasurement of credit risk, risk of loss to the inventory; and, the fee to the
deferred tax balances to the new U.S. Federal tax rate. Refer to company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end
note N, “Taxes,” on pages 121 to 124 for additional information. user, the company has no further obligations related to bringing
about resale or delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $17 million, $16 million and have been met.
$8 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2017,
2016 and 2015, respectively, are included as a reduction within The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns,
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See
Earnings. Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves”
included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K).
Principles of Consolidation Revenue is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of and reliably determined. The company bases its estimates on
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority historical results taking into consideration the type of client,
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrangement.
is reported in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Payments made under cooperative marketing programs are
Position. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling recognized as an expense only if the company receives from
interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated the client an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the
Statement of Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities product sale whose fair value can be reasonably and reliably
(VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if estimated. If the company does not receive an identifiable benefit
required. Investments in business entities in which the company sufficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value
does not have control, but has the ability to exercise significant can be reasonably estimated, such payments are recorded as
influence over operating and financial policies, are accounted for a reduction of revenue.
using the equity method and the company’s proportionate share
of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services
accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is on is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent
page 92 within “Marketable Securities.” Equity investments in between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company
non-publicly traded entities are primarily accounted for using the is the principal for the transaction. Several factors are considered
cost method. All intercompany transactions and accounts have to determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most
been eliminated in consolidation. notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client,
or has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the
Use of Estimates company adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service,
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service,
requires management to make estimates and assumptions has latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk.
that affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs,
expenses and other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) that
are reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes Services
assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and The company’s primary services offerings include IT datacenter
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In and business process outsourcing, application management
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are services, consulting and systems integration, technology
the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable infrastructure and system maintenance, hosting and the
arrangements and for each major category of revenue. design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s
specifications (design and build). Many of these services can
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements be delivered entirely or partially through as-a-Service or cloud
The company’s global capabilities as a cognitive solutions and delivery models. These services are provided on a time-and-
cloud platform company include services, software, hardware, material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price per
and/or related financing. For example, a client may purchase measure of output contract and the contract terms range from
a server that includes operating system software. In addition, less than one year to over 10 years.
the arrangement may include post-contract support for the
software and a contract for post-warranty maintenance service Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing
for the hardware. These types of arrangements can also include contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided
financing provided by the company. These arrangements consist using either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line
of multiple deliverables, with the hardware and software delivered basis over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the
in one reporting period, and the software support and hardware amount of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered
maintenance services delivered across multiple reporting in the period.
periods. In another example, the company may assist the client
in building and running an enterprise information technology (IT) Revenue from application management services, technology
environment utilizing a private cloud on a long-term basis and the infrastructure, and system maintenance and hosting contracts is
client periodically purchases hardware and/or software products recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts.
from the company to upgrade or expand the facility. The services Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor
delivered on the cloud are provided on a continuous basis across hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue
multiple reporting periods, and the hardware and software related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts
products are delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period.
a deliverable in a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject
to specific accounting guidance that deliverable is accounted Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is
for in accordance with such specific guidance. Examples of such recognized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method.
arrangements may include leased hardware which is subject to Under the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the labor
specific leasing guidance or software which is subject to specific costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated
software revenue recognition guidance on whether and/or how to labor costs to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise that
separate multiple-deliverable arrangements into separate units change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or extent of
of accounting (separability) and how to allocate the arrangement progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates are made.
consideration among those separate units of accounting These revisions may result in increases or decreases in estimated
(allocation). For all other deliverables in multiple-deliverable revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected in income
arrangements, the guidance below is applied for separability and in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise to the
allocation. A multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into revision become known by the company.
more than one unit of accounting if the following criteria are met:
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its
• The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order
alone basis; and
to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and
• If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-
in the control of the company. POC method services contracts, losses are recorded as incurred.
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior
as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred income of $5,870 million and $5,873 million at December 31,
until the earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last 2017 and 2016, respectively, is included in the Consolidated
undelivered element is delivered. If these criteria are met for Statement of Financial Position. In other services contracts, the
each element and there is a relative selling price for all units of company performs the services prior to billing the client. Unbilled
accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration accounts receivable of $1,756 million and $1,611 million at
is allocated to the separate units of accounting based on each December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, is included in notes
unit’s relative selling price. The following revenue policies are and accounts receivable-trade in the Consolidated Statement of
then applied to each unit of accounting, as applicable. Financial Position.
Revenue from the company’s cloud, analytics, mobile, security, Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
and cognitive offerings follow the specific revenue recognition the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements and for each
major category of revenue depending on the type of offering
which can be comprised of services, hardware and/or software.

===== PAGE 87 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hardware A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria
system servers and storage solutions. These products can also are met:
be delivered through as-a-Service or cloud delivery models such
• The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not
as Storage-as-a-Service. The company also offers installation
dependent on the undelivered element(s);
services for its more complex hardware products.
• There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recognized value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value
when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no is based on the price charged when the deliverable is sold
unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final separately by the company on a regular basis and not as
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties part of the multiple-deliverable arrangement; and
and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunctory
• Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the
are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized.
culmination of the earnings process for that element(s).
Revenue from as-a-Service arrangements is recognized as the
service is delivered. Revenue from rentals and operating leases
If any one of these criteria is not met, the arrangement is
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the rental
accounted for as one unit of accounting which would result in
or lease.
revenue being recognized ratably over the contract term or being
deferred until the earlier of when such criteria are met or when
Software
the last undelivered element is delivered. If these criteria are met
The company’s software offerings include solutions software,
for each element and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of
which provides the basis for many of the company’s strategic
accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration is
areas including analytics, security and social; transaction
allocated to the separate units of accounting based on each unit’s
processing software, which primarily runs mission-critical
relative VSOE of fair value. There may be cases, however, in which
systems for clients; integration software, which help clients
there is VSOE of fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such
to create, connect and optimize their applications data and
evidence for the delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual
infrastructure; and operating systems software, which provides
method is used to allocate the arrangement consideration. Under
operating systems for IBM Z and Power Systems hardware. Many
the residual method, the amount of consideration allocated to the
of these offerings can be delivered entirely or partially through
delivered item(s) equals the total arrangement consideration less
as-a-Service or cloud delivery models, while others are delivered
the aggregate VSOE of fair value of the undelivered elements.
as on-premise software licenses.
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is
a stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue
existing software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue
recognition criteria have been met. Revenue from post-contract
for these multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the
support, which may include unspecified upgrades on a when-
software deliverable and the non-software deliverables based
and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis over
on the relative selling prices of all of the deliverables in the
the period such items are delivered. Revenue from software
arrangement using the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence
hosting or Software-as-a-Service arrangements is recognized
(TPE) or best estimate of selling price (BESP). In circumstances
as the service is delivered. In software hosting arrangements,
where the company cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling
the rights provided to the customer (e.g., ownership of a license,
price for all of the deliverables in the arrangement, including the
contract termination provisions and the feasibility of the
software deliverable, BESP is used for the purpose of performing
customer to operate the software) are considered in determining
this allocation.
whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements
which include a software license, the associated revenue is
Financing
recognized according to whether the license is perpetual or term.
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct
Revenue from term (recurring license charge) license software
financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis
is recognized over the period that the client is entitled to use the
using the effective interest method. Operating lease income is
license as usage occurs.
recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
In multiple-deliverable arrangements that include software that
Best Estimate of Selling Price
is more than incidental to the products or services as a whole
In certain instances, the company is not able to establish
(software multiple-deliverable arrangements), software and
VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement.
software-related elements are accounted for in accordance
When VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to
with software revenue recognition guidance. Software-related
establish the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is
elements include software products and services for which a
determined based on competitor prices for similar deliverables
software deliverable is essential to its functionality. Tangible
when sold separately.
products containing software components and non-software
components that function together to deliver the tangible
When the company is unable to establish selling price using VSOE
product’s essential functionality are not within the scope of
or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrangement
software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted for
consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price
based on other applicable revenue recognition guidance.
at which the company would transact a sale if the product or
service were sold on a stand-alone basis. BESP may be used,

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
for example, if a product is not sold on a stand-alone basis or Software Costs
when the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design
does not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to
selling the new product on a stand-alone basis. research, development and engineering expense; costs that
are incurred to produce the finished product after technological
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, basis over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing in software cost within cost of sales. The company performs
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that periodic reviews to ensure that unamortized program costs
includes review and approval by the company’s management. remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or
In addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its service licensed programs are charged to software cost within
products and services, in addition to BESP. cost of sales as incurred.
Services Costs The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to
Recurring operating costs for services contracts are recognized purchase or to create and implement internal-use software
as incurred. For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs programs, including software coding, installation, testing and
of external hardware and software accounted for under the POC certain data conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized
method are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up to three years
incurred to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense.
to fulfill the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred
in the initial phases of outsourcing or other cloud-based services Certain eligible, non-recurring costs incurred in the initial phases
contracts are deferred and subsequently amortized. These costs of Software-as-a-Service contracts are deferred and amortized
consist of transition and setup costs related to the installation over the expected period of benefit, consistent with the policy
of systems and processes and are amortized on a straight-line described for Services Costs. Recurring operating costs in these
basis over the expected period of benefit, not to exceed the term contracts are recognized as incurred.
of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated with these
contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis Product Warranties
over the expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract The company offers warranties for its hardware products that
specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful generally range up to three years, with the majority being either
life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in one or three years. Estimated costs for standard warranty
excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing terms are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard
as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience
not to exceed the term of the contract. The company performs and estimates of future spending, and applies this estimate to
periodic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated
transition and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in
estimated minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a the current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty
contract to the unamortized contract costs. If such minimum liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the
undiscounted cash flows are not sufficient to recover the remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over
unamortized costs, an impairment loss is recognized. the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when
actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,121 million from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including
and $2,072 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. extended warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
Amortization of deferred services transition and setup costs was
estimated at December 31, 2017 to be $695 million in 2018, Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded
$517 million in 2019, $354 million in 2020, $232 million in 2021 as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-
and $323 million thereafter. line basis over the delivery period. Changes in deferred income
for extended warranty contracts, and in the warranty liability for
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value standard warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses
of acquired assets used in outsourcing or other cloud-based and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement
services arrangements were $163 million and $160 million at of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables:
December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. Amortization of
deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of Standard Warranty Liability
acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and was
($ in millions)
estimated at December 31, 2017 to be $65 million in 2018,
2017 2016
$51 million in 2019, $29 million in 2020, $13 million in 2021
Balance at January 1 $ 156 $ 181
and $5 million thereafter. In situations in which an outsourcing
contract is terminated, the terms of the contract may require Current period accruals 172 145
the client to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled Accrual adjustments to reflect experience (10) (6)
accounts receivable, unamortized deferred costs incurred to Charges incurred (165) (164)
purchase specific assets utilized in the delivery of services and Balance at December 31 $ 152 $ 156
to pay any additional costs incurred by the company to transition
the services.

===== PAGE 89 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income) and go-to-market capability and any royalty cost due to the
partner is recognized in cost of sales. The IP partner has the
($ in millions)
rights to market the product and its derivative works under its
2017 2016
own brand and remits royalty to the company on those sales,
Balance at January 1 $ 531 $ 538
which are recorded as royalty-based fees. Income from any
Revenue deferred for new extended royalty-based fee arrangements is recognized over time or as
warranty contracts 267 263 the licensee sells future related products (i.e., variable royalty,
Amortization of deferred revenue (260) (267) based upon licensee’s revenue). The company also enters into
Other* 28 (4) cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from
Balance at December 31 $ 566 $ 531 these arrangements is recognized when earned. In addition,
Current portion $ 277 $ 264 the company earns income from certain custom development
projects for strategic technology partners and specific clients.
Noncurrent portion $ 289 $ 267
The company records the income from these projects if the fee is
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments. not refundable, is not dependent upon the success of the project
and when all recognition criteria have been met.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred Other (Income) and Expense
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than
from Global Financing external transactions), gains and losses on
Expense and Other Income certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from securities
Selling, General and Administrative and other investments, gains and losses from certain real estate
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, gains
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products and losses from the sale of businesses, other than reported as
and services are classified as selling expense and include such discontinued operations, and amounts related to accretion of
items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and asset retirement obligations.
travel. General and administrative expense includes such items
as compensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income Business Combinations and
taxes, insurance and office rental. In addition, general and Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
administrative expense includes other operating items such as The company accounts for business combinations using the
an allowance for credit losses, workforce rebalancing charges acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets
for contractually obligated payments to employees terminated acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest
in the ongoing course of business, acquisition costs related to in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values.
business combinations, amortization of certain intangible assets Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair
and environmental remediation costs. value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifiable
intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill
Advertising and Promotional Expense are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as the company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset.
are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable
the period in which the related advertising and promotional reporting units based on expected revenues. Identifiable
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, intangible assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful
which includes media, agency and promotional expense, was lives. Amortization of completed technology is recorded in cost,
$1,445 million, $1,327 million and $1,290 million in 2017, 2016 and amortization of all other intangible assets is recorded in
and 2015, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory,
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. legal, accounting, valuation and other costs, are expensed in the
periods in which the costs are incurred. The results of operations
Research, Development and Engineering of acquired businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are Statements from the acquisition date.
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has Impairment
been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Long-lived assets, other than goodwill and indefinite-lived
intangible assets, are tested for impairment whenever events
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its may not be recoverable. The impairment test is based on
intellectual property (IP) including internally developed undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the asset is written
patents, trade secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or
transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and appraised values. Goodwill and indefinite-lived intangible
others are transaction-based sales/other transfers. Income assets are tested at least annually, in the fourth quarter, for
from licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of impairment and whenever changes in circumstances indicate
the perpetual license term if all revenue recognition criteria an impairment may exist. Goodwill is tested at the reporting
have been met. Licensing arrangements include IP partnerships unit level which is the operating segment, or a business, which
whereby a business partner licenses source code from the is one level below that operating segment (the “component”
company and becomes responsible for developing, maintaining level) if discrete financial information is prepared and regularly
and enhancing the product. The company retains its customers

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
reviewed by management at the segment level. Components held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by the
are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they have similar trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets
economic characteristics. exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans,
Depreciation and Amortization with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets,
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as
follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-
20 years; land improvements, 20 years; production, engineering, retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present
office and other equipment, 2 to 20 years; and information value of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the
technology equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis.
are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or This obligation is recorded in compensation and benefits in the
the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after techno- Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit
logical feasibility has been established are amortized over cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of
periods ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected
software are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
ranging up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over and (gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of
periods between 1 and 7 years. OCI and amortization of the net transition asset remaining in
accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). Service
Environmental cost represents the actuarial present value of participant benefits
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are earned in the current year. Interest cost represents the time
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup value of money cost associated with the passage of time. Certain
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company events, such as changes in the employee base, plan amendments
will incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably and changes in actuarial assumptions, result in a change in
estimated, the company accrues remediation costs for known the benefit obligation and the corresponding change in OCI.
environmental liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for The result of these events is amortized as a component of net
all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy of
are recorded for environmental liabilities that are not probable the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts
or estimable. exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded
Asset Retirement Obligations in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations Earnings based on the employees’ respective functions. Refer
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These to note B, “Accounting Changes”, on pages 94 to 96, for additional
liabilities are initially recorded at fair value and the related information on the presentation change relating to pension costs
asset retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the beginning on January 1, 2018.
carrying amount of the related assets by the same amount as
the liability. Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated (Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are not
over the useful lives of the related assets. Subsequent to initial recognized as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in
recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings as they arise, but are
the ARO liability resulting from the passage of time in interest recognized as a component of OCI in the Consolidated Statement
expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the of Comprehensive Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service
original expected cash flows to the related assets. costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized as a component
of net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and
Defined Benefit Pension and amortization provisions of applicable accounting guidance.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between actual
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in actuarial
plans and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement- assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent the cost of
related benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement benefit changes attributable to prior service granted in plan
of Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the amendments.
difference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit
obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For defined The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
benefit pension plans, the benefit obligation is the projected (income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved
benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the actuarial present by the company’s management. These valuations reflect the
value of benefits expected to be paid upon retirement based terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such
on employee services already rendered and estimated future as compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain
compensation levels. For the nonpension postretirement benefit assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected
plans, the benefit obligation is the accumulated postretirement return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest
benefit obligation (APBO), which represents the actuarial present crediting rates and mortality rates.
value of postretirement benefits attributed to employee services
already rendered. The fair value of plan assets represents the
current market value of assets held in an irrevocable trust fund,

===== PAGE 91 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Contribution Plans the extent that new information becomes available which causes
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact
The charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the income tax expense in the period in which such determination
Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the employees’ is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued
respective functions. liabilities for potential tax assessments are included in income
tax expense.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock- Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
based awards granted to employees. The company measures Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.)
the estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost dollars at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are
on a straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the recorded in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at
employee requisite service period. The company grants its weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention
Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) and Performance Share Units Inventories, property, plant and equipment — net and other
(PSUs) and periodically grants stock options. RSUs are stock non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries
awards granted to employees that entitle the holder to shares and branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the
of common stock as the award vests, typically over a one- to approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company
five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined and acquired the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities
fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price, denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated
adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. The company at year-end exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss
estimates the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes recognized in other (income) and expense. Income and expense
valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in items are translated at the weighted-average rates of exchange
Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings prevailing during the year. These translation gains and losses
based on the employees’ respective functions. are included in net income for the period in which exchange
rates change.
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on Derivative Financial Instruments
the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of
tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid
The differences between the deferred tax assets recognized expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry
for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities.
reported on the income tax return are recorded as a benefit or Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is
expense to the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated based upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than
Statement of Earnings. or greater than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting,
the company requires that the instruments be effective in
Income Taxes reducing the risk exposure that they are designated to hedge.
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge designation criteria
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary also require that it be probable that the underlying transaction
differences between asset and liability amounts that are will occur. Instruments that meet established accounting criteria
recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are formally designated as hedges. These criteria demonstrate
are recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes that the derivative is expected to be highly effective at offsetting
are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation changes in fair value or cash flows of the underlying exposure
allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the both at inception of the hedging relationship and on an ongoing
amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing basis. The method of assessing hedge effectiveness and
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all measuring hedge ineffectiveness is formally documented at
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating hedge inception. The company assesses hedge effectiveness and
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility measures hedge ineffectiveness at least quarterly throughout the
of ongoing tax planning strategies. When the company changes designated hedge period.
its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that
can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company
corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of
which such determination is made. a recognized financial asset or liability, or of an unrecognized
firm commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the or foreign currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, flows of a forecasted transaction, or the cash flows to be received
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully or paid related to a recognized financial asset or liability (cash
sustained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax flow hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign currency risk);
positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is or (3) a hedge of a long-term investment (net investment hedge)
greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. in a foreign operation. In addition, the company may enter into
The current portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and derivative contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks,
the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other even though hedge accounting does not apply or the company
liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. To elects not to apply hedge accounting. In these cases, there exists

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
a natural hedging relationship in which changes in the fair value designated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt
of the derivative, which are recognized currently in net income, (included in the company’s debt risk management program as
act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value of the addressed in note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 100
underlying hedged item(s). to 107), cash flows directly associated with the settlement of
the principal element of these swaps are reported in payments
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a to settle debt in cash flows from financing activities in the
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each
period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments Financial Instruments
are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the
financing in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are
of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance
liabilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in sheet date. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 100 to
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement 107 for further information. All methods of assessing fair value
of Earnings. Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is result in a general approximation of value, and such value may
designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable never actually be realized.
taxes, in OCI, in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive
Income. When net income is affected by the variability of the Fair Value Measurement
underlying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount of the gain Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be
or loss from the derivative that is deferred in AOCI is released to received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly
net income and reported in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense transaction between market participants at the measurement
or other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of date. Under this guidance, the company is required to classify
Earnings based on the nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. certain assets and liabilities based on the following fair value
Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is measured hierarchy:
on a spot-to-spot basis. The effective portion of changes in the
• Level 1 — Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for
fair value of net investment hedging derivatives and other non-
identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the
derivative financial instruments designated as net investment
measurement date;
hedges are recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments
in AOCI. Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net • Level 2 — Inputs other than quoted prices included within
investment hedging derivative excluded from the effectiveness Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either
assessment are recorded in interest expense. If the underlying directly or indirectly; and
hedged item in a fair value hedge ceases to exist, all changes
• Level 3 — Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
in the fair value of the derivative are included in net income
each period until the instrument matures. When the derivative
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such
transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or liability is no longer
data is available without undue cost and effort.
adjusted for changes in its fair value except as required under
other relevant accounting standards.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies
Derivatives that are not designated as hedges, as well as
such items within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not
changes in the fair value of derivatives that do not effectively
available, fair value is based upon internally developed models
offset changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged
that use current market-based or independently sourced
item throughout the designated hedge period (collectively,
market parameters such as interest rates and currency rates.
“ineffectiveness”), are recorded in earnings for each period and
Items valued using internally generated models are classified
are primarily reported in other (income) and expense. When a
according to the lowest level input or value driver that is
cash flow hedging relationship is discontinued, the net gain or
significant to the valuation.
loss in AOCI must generally remain in AOCI until the item that
was hedged affects earnings. However, when it is probable that
The determination of fair value considers various factors
a forecasted transaction will not occur by the end of the originally
including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying
specified time period or within an additional two-month period
the financial instruments. For derivatives and debt securities,
thereafter, the net gain or loss in AOCI must be reclassified into
the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount
earnings immediately.
rates commensurate with the duration of the instrument.
The company reports cash flows arising from derivative
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the
financial instruments designated as fair value or cash flow
company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the
hedges consistent with the classification of cash flows from
“base valuations” calculated using the methodologies described
the underlying hedged items that these derivatives are hedging.
below for several parameters that market participants would
Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives
consider in determining fair value:
designated as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified
in cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated • Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial
Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
as net investment hedges and derivatives that do not qualify as counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market
hedges are reported in cash flows from investing activities in to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For currency swaps

===== PAGE 93 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s expense in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at that the company has no intent to sell and believes that it more
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied likely than not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed in in other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is
the credit default swap market. recognized in OCI. The credit loss component recognized in other
(income) and expense is identified as the amount of the principal
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived utilizing a cash flows not expected to be received over the remaining term
discounted cash flow model that uses observable market inputs of the debt security as projected using the company’s cash flow
such as known notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and projections.
forward exchange rates as well as discount rates. These inputs
relate to liquid, heavily traded currencies with active markets Inventories
which are available for the full term of the derivative. Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated
at the lower of average cost or net realizable value. Cash flows
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a non- related to the sale of inventories are reflected in net cash
recurring basis. These assets include equity method investments provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement
that are recognized at fair value at the measurement date to of Cash Flows.
the extent that they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily
impaired. Certain assets that are measured at fair value on Allowance for Credit Losses
a recurring basis can be subject to nonrecurring fair value Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of
measurements. These assets include available-for-sale equity a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
investments that are deemed to be other-than-temporarily estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer
impaired. In the event of an other-than-temporary impairment receivables is recognized by establishing an allowance for
of a financial instrument, fair value is measured using a model credit losses.
described above.
Notes and Accounts Receivable — Trade
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated
financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and
at fair value, on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are any specific, known troubled accounts.
otherwise not permitted to be accounted for at fair value under
other accounting standards. This election is irrevocable. The Factored Receivables
company has not applied the fair value option to any eligible The company enters into various factoring agreements with third-
assets or liabilities. party financial institutions to sell its receivables (includes notes
and accounts receivable-trade, financing receivables and other
Cash Equivalents accounts receivables) under non-recourse agreements. These
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or transactions are accounted for as a reduction in receivables and
less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents. are considered sold when: (1) they are transferred beyond the
reach of the company and its creditors; (2) the purchaser has the
Marketable Securities right to pledge or exchange the receivables; and (3) the company
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities has surrendered control over the transferred receivables. The
that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the proceeds from these arrangements are reflected as cash
balance sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement
expected to be realized in cash within one year and alliance of Cash Flows.
equity securities are included in investments and sundry assets.
Debt and marketable equity securities are considered available The gross amounts factored (the gross proceeds) under these
for sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and programs (primarily relating to notes and accounts receivable-
losses, net of applicable taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and trade) for the three and twelve months ended December 31, 2017
losses for available-for-sale securities are included in other were $0.7 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively, compared to $0.4
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. billion and $1.2 billion for the three and twelve months ended
Realized gains and losses are calculated based on the specific December 31, 2016, respectively. The fees and the net gains
identification method. and losses associated with the transfer of receivables were not
material for any of the periods presented.
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration Financing Receivables
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s with lease accounting standards. Loan receivables, including
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an installment payment plans, which are generally unsecured, are
anticipated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines primarily for software and services. Loans are financial assets
in fair value from amortized cost for available-for-sale equity and which are recorded at amortized cost which approximates fair
debt securities that the company intends to sell or would more value. Commercial financing receivables are carried at amortized
likely than not be required to sell before the expected recovery
of the amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
cost, which approximates fair value. These receivables are for Impaired Loans — The company evaluates all financing receivables
working capital financing to suppliers, distributors and resellers of considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment on a quarterly
IBM and OEM IT products and services. The company determines basis. The company considers any receivable with an individually
its allowances for credit losses on financing receivables based on evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of
two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables. impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status as
The company further segments the portfolio into three classes: appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services
Americas, Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific. and are unsecured. These receivables are subjected to credit
analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, when appropriate,
When calculating the allowances, the company considers actions are taken to mitigate risks in these agreements which
its ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased include covenants to protect against credit deterioration during
equipment and by considering the current fair market value the life of the obligation.
of any other collateral. The value of the equipment is the net
realizable value. The allowance for credit losses for capital Write-Off — Receivable losses are charged against the allowance
leases, installment payment plan receivables and customer loans in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible.
includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital lease Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance.
or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to
the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which the extent that the customer is no longer in operation and/or,
are applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows: there is no reasonable expectation of additional collections or
repossession. The company’s assessments factor in the history
Individually Evaluated — The company reviews all financing of collections and write-offs in specific countries and across
receivables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review the portfolio.
primarily consists of an analysis based upon current information
available about the client, such as financial statements, news Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
reports, published credit ratings, current market-implied credit The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the
analysis, as well as the current economic environment, collateral inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at
net of repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses
that are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the the realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated
fair value of the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using increases in specific future residual values are not recognized
this information, the company determines the expected cash flow before realization through remarketing efforts. Anticipated
for the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential loss decreases in specific future residual values that are considered
and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss to be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon
is probable, the company records a specific reserve. identification and are recorded as an adjustment to the residual
value estimate. For sales-type and direct-financing leases, this
Collectively Evaluated — The company records an unallocated reduction lowers the recorded net investment and is recognized
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different as a loss charged to financing income in the period in which
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been individually the estimate is changed, as well as an adjustment to unearned
evaluated and specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based income to reduce future-period financing income.
upon credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics
(lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could result in actual Common Stock
receivable losses that are materially different from the estimated Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock
reserve include significant changes in the economy, or a sudden as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation.
change in the economic health of a significant client in the Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When
company’s receivables portfolio. treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded
using a weighted-average basis.
Other Credit-Related Policies
Past Due — The company views receivables as past due when Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class
the original billing date. method. The two-class method determines EPS for each class of
common stock and participating securities according to dividends
Non-Accrual — Non-accrual assets include those receivables and dividend equivalents and their respective participation
(impaired loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves rights in undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock
and other accounts for which it is likely that the company will be is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average
unable to collect all amounts due according to original terms of number of common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted
the lease or loan agreement. Income recognition is discontinued EPS of common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-
on these receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a average number of shares of common stock plus the effect of
reduction to principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period
of principal payments outstanding is recognized as interest using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common
income. Receivables may be removed from non-accrual status, shares include outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and
if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances, such stock options.
as a sustained history of payments.

===== PAGE 95 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES
New Standards to be Implemented
In February 2018, the Financial Accounting Standards Board A cross-functional implementation team has been established
(FASB) issued guidance that allows entities to elect an option to which is evaluating the lease portfolio, system, process and
reclassify the stranded tax effects related to the application of policy change requirements. The company has made progress
U.S. tax reform from accumulated other comprehensive income/ in gathering the necessary data elements for the lease
(loss) to retained earnings. The guidance is effective January 1, population and a system provider has been selected, with system
2019 with early adoption permitted. The company is currently configuration and implementation underway. The company
evaluating whether to elect the option and the impact of the new is currently evaluating the impact of the new guidance on its
guidance on its consolidated financial results. consolidated financial results and expects it will have a material
impact on the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
In August 2017, the FASB issued guidance to simplify the The company is currently planning on electing the package of
application of current hedge accounting in certain areas, better practical expedients to not reassess prior conclusions related
portray the economic results of an entity’s risk management to contracts containing leases, leases classification, and initial
activities in its financial statements and make targeted direct costs and is evaluating the other practical expedients
improvements to presentation and disclosure requirements. available under the guidance.
The guidance is effective January 1, 2019 with early adoption
permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of January 1, The company’s operating lease commitments were $6.6 billion
2018 and does not expect a material impact in the consolidated at December 31, 2017. In 2017, the use of third-party residual
financial results. value guarantee insurance resulted in the company recognizing
$452 million of sales-type lease revenue that would otherwise
In March 2017, the FASB issued guidance that impacts the have been recognized over the lease period as operating lease
presentation of net periodic pension and postretirement benefit revenue. The company continues to assess the potential impacts
costs. Under the guidance, the service cost component of net of the guidance, including normal ongoing business dynamics or
benefit cost will continue to be presented within cost, selling potential changes in contracting terms.
general and administrative expense and research, development
and engineering expense in the Consolidated Statement of In January 2016, the FASB issued guidance which addresses
Earnings, unless eligible for capitalization. The other components aspects of recognition, measurement, presentation and
of net benefit cost will be presented separately from service disclosure of financial instruments. Certain equity investments
cost within other (income) and expense in the Consolidated will be measured at fair value with changes recognized in net
Statement of Earnings. This presentation change will be applied income. The amendment also simplifies the impairment test of
retrospectively upon adoption. The guidance is effective equity investments that lack readily determinable fair value. The
January 1, 2018 with early adoption permitted. The company guidance is effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was not
adopted the guidance as of the effective date. The guidance is permitted except for limited provisions. The company adopted
primarily a change in financial statement presentation and is not the guidance on the effective date. The guidance is not expected
expected to have a material impact in the consolidated financial to have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
results. The change will have an impact on gross profit margins.
The FASB issued guidance on the recognition of revenue from
In June 2016, the FASB issued guidance for credit impairment contracts with customers in May 2014 with amendments in
based on an expected loss model rather than an incurred loss 2015 and 2016. Revenue recognition will depict the transfer
model. The guidance requires the consideration of all available of promised goods or services to customers in an amount that
relevant information when estimating expected credit losses, reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be
including past events, current conditions and forecasts and their entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance
implications for expected credit losses. The guidance is effective also requires disclosures regarding the nature, amount, timing
January 1, 2020 with a one year early adoption permitted. and uncertainty of revenue and cash flows arising from contracts
The company has established an implementation team and is with customers. The guidance permits two methods of adoption:
evaluating the impact of the new guidance. retrospectively to each prior reporting period presented, or
retrospectively with the cumulative effect of initially applying
The FASB issued guidance in February 2016, with amendments the guidance recognized at the date of initial application (the
in 2018, which changes the accounting for leases. The guidance cumulative catch-up transition method). The company adopted
requires lessees to recognize right-of-use assets and lease the guidance effective January 1, 2018 using the cumulative
liabilities for most leases in the Consolidated Statement of catch-up transition method.
Financial Position. The guidance makes some changes to lessor
accounting, including the elimination of the use of third-party Given the scope of work required to implement the recognition
residual value guarantee insurance in the capital lease test, and and disclosure requirements under the new standard, the
overall aligns with the new revenue recognition guidance. The company began its assessment process in 2014 and has
guidance also requires qualitative and quantitative disclosures to completed its changes to policy, processes, systems and
assess the amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising controls. This also included the assessment of data availability
from leases. There are certain practical expedients that can be and presentation necessary to meet the additional disclosure
elected which the company is currently evaluating for application. requirements of the guidance in the Notes to the Consolidated
The guidance is effective January 1, 2019 and early adoption Financial Statements beginning in the first quarter of 2018.
is permitted. The company will adopt the guidance as of the
effective date.

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company expects revenue recognition for its broad portfolio from continuing operations and net income and a benefit to both
of hardware, software and services offerings to remain largely basic and diluted earnings per share of $0.62 per share for the
unchanged. However, the guidance is expected to change year ended December 31, 2017. There was no other impact in the
the timing of revenue recognition in certain areas, including consolidated financial results for the year ended December 31,
recognizing revenue for certain software licenses over time 2017. The ongoing impact of this guidance will be dependent on
versus at a point in time, in limited circumstances. These any transaction that is within its scope.
impacts are not expected to be material. The company expects
to continue to recognize revenue for term license (recurring In March 2016, the FASB issued guidance which changes the
license charge) software arrangements on a monthly basis accounting for share-based payment transactions, including
over the period that the client is entitled to use the license the income tax consequences, classification of awards as
due to the contractual terms in these arrangements. Since the either equity or liabilities and classification in the Consolidated
company currently expenses sales commissions as incurred, the Statement of Cash Flows. The guidance was effective and
requirement in the new standard to capitalize certain in-scope adopted by the company on January 1, 2017, and it did not have
sales commissions will result in an accounting change for the a material impact in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
company. This change is not expected to be material to the Position. The ongoing impact of the guidance could result in
consolidated financial results, with no impact to cash flows. increased volatility in the provision for income taxes and earnings
per share in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, depending
At January 1, 2018, $557 million was reclassified from notes on the company’s share price at exercise or vesting of share-
and accounts receivable-trade and deferred income-current based awards compared to grant date, however these impacts
to prepaid expenses and other current assets to establish are not expected to be material. These impacts are recorded on a
the opening balance for net contract assets. In-scope sales prospective basis. The company continues to estimate forfeitures
commission costs previously recorded in the Consolidated in conjunction with measuring stock-based compensation
Statement of Earnings were capitalized in accordance with the cost. The guidance also requires cash payments on behalf of
transition guidance, in the amount of $737 million. Deferred employees for shares directly withheld for taxes to be presented
income of $29 million was recorded for certain software as financing outflows in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
licenses that will be recognized over time versus at a point in Flows. Prior to adoption, the company reported this activity as
time. Additionally, net deferred taxes was reduced $184 million an operating cash outflow and as a result, prior periods have been
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, resulting in reclassified as required. The FASB also issued guidance in May
a cumulative-effect net increase to retained earnings of $524 2017, which relates to the accounting for modifications of share-
million. The amortization of capitalized sales commissions based payment awards. The company adopted the guidance in
compared to the previous method of recognition on an the second quarter of 2017. The guidance had no impact in the
as-incurred basis is not expected to have a material impact to consolidated financial results.
the company’s consolidated financial results.
In September 2015, the FASB issued guidance eliminating the
Standards Implemented requirement that an acquirer in a business combination account
In January 2017, the FASB issued guidance which clarifies for a measurement-period adjustment retrospectively. Instead,
the definition of a business. The guidance provides a more an acquirer will recognize a measurement-period adjustment
robust framework to use in determining when a set of assets during the period in which the amount of the adjustment is
and activities acquired or sold is a business. The guidance was determined. In addition, the portion of the amount recorded
effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was permitted. in current-period earnings by line item that would have been
The company adopted the guidance effective January 1, recorded in previous reporting periods if the adjustment to the
2017, and it did not have a material impact in the consolidated provisional amounts had been recognized as of the acquisition
financial results. date should be presented separately on the face of the income
statement or disclosed in the notes. The guidance was effective
In October 2016, the FASB issued guidance which requires an January 1, 2016 on a prospective basis. The guidance did not
entity to recognize the income tax consequences of intra-entity have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
transfers of assets, other than inventory, at the time of transfer.
Assets within the scope of the guidance include intellectual In May 2015, the FASB issued guidance which removed the
property and property, plant and equipment. The guidance was requirement to categorize within the fair value hierarchy all
effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was permitted. investments for which fair value is measured using the net asset
The company adopted the guidance on January 1, 2017 using value per share practical expedient. The amendments also
the required modified retrospective method. At adoption, $95 removed the requirement to make certain disclosures for all
million and $47 million were reclassified from investments and investments that are eligible to be measured at fair value using
sundry assets and prepaid expenses and other current assets, the net asset value per share practical expedient. Rather, those
respectively into retained earnings. Additionally, net deferred disclosures are limited to investments for which the entity has
taxes of $244 million were established in deferred taxes in elected to measure the fair value using that practical expedient.
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, resulting in The guidance was effective January 1, 2016. The guidance was
a cumulative-effect net increase to retained earnings of $102 a change in disclosure only and did not have an impact in the
million. In January 2017, the company had one transaction that consolidated financial results.
generated a $582 million benefit to income tax expense, income

===== PAGE 97 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In April 2015, the FASB issued guidance about whether a cloud 2017 Acquisitions
computing arrangement includes a software license. If a cloud
($ in millions)
computing arrangement includes a software license, then the
Amortization Total
customer should account for the software license element Life (in Years) Acquisitions
of the arrangement consistent with the acquisition of other Current assets $ 18
software licenses. If a cloud computing arrangement does not
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 69
include a software license, the customer should account for
Intangible assets
the arrangement as a services contract. All software licenses
recognized under this guidance will be accounted for consistent Goodwill N/A 16
with other licenses of intangible assets. The guidance was Completed technology 5 9
effective January 1, 2016 and the company adopted it on a Client relationships 5–7 64
prospective basis. The guidance did not have a material impact Patents/trademarks 1–5 1
in the consolidated financial results.
Total assets acquired 177
Current liabilities (9)
NOTE C. ACQUISITIONS/DIVESTITURES Noncurrent liabilities (34)
Acquisitions Total liabilities assumed (43 )
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions, as reflected in
Total purchase price $134
the tables in this note, was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of N/A — Not applicable
acquired cash and cash equivalents.
The acquisitions were accounted for as business combinations
2017 using the acquisition method, and accordingly, the identifiable
In 2017, the company completed five acquisitions at an aggregate assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling
cost of $134 million. All of these acquisitions were for 100 interest in the acquired entity were recorded at their estimated fair
percent of the acquired businesses. values at the date of acquisition. The primary items that generated
the goodwill are the value of the synergies between the acquired
The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment completed businesses and IBM and the acquired assembled workforce,
acquisitions of three businesses: in the first quarter, Agile 3 neither of which qualify as an amortizable intangible asset.
Solutions, LLC (Agile 3 Solutions), a privately held business;
in the third quarter, the cloud and managed hosting services The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable
business from a large U.S. telecommunications company, intangible assets acquired is 6.6 years. These identified
and Cloudigo Ltd. (Cloudigo), a privately held business. The intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over
Cognitive Solutions segment completed the acquisition of one their useful lives. Goodwill of $13 million has been assigned to
privately held business: in the second quarter, XCC Web Content the Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment and goodwill
& Custom Apps Extension (XCC) from TIMETOACT Software & of $3 million has been assigned to the Cognitive Solutions
Consulting GmbH. Global Business Services (GBS) completed the segment. It is expected that approximately 50 percent of the
acquisition of one privately held business: in the fourth quarter, goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
Vivant Digital (Vivant).
2016
Each acquisition is expected to enhance the company’s portfolio In 2016, the company completed fifteen acquisitions at an
of product and services capabilities. Agile 3 Solutions is a aggregate cost of $5,899 million.
developer of software used by C-Suite and senior executives
to better visualize, understand and manage risks associated The Weather Company (TWC) — On January 29, 2016, the
with the protection of sensitive data and adds capabilities company completed the acquisition of TWC’s B2B, mobile
to the company’s security portfolio. The acquisition of the and cloud-based Web-properties, weather.com, Weather
cloud and managed hosting services business of a large U.S. Underground, The Weather Company brand and WSI, its global
telecommunications company strengthens the company’s business-to-business brand, for cash consideration of $2,278
services portfolio and aligns with its cloud strategy. Cloudigo million. The cable television segment was not acquired by IBM,
brings talent and technology that aligns closely with the but is licensing weather forecast data and analytics from IBM
company’s cloud platform investments in advanced network under a long-term contract. TWC was a privately held business.
processing. XCC’s technology enhances IBM’s Connections Cloud Goodwill of $1,717 million was assigned to the Cognitive
platform by providing a single, accessible engagement center for Solutions segment. It was expected that none of the goodwill
sharing content. Vivant extends the strategy and design expertise would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-
of IBM Interactive Experience (IBM iX) and helps accelerate average useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired
clients’ digital transformations. was 6.9 years.
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these Truven Health Analytics, Inc. (Truven)— On April 8, 2016, the
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Truven,
December 31, 2017. a leading provider of healthcare analytics solutions, for cash
consideration of $2,612 million, of which $2,412 million was paid
in April 2016 and $148 million was paid in July 2017. Truven has
developed proprietary analytic methods and assembled analytic

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
content assets, creating extensive national healthcare utilization, cloud infrastructure. Resource/Ammirati is a leading U.S.-based
performance, quality and cost data. Truven was a privately digital marketing and creative agency, addressing the rising
held business. Goodwill of $1,933 million was assigned to the demand from businesses seeking to reinvent themselves for the
Cognitive Solutions segment. It was expected that approximately digital economy. Ecx.io enhances GBS’ IBM iX with new digital
15 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes. marketing, commerce and platform skills to accelerate clients’
The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified digital transformations. Optevia is a Software-as-a Service
intangible assets acquired was 6.9 years. systems integrator specializing in CRM solutions for public
sector organizations. Aperto also joined IBM iX, supporting the
Other Acquisitions — The Technology Services & Cloud Platforms company’s growth in Europe, with expertise in digital strategy
segment completed acquisitions of four businesses: in the first projects, including website and application development.
quarter: Ustream, Inc. (Ustream), a privately held business, Bluewolf extends the company’s analytics, experience design
and AT&T’s application and hosting services business; in the and industry consulting leadership with one of the world’s
third quarter, G4S’s cash solutions business; and in the fourth leading Salesforce consulting practices to deliver differentiated,
quarter, Sanovi Technologies Private Limited (Sanovi), a privately consumer-grade experiences via the cloud. Fluid, Inc.’s Expert
held business. GBS completed acquisitions of six privately Personal Shopper business extends the company’s portfolio of
held businesses: in the first quarter, Resource/Ammirati, ecx SaaS offerings and services, helping clients conduct commerce
International AG (ecx.io) and Optevia Limited (Optevia); in the and engage with their customers. Resilient, a provider of incident
second quarter, Aperto AG (Aperto) and Bluewolf Group, LLC response solutions, automates and orchestrates the many
(Bluewolf); and in the fourth quarter, Fluid, Inc.’s Expert Personal processes needed when dealing with cyber incidents from
Shopper (XPS) business. The Cognitive Solutions segment breaches to lost devices. EZSource helps developers quickly
completed acquisitions of three privately held businesses: in the and easily understand and change mainframe code based on
second quarter, Resilient Systems, Inc. (Resilient) and EZ Legacy, data displayed through dashboards and other visualizations.
Ltd. (EZSource); and in the fourth quarter, Promontory Financial Promontory, a global market-leading risk management and
Group, LLC (Promontory). regulatory compliance consulting firm, helps address clients’
escalating regulations and risk management requirements.
Ustream provides cloud-based video streaming to enterprises
and broadcasters. The acquisition of AT&T’s application and All of these Other Acquisitions were for 100 percent of the
hosting services business strengthens the company’s cloud acquired businesses.
portfolio. The acquisition of the G4S cash solutions business
brings together the engineering skills of G4S with the company’s The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
analytics and remote technology capabilities to expand delivery acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
solutions. Sanovi provides hybrid cloud recovery, cloud migration December 31, 2016.
and business continuity software for enterprise data centers and
2016 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization The Weather Truven Health Other
Life (in Years) Company Analytics Acquisitions
Current assets $ 76 $ 171 $ 153
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 123 127 110
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,717 1,933 593
Completed technology 1–7 160 338 96
Client relationships 3–7 313 516 226
Patents/trademarks 1–7 349 54 42
Total assets acquired 2,738 3,141 1,220
Current liabilities (88) (148) (96)
Noncurrent liabilities (372) (381) (76)
Total liabilities assumed (460) (529) (171)
Bargain purchase gain — — (40)*
Total purchase price $2,278 $2,612 $1,009
N/A — Not applicable
* Bargain purchase gain relating to AT&T’s application and hosting services business was recognized in selling, general and administrative expense in
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in the three months ended March 31, 2016.
For the Other Acquisitions, the overall weighted-average life Platforms segment, goodwill of $303 million was assigned to the
of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was GBS segment and goodwill of $171 million was assigned to the
6.3 years. These identified intangible assets will be amortized Cognitive Solutions segment. It was expected that approximately
on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of 55 percent of the goodwill would be deductible for tax purposes.
$119 million was assigned to the Technology Services & Cloud

===== PAGE 99 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2015 quarter, Blue Box Group, Inc. (Blue Box); in the third quarter,
In 2015, the company completed fourteen acquisitions at an StrongLoop, Inc. (StrongLoop); and in the fourth quarter,
aggregate cost of $3,555 million. Gravitant, Inc. (Gravitant) and Clearleap, Inc. (Clearleap). GBS
completed acquisitions of two privately held businesses in the
Merge Healthcare, Inc. (Merge) — On October 13, 2015, the fourth quarter, Advanced Application Corporation (AAC) and
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Merge, a Meteorix, LLC. (Meteorix).
publicly held business and a leading provider of medical image
handling and processing, interoperability and clinical systems AlchemyAI provides scalable cognitive computing application
designed to advance healthcare quality and efficiency, for cash program interface services and computing applications. Blekko
consideration of $1,036 million. Merge joined the company’s technology provides advanced Web-crawling, categorization
Watson Health business unit, bolstering clients’ ability to analyze and intelligent filtering. Explorys provides secure cloud-based
and cross-reference medical images against billions of data solutions for clinical integration, at-risk population management,
points already in the Watson Health Cloud. Goodwill of $695 cost of care measurement and pay-for-performance. Phytel’s
million was assigned to the Cognitive Solutions ($502 million) and SaaS-based population health management offerings help
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms ($193 million) segments. providers identify patients at risk for care gaps and engage the
It was expected that none of the goodwill would be deductible patient to begin appropriate preventative care. Blue Box provides
for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the hosted, managed, OpenStack-based production-grade private
identified intangible assets acquired was 7.0 years. clouds for the enterprise and service provider markets. Compose
offers auto-scaling, production-ready databases to help software
Cleversafe, Inc. (Cleversafe) — On November 6, 2015, the development teams deploy data services efficiently. StrongLoop
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of provides application development software that enables software
Cleversafe, a privately held business and a leading developer developers to build applications using application programming
and manufacturer of object-based storage software and interfaces. AAC engages in system integration application
appliances, for cash consideration of $1,309 million. Cleversafe’s development, software support and services. AAC was an
integration into the company’s Cloud business gives clients affiliate of JBCC Holdings Inc. and IBM Japan Ltd. The company
strategic data flexibility, simplified management and consistency acquired all the shares of AAC which became a wholly owned
with on-premise, cloud and hybrid cloud deployment options. subsidiary as of October 1, 2015. Gravitant develops cloud-based
Goodwill of $1,000 million was assigned to the Technology software to enable organizations to easily plan, buy and manage,
Services & Cloud Platforms ($590 million) and Systems ($410 or “broker,” software and computing services from multiple
million) segments. It was expected that none of the goodwill suppliers across hybrid clouds. Meteorix offers consulting,
would be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted- deployment, integration and ongoing post-production services for
average useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired Workday Financial Management and Human Capital Management
was 6.9 years. applications. Clearleap provides cloud-based video services.
IRIS Analytics provides technology and consultancy services to
Other Acquisitions — The Cognitive Solutions segment completed the payments industry to detect electronic payment fraud.
acquisitions of six privately held businesses: in the first quarter,
AlchemyAI, Inc. (AlchemyAI) and Blekko, Inc. (Blekko); in All of these Other Acquisitions were for 100 percent of the
the second quarter, Explorys, Inc. (Explorys) and Phytel, Inc. acquired businesses with the exception of the AAC acquisition.
(Phytel); in the third quarter, Compose, Inc. (Compose); and in
the fourth quarter, IRIS Analytics GmbH (IRIS Analytics). The The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms segment completed acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
acquisitions of four privately held businesses: in the second December 31, 2015.
2015 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Merge Cleversafe Acquisitions
Current assets $ 94 $ 23 $ 60
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 128 63 82
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 695 1,000 895
Completed technology 5–7 133 364 163
Client relationships 5–7 145 23 95
Patents/trademarks 2–7 54 11 23
Total assets acquired 1,248 1,484 1,318
Current liabilities (73) (15) (34)
Noncurrent liabilities (139) (160) (73)
Total liabilities assumed (212) (175) (107)
Total purchase price $1,036 $1,309 $1,210
N/A — Not applicable

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the “Other Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average Industry Standard Server — On January 23, 2014, IBM and
life of the identified intangible assets acquired was 6.4 years. Lenovo Group Limited (Lenovo) announced a definitive agreement
These identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight- in which Lenovo would acquire the company’s industry standard
line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $518 million was server portfolio (System x) for an adjusted purchase price of $2.1
assigned to the Cognitive Solutions segment, $303 million billion, consisting of approximately $1.8 billion in cash, with the
was assigned to the Technology Services & Cloud Platforms balance in Lenovo common stock. The stock represented less
segment, and $74 million was assigned to the GBS segment. It than 5 percent equity ownership in Lenovo. The company sold to
was expected that 7 percent of the goodwill would be deductible Lenovo its System x, BladeCenter and Flex System blade servers
for tax purposes. and switches, x86-based Flex integrated systems, NeXtScale and
iDataPlex servers and associated software, blade networking
Divestitures and maintenance operations. As of March 31, 2016, all Lenovo
Microelectronics — On October 20, 2014, IBM and common stock was sold.
GLOBALFOUNDRIES announced a definitive agreement in
which GLOBALFOUNDRIES would acquire the company’s The initial closing was completed on October 1, 2014. A
Microelectronics business, including existing semiconductor subsequent closing occurred in most other countries in which
manufacturing assets and operations in East Fishkill, NY and there was a large business footprint on December 31, 2014. The
Essex Junction, VT. The commercial OEM business acquired remaining countries closed on March 31, 2015. An assessment of
by GLOBALFOUNDRIES includes custom logic and specialty the ongoing contractual terms of the transaction resulted in the
foundry, manufacturing and related operations. The transaction recognition of pre-tax gains of $63 million, $57 million and $14
closed on July 1, 2015. million in 2015, 2016 and 2017, respectively.
At September 30, 2014, the company concluded that the Overall, the company expects to recognize a total pre-tax gain
Microelectronics business met the criteria for discontinued on the sale of approximately $1.6 billion, which does not include
operations reporting. The disposal group constituted a associated costs related to transition and performance-based
component under accounting guidance. The continuing cash costs. Net of these charges, the pre-tax gain was approximately
inflows and outflows with the discontinued component are $1.3 billion, of which the cumulative gain recorded as of
related to the manufacturing sourcing arrangement and the December 31, 2017 is $1.2 billion. The balance of the gain is
transition, packaging and test services. These cash flows are not expected to be recognized in 2019 upon conclusion of the
direct cash flows as they are not significant and the company has maintenance agreement.
no significant continuing involvement.
Others — In addition to those above, the company completed the
All assets and liabilities of the business, classified as held for following divestitures:
sale at June 30, 2015, were transferred at closing. The company
transferred $515 million of net cash to GLOBALFOUNDRIES in 2017 — In the first quarter of 2017, the company completed one
the third quarter of 2015. This amount included $750 million research-related divestiture. The Cognitive Solutions segment
of cash consideration, adjusted by the amount of working completed four divestitures; two in the second quarter of 2017
capital due from GLOBALFOUNDRIES and other miscellaneous and one each in the third and fourth quarter of 2017. The financial
items. A second cash payment in the amount of $500 million terms related to these transactions were not material. Overall,
was transferred in December 2016 while the remaining cash the company recognized a pre-tax gain of $31 million related to
consideration of $250 million was transferred in December 2017. these transactions in 2017.
Summarized financial information for discontinued operations is 2016 — In the first quarter of 2016, the company completed four
shown in the table below. software product-related divestitures. In the fourth quarter of
2016, the company completed the divestiture of one service-
($ in millions) related offering. The financial terms related to these transactions
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 were not material. Overall, the company recorded a pre-tax gain
Total revenue $ — $ — $ 720 of $42 million related to these transactions in 2016.
Loss from discontinued
operations, before tax (9) (11) (175) 2015 — In the first quarter of 2015, the company completed two
software product-related divestitures and in the second quarter,
Loss on disposal, before tax 1 0 (116)
the company completed one software product-related divestiture
Total loss from discontinued
and the divestiture of one GBS offering. In the fourth quarter of
operations, before
2015, the company completed three software product-related
income taxes (8) (11) (291)
divestitures. The financial terms related to these transactions
Provision/(benefit) for
were not material. Overall, the company recorded a pre-tax gain
income taxes (3) (2) (117)
of $81 million related to these transactions in 2015.
Loss from discontinued
operations, net of tax $(5) $ (9 ) $(174 )

===== PAGE 101 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis at December 31, 2017 and 2016.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $ 8,066 $— $ 8,066
Commercial paper — 96 — 96
Money market funds 26 — — 26
Canadian government securities — 398 — 398
Total 26 8,560 — 8,586 (6)
Debt securities — current (2) — 608 — 608 (6)
Debt securities — noncurrent (3) 4 7 — 11
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 4 — — 4
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 461 — 461
Foreign exchange contracts — 469 — 469
Equity contracts — 12 — 12
Total — 942 — 942 (7)
Total assets $33 $10,117 $— $10,151 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 378 $— $ 378
Equity contracts — 3 — 3
Interest rate contracts — 34 — 34
Total liabilities $ — $ 415 $— $ 415 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) U.S. government securities reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) I ncluded within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2017 were $185 million and $757 million, respectively.
(5) T he gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2017 were $377 million and $38 million, respectively.
(6) A vailable-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) I f derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the
total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $255 million.

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2016: Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit $ — $3,629 $— $3,629
Money market funds 1,204 — — 1,204
Total 1,204 3,629 — 4,832 (6)
Debt securities — current (2) — 699 — 699 (6)
Debt securities — noncurrent (3) 1 6 — 8
Available-for-sale equity investments (3) 7 — — 7
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts — 555 — 555
Foreign exchange contracts — 560 — 560
Equity contracts — 11 — 11
Total — 1,126 — 1,126 (7)
Total assets $1,212 $5,460 $— $6,672 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts $ — $ 188 $— $ 188
Equity contracts — 10 — 10
Interest rate contracts — 8 — 8
Total liabilities $ — $ 206 $— $ 206 (7)
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2) U.S. government securities reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(3) I ncluded within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(4) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position at December 31, 2016 were $532 million and $594 million, respectively.
(5) T he gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement
of Financial Position at December 31, 2016 were $145 million and $61 million, respectively.
(6) Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7) I f derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position,
the total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $116 million.
There were no transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years Long-Term Debt
ended December 31, 2017 and 2016. Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value asset in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a
Short-Term Receivables and Payables quoted market price is not available, an expected present value
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments technique that uses rates currently available to the company
are financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair for debt with similar terms and remaining maturities is used to
value. Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short- estimate fair value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is
term debt (excluding the current portion of long-term debt) $39,837 million and $34,655 million and the estimated fair value
are financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate is $42,264 million and $36,838 million at December 31, 2017
fair value. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, and 2016, respectively. If measured at fair value in the financial
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the statements, long-term debt (including the current portion) would
fair value hierarchy, except for short-term debt, which would be be classified as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
classified as Level 2.
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using
current interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with
similar credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At
December 31, 2017 and 2016, the difference between the
carrying amount and estimated fair value for loans and long-
term receivables was immaterial. If measured at fair value in
the financial statements, these financial instruments would be
classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 103 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent debt
considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value, which is and marketable equity securities which are also considered
not materially different from carrying value, in the Consolidated available-for-sale and recorded at fair value in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position. Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2017: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities — noncurrent (1) $8 $3 $— $11
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) 1 3 0 4
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Gross Gross
Adjusted Unrealized Unrealized Fair
At December 31, 2016: Cost Gains Losses Value
Debt securities — noncurrent (1) $5 $3 $— $8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1) 3 5 0 7
(1) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
During the fourth quarter of 2014, the company acquired equity The after-tax net unrealized gains/(losses) on available-for-
securities in conjunction with the sale of the System x business sale debt and equity securities that have been included in other
which were classified as available-for-sale securities. Based on comprehensive income/(loss) and the after-tax net (gains)/losses
an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 2015, reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive income/
the company recorded an other-than-temporary impairment (loss) to net income were as follows:
loss of $86 million resulting in an adjusted cost basis of $185
million as of December 31, 2015. In the first quarter of 2016, the ($ in millions)
company recorded a gross realized loss of $37 million (before For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016
taxes) related to the sale of all the outstanding shares. The loss Net unrealized gains/(losses)
on this sale was recorded in other (income) and expense in the arising during the period $0 $(23)
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Net unrealized (gains)/losses
reclassified to net income* 1 21
Sales of debt and available-for-sale equity investments during
* There were no writedowns in 2017 and 2016, respectively.
the period were as follows:
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale
($ in millions)
debt securities are less than one year at December 31, 2017.
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
Proceeds $7 $151 $8
Derivative Financial Instruments
Gross realized gains The company operates in multiple functional currencies and
(before taxes) 3 3 1
is a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In
Gross realized losses the normal course of business, the company is exposed to the
(before taxes) 2 37 1 impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations,
and to a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and
client credit risk. The company limits these risks by following
established risk management policies and procedures, including
the use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
debt in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For In the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the company
interest rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master
rate movements between the interest rates associated with the netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or payables
company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest rates recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the
associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to fair values of the related derivative instruments. No amount was
manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2017 and 2016
derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility for the right to reclaim cash collateral. The amount recognized
arising from foreign exchange rate fluctuations. in accounts payable for the obligation to return cash collateral
was $114 million and $141 million at December 31, 2017 and
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is 2016, respectively. The company restricts the use of cash
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts collateral received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated
counterparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only Statement of Financial Position. No amount was rehypothecated
entering into contracts with carefully selected major financial at December 31, 2017 and 2016.
institutions based upon their overall credit profile. The company’s
established policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge
on principal transactions include reviewing and establishing the volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in
limits for credit exposure and continually assessing the currency exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of
creditworthiness of counterparties. The right of set-off that exists the company with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments,
under certain of these arrangements enables the legal entities designated as net investment hedges, expose the company to
of the company subject to the arrangement to net amounts due liquidity risk as the derivatives have an immediate cash flow
to and from the counterparty reducing the maximum loss from impact upon maturity which is not offset by a cash flow from
credit risk in the event of counterparty default. the translation of the underlying hedged equity. The company
monitors this cash loss potential on an ongoing basis and
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements may discontinue some of these hedging relationships by
with most of its major derivative counterparties. These de-designating or terminating the derivative instrument in
arrangements require the company to hold or post collateral order to manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as
(cash or U.S. Treasury securities) when the derivative fair values accounting hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset
exceed contractually established thresholds. Posting thresholds the changes in the fair value of the de-designated instruments
can be fixed or can vary based on credit default swap pricing from the date of de-designation until maturity.
or credit ratings received from the major credit agencies. The
aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments under these In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts,
collateralized arrangements that were in a liability position at futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps,
December 31, 2017 and 2016 was $126 million and $11 million, and options depending upon the underlying exposure. The
respectively, for which no collateral was posted at either date. company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
Full collateralization of these agreements would be required in
the event that the company’s credit rating falls below investment A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
grade or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis by underlying risk, follows.
points, as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral
security arrangements. The aggregate fair value of derivative Interest Rate Risk
instruments in asset positions as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
was $942 million and $1,126 million, respectively. This amount The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund
represents the maximum exposure to loss at the reporting date if its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective
the counterparties failed to perform as contracted. This exposure financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the
was reduced by $255 million and $116 million at December 31, underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce
2017 and 2016, respectively, of liabilities included in master overall interest cost, the company uses interest-rate swaps to
netting arrangements with those counterparties. Additionally, convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate
at December 31, 2017 and 2016, this exposure was reduced by debt (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate
$114 million and $141 million of cash collateral, respectively, and debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At
$35 million of non-cash collateral in U.S. Treasury securities at December 31, 2017 and 2016, the total notional amount of the
December 31, 2016. There were no non-cash collateral balances company’s interest rate swaps was $9.1 billion and $7.3 billion,
in U.S. Treasury securities at December 31, 2017. At December respectively. The weighted-average remaining maturity of these
31, 2017 and 2016, the net exposure related to derivative assets instruments at December 31, 2017 and 2016 was approximately
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was 4.8 years and 6.2 years, respectively.
$572 million and $834 million, respectively. At December 31,
2017 and 2016, the net position related to derivative liabilities
recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position was
$160 million and $90 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 105 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Forecasted Debt Issuance Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company
starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are
any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time
at December 31, 2017 and 2016. over which the company has hedged its exposure to the variability
in future cash flows is approximately ten years. At December 31,
At December 31, 2016, net gains of less than $1 million (before 2017 and 2016, the total notional amount of cross-currency
taxes) were recorded in accumulated other comprehensive swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency
income/(loss) in connection with cash flow hedges of the denominated debt was $6.5 billion and $1.4 billion, respectively.
company’s borrowings. During 2017, all gains and losses
associated with this program that were recorded in other At December 31, 2017 and 2016, in connection with cash
comprehensive income/(loss) were reclassified to net income flow hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings,
and there are no gains and losses remaining in accumulated other the company recorded net gains of $42 million and net gains
comprehensive income/(loss) at December 31, 2017. of $29 million (before taxes), respectively, in accumulated
other comprehensive income/(loss). Within these amounts,
Foreign Exchange Risk $157 million of gains and $27 million of gains, respectively,
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next
(Net Investment) 12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated underlying exposure.
debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in
foreign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in Asset/Liability Management
the functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the
to the U.S. dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency
and foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk management swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In
purpose. At December 31, 2017 and 2016, the total notional addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts
amount of derivative instruments designated as net investment to economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency
hedges was $7.0 billion and $6.7 billion, respectively. At exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency
December 31, 2017 and 2016, the weighted-average remaining assets and liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap
maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.2 years at contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the
both periods. fair values of these contracts and of the underlying hedged
exposures are generally offsetting and are recorded in other
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional At December 31, 2017 and 2016, the total notional amount of
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign currency
payments for royalties and goods and services among the exposure was $11.5 billion and $12.7 billion, respectively.
company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the company. In
anticipation of these foreign currency cash flows and in view of Equity Risk Management
the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively The company is exposed to market price changes in certain
employs foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its broad market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily
currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as related to certain obligations to employees. Changes in the
cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which the overall value of these employee compensation obligations are
company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash recorded in selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense in
flows is four years. At December 31, 2017 and 2016, the total the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not designated
notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives, including
hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $7.8 equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the exposures
billion and $8.3 billion, respectively. The weighted-average related to its employee compensation obligations. The derivatives
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2017 are linked to the total return on certain broad market indices
and 2016 was 0.7 years at both periods. or the total return on the company’s common stock, and are
recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 in connection with cash flow expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December
hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the 31, 2017 and 2016, the total notional amount of derivative
company recorded net gains of $27 million and net gains of instruments in economic hedges of these compensation
$462 million (before taxes), respectively, in accumulated other obligations was $1.3 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
comprehensive income/(loss). Within these amounts, $81 million
of losses and $397 million of gains, respectively, are expected
to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 months,
providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying
anticipated transactions.

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of any derivative instruments relating to this program outstanding
common stock in connection with various investments that are at December 31, 2017 and 2016.
deemed derivatives because they contain net share or net cash
settlement provisions. The company records the changes in The company is exposed to market volatility on certain
the fair value of these warrants in other (income) and expense investment securities. The company may utilize options or
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company did forwards to economically hedge its market exposure. The
not have any warrants qualifying as derivatives outstanding at derivatives are recorded at fair value with gains and losses
December 31, 2017 and 2016. reported in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2017 and 2016, the
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to company did not have any derivative instruments relating to this
pay amounts due under contractual terms. The company may program outstanding.
utilize credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit
exposures. The swaps are recorded at fair value with gains The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the
and losses reported in other (income) and expense in the derivative and non-derivative instrument-related risk management
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company did not have activity as of December 31, 2017 and 2016, as well as for the
years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
Balance Sheet Balance Sheet
At December 31: Classification 2017 2016 Classification 2017 2016
Designated as hedging
instruments
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Interest rate contracts other current assets $ 2 $ — expenses and liabilities $ — $ —
Investments and
sundry assets 459 555 Other liabilities 34 8
Foreign exchange Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
contracts other current assets 111 421 expenses and liabilities 318 46
Investments and
sundry assets 298 17 Other liabilities 3 35
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $870 $ 993 derivative liabilities $ 355 $ 89
Not designated as hedging
instruments
Foreign exchange Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
contracts other current assets $ 61 $ 100 expenses and liabilities $ 57 $ 89
Investments and
sundry assets — 22 Other liabilities — 18
Prepaid expenses and Other accrued
Equity contracts other current assets 12 11 expenses and liabilities 3 10
Fair value of Fair value of
derivative assets $ 72 $ 133 derivative liabilities $ 60 $ 117
Total derivatives $942 $1,126 $ 415 $ 206
Total debt designated as
hedging instruments (1)
Short-term debt N/A N/A $ — $1,125
Long-term debt N/A N/A $6,471 $7,844
N/A N/A $6,471 $8,969
Total $942 $1,126 $6,886 $9,175
N/A — Not applicable
(1) Debt designated as hedging instruments are reported at carrying value.

===== PAGE 107 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Attributable to Risk
Consolidated Recognized on Derivatives Being Hedged (2)
Statement of
For the year ended December 31: Earnings Line Item 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (1) (5)
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $ 1 $ 28 $108 $ 74 $ 58 $(1)
Interest expense 1 31 94 69 63 (1)
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments
Other (income )
Foreign exchange contracts and expense 16 (189) 127 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income )
Interest rate contracts and expense — 0 (1) N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 135 112 (27) N/A N/A N/A
Other (income )
and expense — (1) (9) N/A N/A N/A
Total $153 $ (18) $291 $144 $121 $(1)
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Ineffectiveness and
Effective Portion Effective Portion Amounts Excluded from
Recognized in OCI Consolidated Reclassified from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
For the year ended Statement of
December 31: 2017 2016 2015 Earnings Line Item 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Derivative instruments
in cash flow hedges
Interest rate
contracts $ — $ — $ — Interest expense $ (45) $ (24) $ 0 $ — $ — $ —
Foreign exchange Other (income )
contracts (58) 243 618 and expense 324 (68) 731 1 (3) 5
Cost of sales* 3 (5) 192 — — —
Cost of services * 70 (8) 0 — — —
SG&A expense 11 4 149 — — —
Instruments in net
investment hedges (4)
Foreign exchange
contracts (1,607) 311 889 Cost of financing — — — 11 — —
Interest expense — — — 33 77 13
Total $(1,665) $555 $1,507 $363 $(102) $1,072 $45 $74 $18
* Reclassified to conform to 2017 presentation.
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon
payments required under these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
(5) F or the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, fair value hedges resulted in losses of $2 million, $4 million and $2 million in ineffectiveness,
respectively.
N/A — Not applicable

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit
there were no significant gains or losses excluded from the losses of $21 million and $28 million at December 31, 2017 and
assessment of hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or 2016, respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts
associated with an underlying exposure that did not or was receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and OEM
not expected to occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable
anticipated in the normal course of business. financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
Client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), net of
NOTE E. INVENTORIES
allowance for credit losses of $211 million and $276 million at
($ in millions) December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively, are loans that are
At December 31: 2017 2016 provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware,
Finished goods $ 333 $ 358 software and services. Payment terms on these financing
arrangements are generally for terms up to seven years.
Work in process and raw materials 1,250 1,195
Total $1,583 $1,553
The allowance for credit losses at December 31, 2016 reflected
a write-off in the fourth quarter of $188 million of previously
reserved customer accounts as a result of recent experience and
NOTE F. FINANCING RECEIVABLES history across the portfolio, particularly in China. Of this total,
The following table presents financing receivables, net of $30 million was in Americas, $33 million was in EMEA and $125
allowances for credit losses, including residual values. million was in Asia Pacific and $73 million and $115 million was
in lease receivables and loan receivables, respectively.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2017 2016 Client loan and installment payment financing contracts are
Current priced independently at competitive market rates. The company
Net investment in sales-type and has a history of enforcing these financing agreements.
direct financing leases $ 2,900 $ 2,909
Commercial financing receivables 11,596 9,706 The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as
Client loan and installment collateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables
payment receivables (loans) 7,226 6,390 pledged as collateral for borrowings were $773 million and
Total $21,721 $19,006 $689 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
These borrowings are included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages
Noncurrent
112 to 115.
Net investment in sales-type
and direct financing leases $ 4,320 $ 3,950
The company did not have any financing receivables held for
Client loan and installment
sale as of December 31, 2017 and 2016.
payment receivables (loans) 5,230 5,071
Total $ 9,550 $ 9,021
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following tables present financing receivables on a gross
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates basis, excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms value, by portfolio segment and by class, excluding commercial
ranging generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales- financing receivables and other miscellaneous financing
type and direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual receivables at December 31, 2017 and 2016. The company
values of $630 million and $585 million at December 31, 2017 determines its allowance for credit losses based on two portfolio
and 2016, respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income segments: lease receivables and loan receivables, and further
of $535 million and $513 million, and net of the allowance for segments the portfolio into three classes: Americas, EMEA and
credit losses of $103 million and $133 million at those dates, Asia Pacific. This portfolio segmentation was changed from
respectively. Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments growth markets and major markets in 2017 as the company no
outstanding at December 31, 2017, expressed as a percentage of longer manages the business under those market delineations.
the total, are approximately: 2018, 43 percent; 2019, 27 percent; There was no impact to segment reporting or the company’s
2020, 18 percent; 2021, 9 percent; and 2022 and beyond, Consolidated Financial Statements.
3 percent.

===== PAGE 109 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2017: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 3,911 $1,349 $1,333 $ 6,593
Loan receivables 6,715 3,597 2,354 12,667
Ending balance $10,626 $4,946 $3,687 $19,259
Collectively evaluated for impairment $10,497 $4,889 $3,604 $18,990
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 129 $ 57 $ 83 $ 269
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2017
Lease receivables $ 54 $ 4 $ 76 $ 133
Loan receivables 169 18 89 276
Total $ 223 $ 22 $ 165 $ 410
Write-offs (51) (1) (85) (137)
Recoveries 1 1 0 2
Provision (8) 29 (4) 16
Other 7 11 6 24
Ending balance at December 31, 2017 $ 172 $ 61 $ 82 $ 314
Lease receivables $ 63 $ 9 $ 31 $ 103
Loan receivables $ 108 $ 52 $ 51 $ 211
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 43 $ 15 $ 6 $ 64
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 128 $ 46 $ 76 $ 250
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2016: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 3,830 $1,171 $1,335 $ 6,336
Loan receivables 6,185 3,309 2,243 11,737
Ending balance $10,015 $4,480 $3,578 $18,073
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 9,847 $4,460 $3,419 $17,726
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 168 $ 20 $ 159 $ 347
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2016
Lease receivables $ 52 $ 17 $ 143 $ 213
Loan receivables 122 55 200 377
Total $ 175 $ 72 $ 343 $ 590
Write-offs (36) (48) (154) (237)
Recoveries 2 0 0 2
Provision 65 (1) (6) 58
Other 17 (1) (18) (3)
Ending balance at December 31, 2016 $ 223 $ 22 $ 165 $ 410
Lease receivables $ 54 $ 4 $ 76 $ 133
Loan receivables $ 169 $ 18 $ 89 $ 276
Collectively evaluated for impairment $ 62 $ 13 $ 15 $ 90
Individually evaluated for impairment $ 161 $ 9 $ 150 $ 320
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are records a specific reserve. In addition, the company records an
evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For unallocated reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate
individually evaluated receivables, the company determines to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that have been
the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates an specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit
estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For rating, probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan)
those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company and loss history.

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status ($ in millions)
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing Interest
receivables which were on non-accrual status at December 31, Income
Average Interest Recognized
2017 and 2016. For the year ended Recorded Income on Cash
December 31, 2016: Investment Recognized Basis
($ in millions) Americas $160 $0 $—
At December 31: 2017 2016 EMEA 56 0 —
Americas $ 22 $ 23 Asia Pacific 290 0 —
EMEA 14 2 Total $505 $0 $—
Asia Pacific 3 14
Total lease receivables $ 38 $ 40
Credit Quality Indicators
Americas $ 71 $128
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based
EMEA 59 5
on rating agency data, publicly available information and
Asia Pacific 9 12
information provided by customers, are reviewed periodically
Total loan receivables $138 $145 based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a
Total receivables $177 $185 numerical rating system that maps to Moody’s Investors Service
credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information
provided by Moody’s, where available, as one of many inputs in
Impaired Receivables its determination of customer credit rating.
The company considers any receivable with an individually
evaluated reserve as an impaired receivable. Depending on the The tables present the net recorded investment for each class
level of impairment, receivables will also be placed on a non- of receivables, by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2017
accrual status. The following tables present impaired receivables and 2016. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging
at December 31, 2017 and 2016. This presentation includes both from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are
loan and lease receivables. considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators
do not reflect mitigation actions that the company may take to
($ in millions) transfer credit risk to third parties.
Recorded Related
At December 31, 2017: Investment Allowance
Lease Receivables
Americas $129 $128
($ in millions)
EMEA 57 46
At December 31, 2017: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
Asia Pacific 83 76
Credit rating
Total $269 $250
Aaa–Aa3 $ 422 $ 49 $ 68
A1–A3 855 190 544
($ in millions) Baa1–Baa3 980 371 337
Recorded Related Ba1–Ba2 730 448 184
At December 31, 2016: Investment Allowance Ba3–B1 443 192 89
Americas $168 $161
B2–B3 367 77 64
EMEA 20 9
Caa–D 51 13 18
Asia Pacific 159 150
Total $3,847 $1,340 $1,302
Total $347 $320
Loan Receivables
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Interest At December 31, 2017: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
Income
Average Interest Recognized Credit rating
For the year ended Recorded Income on Cash Aaa–Aa3 $ 724 $ 129 $ 120
December 31, 2017: Investment Recognized Basis
A1–A3 1,469 502 961
Americas $158 $0 $—
Baa1–Baa3 1,683 982 596
EMEA 33 0 —
Ba1–Ba2 1,253 1,186 325
Asia Pacific 122 0 —
Ba3–B1 760 508 157
Total $312 $0 $—
B2–B3 630 204 113
Caa–D 88 34 31
Total $6,607 $3,545 $2,303

===== PAGE 111 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2017, the industries which made up Global Loan Receivables
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial
($ in millions)
(33 percent), Government (15 percent), Manufacturing
At December 31, 2016: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
(13 percent), Services (13 percent), Retail (8 percent),
Credit rating
Communications (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent) and Other
(6 percent). Aaa–Aa3 $ 712 $ 143 $ 90
A1–A3 1,246 318 832
Lease Receivables Baa1–Baa3 1,230 1,032 565
($ in millions) Ba1–Ba2 1,309 987 316
At December 31, 2016: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Ba3–B1 914 585 182
Credit rating B2–B3 472 201 143
Aaa–Aa3 $ 447 $ 51 $ 53 Caa–D 133 25 25
A1–A3 782 113 486 Total $6,016 $3,291 $2,154
Baa1–Baa3 772 366 330
Ba1–Ba2 822 350 185
At December 31, 2016, the industries which made up Global
Ba3–B1 574 208 106
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (34
B2–B3 297 71 84 percent), Government (14 percent), Manufacturing (13 percent),
Caa–D 83 9 15 Services (12 percent), Retail (8 percent), Communications
Total $3,776 $1,167 $1,259 (7 percent), Healthcare (6 percent) and Other (6 percent).
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
Fully <90 Days Recorded
Total Reserved or Unbilled Total Investment
Past Due Financing Financing Financing >90 Days and
At December 31, 2017: >90 Days (1) Receivables Receivables Receivables Accruing (2)
Americas $30 $ 29 $ 3,852 $ 3,911 $197
EMEA 3 5 1,340 1,349 5
Asia Pacific 5 28 1,301 1,333 23
Total lease receivables $37 $ 62 $ 6,493 $ 6,593 $225
Americas $39 $ 96 $ 6,581 $ 6,715 $254
EMEA 12 35 3,551 3,597 17
Asia Pacific 3 46 2,305 2,354 12
Total loan receivables $53 $176 $12,437 $12,667 $283
Total $91 $239 $18,930 $19,259 $508
(1) Only the portion of a financing receivable which is greater than 90 days past due, excluding amounts that are fully reserved.
(2) At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for aged financing receivables greater than 90 days.
($ in millions)
Fully <90 Days Recorded
Total Reserved or Unbilled Total Investment
Past Due Financing Financing Financing >90 Days and
At December 31, 2016: >90 Days (1) Receivables Receivables Receivables Accruing (2)
Americas $17 $ 20 $ 3,793 $ 3,830 $ 66
EMEA 2 10 1,159 1,171 6
Asia Pacific 12 59 1,264 1,335 40
Total lease receivables $31 $ 89 $ 6,216 $ 6,336 $111
Americas $19 $ 90 $ 6,075 $ 6,185 $ 80
EMEA 5 5 3,299 3,309 15
Asia Pacific 6 87 2,150 2,243 46
Total loan receivables $31 $182 $11,524 $11,737 $141
Total $62 $271 $17,740 $18,073 $253
(1) Only the portion of a financing receivable which is greater than 90 days past due, excluding amounts that are fully reserved.
(2) At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for aged financing receivables greater than 90 days.

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE I. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
The company did not have any significant troubled debt Intangible Assets
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016. The following table details the company’s intangible asset
balances by major asset class.
NOTE G. PROPERTY, PLANT AND EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
($ in millions) Gross Net
At December 31: 2017 2016* Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2017: Amount Amortization Amount
Land and land improvements $ 480 $ 506
Intangible asset class
Buildings and building and
Capitalized software $1,600 $ (790) $ 810
leasehold improvements 10,073 9,763
Client relationships 2,358 (1,080) 1,278
Information technology equipment 16,874 15,012
Completed technology 2,586 (1,376) 1,210
Production, engineering,
office and other equipment 4,060 3,869 Patents/trademarks 668 (256) 413
Plant and other property — gross 31,487 29,150 Other* 47 (16) 31
Less: Accumulated depreciation 20,832 18,842 Total $7,260 $(3,518) $3,742
Plant and other property — net 10,655 10,308 * Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary
Rental machines 844 984 business processes, methodologies and systems.
Less: Accumulated depreciation 383 461
Rental machines — net 462 523 ($ in millions)
Total — net $11,116 $10,830 Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
* Reclassified to conform to 2017 presentation. At December 31, 2016: Amount Amortization Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $1,537 $ (661) $ 876
NOTE H. INVESTMENTS AND SUNDRY ASSETS
Client relationships 2,831 (1,228) 1,602
($ in millions)
Completed technology 3,322 (1,668) 1,654
At December 31: 2017 2016
Patents/trademarks 730 (205) 525
Deferred transition and setup costs
Other* 46 (15) 31
and other deferred arrangements* $1,537 $1,497
Total $8,466 $(3,778) $4,688
Derivatives — noncurrent 757 594
Alliance investments * Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and
nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.
Equity method 90 85
Non-equity method 32 19
The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $946
Prepaid software 300 230 million during the year ended December 31, 2017, primarily due
Long-term deposits 271 267 to intangible asset amortization, partially offset by additions
Other receivables 455 416 resulting from capitalized software. There was no impairment
Employee benefit-related 316 272 of intangible assets recorded in 2017 and 2016. The aggregate
intangible amortization expense was $1,520 million and
Prepaid income taxes 590 477
$1,544 million for the years ended December 31, 2017 and
Other assets 572 729
2016, respectively. In addition, in 2017 and 2016, respectively,
Total $4,919 $4,585
the company retired $1,753 million and $817 million of fully
* Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross carrying
are related to services client arrangements. Refer to note A, amount and accumulated amortization by this amount.
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 87 for additional information.
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding
years relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be
the following at December 31, 2017:
($ in millions)
Capitalized Acquired
Software Intangibles Total
2018 $482 $812 $1,294
2019 248 671 920
2020 79 560 639
2021 — 446 446
2022 — 377 377

===== PAGE 113 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Purchase Price and Other December
Segment 2017 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments* 31, 2017
Cognitive Solutions $19,484 $ 3 $(38) $(20) $235 $19,665
Global Business Services 4,607 — 2 — 204 4,813
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 10,258 13 (2) — 179 10,447
Systems 1,850 — 0 — 13 1,862
Total $36,199 $16 $(38) $(20) $631 $36,788
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Purchase Price and Other December
Segment 2016 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments* 31, 2016
Cognitive Solutions $15,621 $3,821 $ 5 $(12) $ 48 $19,484
Global Business Services 4,396 303 4 (1) (95) 4,607
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms 10,156 119 (12) (5) (1) 10,258
Systems 1,848 — (4) — 5 1,850
Total $32,021 $4,244 $ (7) $(18) $(42 ) $36,199
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during 2017 NOTE J. BORROWINGS
or 2016 and the company has no accumulated impairment losses. Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2017 and 2016 were
At December 31: 2017 2016
related to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to
Commercial paper $1,496 $ 899
September 30, 2017 or September 30, 2016, respectively,
and were still subject to the measurement period that ends Short-term loans 276 375
at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date or when Long-term debt — current maturities 5,214 6,239
information becomes available. Net purchase price adjustments Total $6,987 $7,513
of $38 million were recorded during 2017, with the primary
drivers being deferred tax assets, other taxes payable and other
current liabilities associated with the Truven Health Analytics, The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at
Inc. and The Weather Company acquisitions. Net purchase price December 31, 2017 and 2016 was 1.5 percent and 0.7 percent,
adjustments of $7 million were recorded during 2016, with the respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term
primary drivers being deferred tax assets, accounts receivable, loans were 8.8 percent and 9.5 percent at December 31, 2017
deferred income, inventory and other current liabilities. and 2016, respectively.

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2017 2016
U.S. dollar debt (average interest rate at December 31, 2017):*
4.0% 2017 $ — $ 5,104
3.5% 2018 4,640 4,724
2.7% 2019 5,540 4,132
1.9% 2020 3,416 2,054
2.2% 2021 4,129 2,887
2.4% 2022 3,481 1,901
3.3% 2023 1,547 1,500
3.6% 2024 2,000 2,000
7.0% 2025 600 600
3.5% 2026 1,350 1,350
4.7% 2027 969 469
6.5% 2028 313 313
5.9% 2032 600 600
8.0% 2038 83 83
5.6% 2039 745 745
4.0% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.0% 2045 27 27
4.7% 2046 650 650
7.1% 2096 316 316
31,515 30,563
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2017, in parentheses):*
Euros (1.5%) 2019–2029 10,502 7,122
Pound sterling (2.7%) 2020–2022 1,420 1,296
Japanese yen (0.3%) 2022–2026 1,291 1,576
Canadian (2.2%) 2017 — 373
Other (5.4%) 2018–2020 717 215
45,445 41,145
Less: net unamortized discount 826 839
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 93 82
Add: fair value adjustment** 526 669
45,052 40,893
Less: current maturities 5,214 6,239
Total $39,837 $34,655
* Includes notes, debentures, bank loans, secured borrowings and capital lease obligations.
** The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount
equal to the sum of the debt’s carrying value and a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations
attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates.
There are no debt securities issued and outstanding by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance
subsidiary of International Business Machines Corporation, the parent. Any debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC, would be
fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the parent.

===== PAGE 115 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
During the third quarter of 2017, IBM Credit LLC (IBM Credit), a consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s
wholly owned subsidiary of the company, filed a shelf registration ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met.
statement with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s
allowing it to offer for sale public debt securities. IBM Credit consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
issued fixed- and floating-rate debt securities in September than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect
2017 in the aggregate amount of $3.0 billion with maturity dates to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
ranging from 2019 to 2022. The debt is included in the long-term
debt table on page 113. The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt
covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its The failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would
and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s become immediately due and payable.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2017 2016
For the year ended December 31: Amount Average Rate Amount Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt $29,007 2.73% $27,414 3.18%
Floating-rate debt* 16,044 2.10% 13,480 1.59%
Total $45,052 $40,893
* Includes $9,138 million in 2017 and $7,338 million in 2016 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into
floating-rate debt. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 to 107.
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt Lines of Credit
outstanding at December 31, 2017, are as follows: In 2016, the company increased the size of its five-year Credit
Agreement (the “Credit Agreement”) to $10.25 billion and
($ in millions) extended the term by one year to November 10, 2021. The
Total total expense recorded by the company related to this Credit
2018 $ 5,217 Agreement was $6.1 million in 2017, $5.5 million in 2016 and
$5.3 million in 2015. The Credit Agreement permits the company
2019 7,128
and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10.25 billion on a
2020 6,242
revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be
2021 5,196
unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also,
2022 4,288 upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional
2023 and beyond 17,374 banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, increase the
Total $45,445 commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an additional
$1.75 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agreement,
the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay and
reborrow amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time during
Interest on Debt
the Credit Agreement term. Interest rates on borrowings under
($ in millions) the Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing market interest
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 rates, as further described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit
Cost of financing $ 658 $ 576 $ 540 Agreement contains customary representations and warranties,
covenants, events of default, and indemnification provisions.
Interest expense 615 630 468
The company believes that circumstances that might give rise
Interest capitalized 5 2 0
to breach of these covenants or an event of default, as specified
Total interest paid
in the Credit Agreement, are remote.
and accrued $1,278 $1,208 $1,008
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some
Refer to the related discussion on page 144 in note T, “Segment of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate.
Information,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing Interest rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 102 to credit vary from country to country, depending on local market
107 for a discussion of the use of foreign currency denominated conditions.
debt designated as a hedge of net investment, as well as a
discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in the
company’s debt risk management program.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On July 20, 2017, the company and IBM Credit, (the Borrowers), In response to changing business needs, the company
entered into a $2.5 billion 364-Day Credit Agreement, and a $2.5 periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve
billion Three-Year Credit Agreement (the New Credit Agreements, productivity, cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The
and together with the Credit Agreement, the Credit Facilities). noncurrent contractually obligated future payments associated
IBM also entered into the Third Amendment to its Credit with these activities are reflected in the workforce reductions
Agreement. The total expense recorded by the company related caption in the previous table. This also includes certain special
to the New Credit Agreements was $2.8 million in 2017. The restructuring-related actions prior to 2006. The noncurrent
New Credit Agreements permit the Borrowers to borrow up to liabilities are workforce accruals related to terminated
an aggregate of $5 billion on a revolving basis. Neither Borrower employees who are no longer working for the company who
is a guarantor or co-obligor of the other Borrower under the New were granted annual payments to supplement their incomes in
Credit Agreements. Subject to certain conditions stated in the certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal
New Credit Agreements, the Borrowers may borrow, prepay requirements, these required payments will continue until the
and re-borrow amounts under the New Credit Agreements at former employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes
any time during the term of the New Credit Agreements. Funds away. Current liabilities are included in other accrued expenses
borrowed may be used for the general corporate purposes of the and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
Borrowers. Interest rates on borrowings under the New Credit and were immaterial at December 31, 2017.
Agreements will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as
further described in the New Credit Agreements. The New Credit The company employs extensive internal environmental
Agreements contain customary representations and warranties, protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The
covenants, events of default, and indemnification provisions. The company also participates in environmental assessments and
Amendment to the Credit Agreement adds and restates various cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities,
provisions in order to provide the company with the opportunity previously owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s
in 2018 to request that the lenders extend the termination date maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be
of the Credit Agreement to July 20, 2023. estimated and no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The
As of December 31, 2017, there were no borrowings by the total amounts accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities,
company, or its subsidiaries, under the Credit Facilities. including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated
Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect actual
or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $267 million and
NOTE K. OTHER LIABILITIES
$272 million at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively.
($ in millions) Estimated environmental costs are not expected to materially
At December 31: 2017 2016 affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated results
Income tax reserves $4,193 $2,621 of the company’s operations in future periods. However, estimates
of future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,583 1,494
periods and changing environmental remediation regulations.
Disability benefits 504 538
Derivative liabilities 38 61
As of December 31, 2017, the company was unable to estimate
Workforce reductions 804 782 the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
Deferred taxes 545 424 certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are
Other taxes payable 948 90 primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that
Environmental accruals 262 262 is not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished
and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would
Warranty accruals 56 68
remediate only if it performed major renovations of certain
Asset retirement obligations 115 142
existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have
Acquisition related 88 111
indeterminate settlement dates, the company could not develop
Divestiture related* 253 270 a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will
Other 577 613 continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each
Total $9,965 $7,477 future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once
sufficient additional information becomes available. The total
* Primarily related to the divestiture of the Microelectronics business.
amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified
as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
were $152 million and $173 million at December 31, 2017 and
2016, respectively.

===== PAGE 117 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE L. EQUITY ACTIVITY Other Stock Transactions
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 The company issued the following shares of common stock as
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees
922,179,225 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2017 and stock purchase plan: 4,311,998 shares in 2017, 3,893,366
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par shares in 2016, and 6,013,875 shares in 2015. The company
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2017. issued 463,083 treasury shares in 2017, 383,077 treasury
shares in 2016 and 1,155,558 treasury shares in 2015, as a
Stock Repurchases result of restricted stock unit releases and exercises of stock
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by
common stock. The company repurchased 27,237,179 common non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the company’s stock-based
shares at a cost of $4,323 million, 23,283,400 common shares at compensation plans, 1,226,080 common shares at a cost of $193
a cost of $3,455 million and 30,338,647 common shares at a cost million, 854,365 common shares at a cost of $126 million, and
of $4,701 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively. These 1,625,820 common shares at a cost of $248 million in 2017,
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of 2016 and 2015, respectively, were remitted by employees to the
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding
may differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions. requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock
At December 31, 2017, $3,786 million of Board common stock balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and
repurchase authorization was available. The company plans to the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
purchase shares on the open market or in private transactions
from time to time, depending on market conditions.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2017: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 152 $ 617 $ 769
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 1 $ (1) $ 0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 1 0 1
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 2 $ (1) $ 1
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (58) $ 0 $ (58)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales (3) 1 (3)
Cost of services (70) 27 (43)
SG&A expense (11) 3 (9)
Other (income) and expense (324) 124 (199)
Interest expense 45 (17) 28
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (421) $ 137 $ (284)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 682 (201) 481
Curtailments and settlements 19 (5) 14
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (88) 29 (58)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,889 (1,006) 1,883
Total retirement-related benefit plans $3,502 $(1,182) $2,320
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $3,235 $ (429) $2,806
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.)

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2016: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (20) $(120) $ (140)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (38) $ 14 $ (23)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 34 (13) 21
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (3) $ 1 $ (2)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 243 $ (80) $ 163
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales* 5 (5) 1
Cost of services* 8 (3) 5
SG&A expense (4) (2) (7)
Other (income) and expense 68 (26) 42
Interest expense 24 (9) 15
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 345 $(126) $ 219
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period $(2,490) $ 924 $(1,566)
Curtailments and settlements (16) 1 (15)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (107) 34 (74)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,764 (976) 1,788
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 150 $ (19) $ 132
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 472 $(263) $ 209
* Reclassified to conform to 2017 presentation.
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.)

===== PAGE 119 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2015: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $(1,379) $ (342) $(1,721)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (54) $ 21 $ (33)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 86 (33) 53
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 32 $ (12) $ 20
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 618 $ (218) $ 399
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of sales* (192) 59 (133)
Cost of services* 0 (2) (2)
SG&A expense (149) 43 (105)
Other (income) and expense (731) 281 (451)
Interest expense 0 0 0
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (454) $ 162 $ (292)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 6 $ (2) $ 4
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,963) 1,039 (1,925)
Curtailments and settlements 33 (9) 24
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (100) 36 (65)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 3,304 (1,080) 2,223
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 279 $ (17) $ 262
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $(1,523) $ (208) $(1,731)
* Reclassified to conform to 2017 presentation.
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. (See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.)
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Net Change Gains/(Losses ) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses ) Currency Retirement- on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Related For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Benefit Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2014 $ 392 $(1,742) $(26,509) $(15) $(27,875)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 399 (1,721) (1,897) (33) (3,252)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (691) 0 2,158 53 1,520
Total change for the period (292) (1,721) 262 20 (1,731)
December 31, 2015 100 (3,463) (26,248) 5 (29,607)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 163 (140) (1,581) (23) (1,581)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income 56 0 1,714 21 1,791
Total change for the period 219 (140) 132 (2) 209
December 31, 2016 319 (3,603) (26,116) 2 (29,398)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (58) 769 495 0 1,206
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (226) 0 1,825 1 1,599
Total change for the period (284) 769 2,320 1 2,806
December 31, 2017 $ 35 $(2,834) $(23,796) $ 3 $(26,592)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M. CONTINGENCIES AND COMMITMENTS
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with of the company’s potential liability. Further, the company is
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of other
plaintiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and
suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status
from time to time in the ordinary course of its business. The of the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel
company is a leader in the information technology industry legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development
and, as such, has been and will continue to be subject to claims of information important to the matters. The company reviews
challenging its IP rights and associated products and offerings, claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly,
including claims of copyright and patent infringement and and decisions are made with respect to recording or adjusting
violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses or range
company enforces its own IP against infringement, through of losses (individually or in the aggregate), to reflect the impact
license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural and
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to substantive rulings, reviews by counsel and other information
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide pertinent to a particular matter.
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably
other benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, have a material effect on the company’s business, financial
product liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a
and environmental matters. These actions may be commenced number of variables, including: the timing and amount of such
by a number of different parties, including competitors, clients, losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies;
current or former employees, government and regulatory the significance of the impact any such losses, damages or
agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements;
which the company does business. Some of the actions to which and the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter
the company is party may involve particularly complex technical that may give rise to additional factors. While the company
issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the will continue to defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the
laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. company’s business, financial condition, results of operations
or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by the
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, resolution of one or more of these matters.
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such involving the company.
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 in
state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM).
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP
of material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition,
company also discloses matters based on its consideration of interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to
other matters and qualitative factors, including the experience the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of
of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On
employee relations considerations. September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection,
and all proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010.
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this The jury found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare
time that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated
example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and
of the company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to Sequent for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30,
the remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district
discussed in this note, except as specifically discussed herein, court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June
the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably 2013, the Federal Court in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen
possible losses or range of losses, including losses in excess the SCO v. IBM case. In February 2016, the Federal Court ruled in
of amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, favor of IBM on all of SCO’s remaining claims, and SCO appealed.
suits, investigations and proceedings are inherently uncertain, On October 30, 2017, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed
and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these the dismissal of all but one of SCO’s remaining claims, which was
matters. It is the company’s experience that damage amounts remanded to the Federal Court in Utah.
claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to
possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful indicators

===== PAGE 121 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf (including to early retirement policy) would not require such
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued consultation. IBM UK appealed both the breach and remedies
one another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the judgments. In August 2017, the Appeal Court reversed the High
modernization of social service program processing in Indiana. Court, holding that IBM UK was not in breach of its implied duties
After six weeks of trial, on July 18, 2012, the Indiana Superior of good faith and that the changes made to the plans were lawful.
Court in Marion County rejected the State’s claims in their The time to appeal has expired and the Appeal Court judgment
entirety and awarded IBM $52 million plus interest and costs. is final. In addition, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 290
On February 13, 2014, the Indiana Court of Appeals reversed individual actions brought since early 2010 by participants of the
portions of the trial judge’s findings, found IBM in material breach, defined benefits plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which
and ordered the case remanded to the trial judge to determine allege constructive dismissal and age discrimination, are pending
the State’s damages, if any. The Indiana Court of Appeals also before the Employment Tribunal in Southampton UK.
affirmed approximately $50 million of the trial court’s award
of damages to IBM. On March 22, 2016, the Indiana Supreme In early 2012, IBM notified the SEC of an investigation by the
Court affirmed the outcome of the Indiana Court of Appeals and Polish Central Anti-Corruption Bureau involving allegations of
remanded the case to the Indiana Superior Court. On August 7, illegal activity by a former IBM Poland employee in connection
2017, the Indiana Superior Court awarded the State $128 million, with sales to the Polish government. IBM cooperated with the SEC
which it then offset against IBM’s previously affirmed award of and Polish authorities in this matter. In April 2013, IBM learned
$50 million, resulting in a $78 million award to the State, plus that the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) was also investigating
interest. IBM appealed to the Indiana Court of Appeals and the allegations related to the Poland matter, as well as allegations
matter remains pending. relating to transactions in Argentina, Bangladesh and Ukraine.
The DOJ was seeking information regarding the company’s
On March 9, 2017, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s global Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977 (FCPA) compliance
Department of Labor and Industry sued IBM in Pennsylvania program and its public sector business. The company cooperated
state court regarding a 2006 contract for the development of with the DOJ in this matter. In June 2017, the DOJ and the SEC
a custom software system to manage the Commonwealth’s each informed IBM that based on the information to date, they
unemployment insurance benefits programs. The matter is closed their respective investigations into these matters without
pending in a Pennsylvania court. pursuing any enforcement action against the company.
On October 29, 2013, Bridgestone Americas, Inc. (Bridgestone) In May 2015, a putative class action was commenced in the
sued IBM regarding a 2009 contract for the implementation of United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
an SAP-based, enterprise-wide order management system. IBM related to the company’s October 2014 announcement that it
counterclaimed against Bridgestone and its parent, Bridgestone was divesting its global commercial semiconductor technology
Corp. The case is pending in the Middle District of Tennessee. business, alleging violations of the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (“ERISA”). Management’s Retirement
On April 16, 2014, Iusacell SA de C.V. (Iusacell) sued IBM, Plans Committee and three current or former IBM executives are
claiming that IBM made fraudulent misrepresentations that named as defendants. On September 29, 2017, the Court granted
induced Iusacell to enter into an agreement with IBM Mexico. the defendants’ motion to dismiss the first amended complaint.
Iusacell claimed damages for lost profits. Iusacell’s complaint Plaintiffs have filed a notice of appeal to the Second Circuit Court
related to a contractual dispute in Mexico, which was the subject of Appeals and the matter remains pending.
of a pending arbitration proceeding in Mexico initiated by IBM
Mexico against Iusacell for breach of the underlying agreement. In August 2015, IBM learned that the SEC is conducting an
On August 31, 2017, the parties entered into an agreement investigation relating to revenue recognition with respect to the
releasing all claims against each other, resolving both the lawsuit accounting treatment of certain transactions in the U.S., UK and
and the arbitration proceeding. Ireland. The company is cooperating with the SEC in this matter.
IBM UK initiated legal proceedings in May 2010 before the The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
High Court in London against the IBM UK Pensions Trust (the brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under
UK Trust) and two representative beneficiaries of the UK Trust the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
membership. IBM UK sought a declaration that it acted lawfully and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws
both in notifying the Trustee of the UK Trust that it was closing its similar to CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible
UK defined benefit plans to future accruals for most participants parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of
and in implementing the company’s new retirement policy. In fault or ownership of sites. The company is also conducting
April 2014, the High Court acknowledged that the changes made environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at or
to its UK defined benefit plans were within IBM’s discretion, in the vicinity of several current or former operating sites globally
but ruled that IBM breached its implied duty of good faith both pursuant to permits, administrative orders or agreements with
in implementing these changes and in the manner in which it country, state or local environmental agencies, and is involved
consulted with employees. Proceedings to determine remedies in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or former
were held in July 2014, and in February 2015 the High Court held operating sites.
that for IBM to make changes to accruals under the plan would
require a new consultation of the participants, but other changes

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and NOTE N. TAXES
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with
($ in millions)
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax Income from continuing
operations before
litigation matters. The total potential amount related to all these
income taxes
matters for all applicable years is approximately $1.0 billion. The
U.S. operations $ 560 $ 3,650 $ 5,915
company believes it will prevail on these matters and that this
amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability. Non-U.S. operations 10,840 8,680 10,030
Total income from
Commitments continuing operations
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities before income taxes $11,400 $12,330 $15,945
include unused amounts of $8,111 million and $6,542 million at
December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. A portion of these
The income from continuing operations provision for income
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to
taxes by geographic operations is as follows:
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company
has committed to provide future financing to its clients in
($ in millions)
connection with client purchase agreements for approximately
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
$3,569 million and $2,463 million at December 31, 2017 and
U.S. operations $2,923 $ 38 $ 849
2016, respectively.
Non-U.S. operations 2,719 411 1,732
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor Total continuing operations
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of provision for income taxes $5,642 $449 $2,581
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following
is a description of arrangements in which the company is the
The components of the income from continuing operations
guarantor.
provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows:
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant
($ in millions)
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in
the context of contracts entered into by the company, under U.S. federal
which the company customarily agrees to hold the other party Current $2,388 $ 186 $ (321)
harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations Deferred 77 (746) 553
and covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold, $2,465 $ (560) $ 232
certain IP rights, specified environmental matters, third-party
U.S. state and local
performance of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain
Current $ 55 $ 244 $ 128
income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by
Deferred 28 (44) 116
the company is conditioned on the other party making a claim
pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract, $ 83 $ 200 $ 244
the procedures of which typically allow the company to challenge Non-U.S.
the other party’s claims. While typically indemnification Current $3,891 $ 988 $2,101
provisions do not include a contractual maximum on the Deferred (797) (179) 4
company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these
$3,094 $ 809 $2,105
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of
Total continuing operations
claim, and in some instances, the company may have recourse
provision for income taxes $5,642 $ 449 $2,581
against third parties for certain payments made by the company.
Discontinued operations
provision for income taxes (3) (2) (117)
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
Provision for social security,
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
real estate, personal
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique
property and other taxes 3,434 3,417 3,497
facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
Total taxes included
Historically, payments made by the company under these
in net income $9,073 $3,864 $5,961
agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s
business, financial condition or results of operations.
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under
these financial guarantees was $19 million and $34 million at
December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. The fair value of the
guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial
Position was immaterial.

===== PAGE 123 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the Intangible Low-Taxed Income” provisions, further refinement
company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations is of the company’s calculations, additional guidance that may be
as follows: issued by the U.S. government, among other items. As these
various factors are finalized, any change will be recorded as an
adjustment to the provision for, or benefit from, income taxes in
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
the period the amounts are determined, not to exceed 12 months
Statutory rate 35% 35% 35%
from the date of U.S. tax reform enactment.
U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act 48 — —
Foreign tax differential (26) (21) (17) In late January 2018, the U.S. Treasury and Internal Revenue
Intra-entity transfers (5) — — Service issued guidelines, which are expected to result in an
Domestic incentives (2) (1) (2) additional charge in the first quarter of 2018, estimated at
State and local 1 1 1 approximately $110 million.
Japan resolution — (10) —
The 2017 continuing operations effective tax rate increased
Other (2) 0 (1)
45.8 points from 2016 driven by: the tax charge related to the
Effective rate 49% 4% 16%
impact of U.S. tax reform described above (48.0 points), the
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes. favorable resolution of the longstanding tax matter in Japan
in 2016 (9.5 points) and an increase in the year-to-year tax
The significant components reflected within the tax rate charges related to intercompany payments (1.5 points). These
reconciliation labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the impacts were partially offset by an increased benefit year to
effects of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than year in the utilization of foreign tax credits (5.4 points), a tax
the U.S. statutory rate, foreign export incentives, the U.S. tax benefit related to an intra-entity asset transfer in the first
impacts of non-U.S. earnings repatriation and any net impacts quarter of 2017 (5.1 points), a benefit due to the tax write down
of intercompany transactions. These items also reflect audit of an intercompany investment in the fourth quarter of 2017
settlements, excluding the 2016 Japan resolution, or changes (1.7 points), and a benefit due to the geographic mix of pre-tax
in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated with each earnings (1.0 points).
of these items.
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was liabilities was a benefit of $270 million driven by U.S. tax reform
enacted. U.S. tax reform introduced many changes, including and was included in the one-time charge.
lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to 21 percent, changes in
incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base erosion and significant Deferred Tax Assets
changes in the taxation of international income, including
($ in millions)
provisions which allow for the repatriation of foreign earnings
At December 31: 2017 2016
without U.S. tax. The enactment of U.S. tax reform resulted in a
Retirement benefits $3,477 $ 4,671
provisional charge of $5,475 million to tax expense in the fourth-
quarter and year-ended December 31, 2017. This charge was the Share-based and other compensation 646 1,132
result of the one-time U.S. transition tax and any foreign tax costs Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 718 1,676
on undistributed foreign earnings, as well as the remeasurement Deferred income 605 741
of deferred tax balances to the new U.S. Federal tax rate. Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 1,024 816
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 395 473
The net charge related to U.S. tax reform is based on the
Depreciation 293 270
company’s estimates as of December 31, 2017. All components
Accruals 387 624
of the provisional charge of $5,475 million are based on the
company’s estimates as of December 31, 2017. Specifically, the Intangible assets 585 —
transition tax, any foreign tax costs as well as the remeasurement Other 1,396 1,503
of deferred tax balances are provisional and have been calculated Gross deferred tax assets 9,526 11,906
based on existing tax law and the best information available as Less: valuation allowance 1,004 916
of the date of estimate. The final impact of U.S. tax reform may
Net deferred tax assets $8,522 $10,990
differ, possibly materially, due to factors such as changes in
interpretations and assumptions that the company has made
in its assessment, conclusion of the effects of the “Global

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Deferred Tax Liabilities The liability at December 31, 2017 of $7,031 million can be
reduced by $967 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with
($ in millions)
timing adjustments, U.S. tax credits, potential transfer pricing
At December 31: 2017 2016
adjustments, and state income taxes. The net amount of $6,064
Depreciation $ 641 $ 856
million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s
Retirement benefits 483 406 effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2016 and
Goodwill and intangible assets 1,226 1,800 2015 were $2,965 million and $3,724 million, respectively.
Leases 584 651
Software development costs 360 672 Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are
included in income tax expense. During the year ended
Deferred transition costs 254 351
December 31, 2017, the company recognized $174 million in
Other 658 1,455
interest expense and penalties; in 2016, the company recognized
Gross deferred tax liabilities $4,206 $6,191
$62 million in interest expense and penalties; and, in 2015,
the company recognized $141 million in interest expense and
penalties. The company has $799 million for the payment of
For financial reporting purposes, the company has foreign and
interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2017, and had
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $507
$625 million accrued at December 31, 2016.
million, as well as foreign and domestic credit carryforwards
of $1,235 million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably
available for at least two years and the majority are available for
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
10 years or more.
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential
decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is associated
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2017, 2016 and
with the anticipated resolution of the company’s U.S. income
2015 were $1,004 million, $916 million and $740 million,
tax audit for 2013 and 2014, as well as various non-U.S. audits.
respectively. The amounts principally apply to certain foreign,
The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits at
state and local loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of
December 31, 2017 could be reduced by $1,062 million.
management, it is more likely than not that these assets will not
be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to
The company is subject to taxation in the U.S. and various state
these carryforwards are realized in the future, the reduction in
and foreign jurisdictions. With respect to major U.S. state and
the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense.
foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer
subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2013. With limited
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31,
exception, the company is no longer subject to income tax
2017 increased by $3,291 million in 2017 to $7,031 million.
examination of its U.S. federal tax return for years prior to 2013.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of
The open years contain matters that could be subject to differing
unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
interpretations of applicable tax laws and regulations related to
the amount and/or timing of income, deductions and tax credits.
($ in millions)
Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the
2017 2016 2015
company believes that adequate amounts of tax and interest have
Balance at January 1 $3,740 $ 4,574 $ 5,104
been provided for any significant adjustments that are expected
Additions based on tax to result for these years.
positions related to the
current year 3,029 560 464
In the fourth quarter of 2013, the company received a draft tax
Additions for tax positions
assessment notice for approximately $866 million (approximately
of prior years 803 334 569
$839 million at 2017 year-end currency rates) from the Indian
Reductions for tax positions Tax Authorities for 2009. In July 2016, the Karnataka High
of prior years (including
Court in Bangalore set aside this assessment by way of court
impacts due to a lapse in
order and the company reached a mutual agreement with the
statute) (367) (1,443) (1,348)
Income Tax Department for a new assessment. On January 2,
Settlements (174) (285) (215)
2018, the Income Tax Department issued the new 2009 draft
Balance at December 31 $7,031 $ 3,740 $ 4,574 tax assessment for approximately $330 million. The revised draft
tax assessment is in line with prior and future tax assessments
and the company is confident that it will ultimately prevail on the
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
matters raised in the assessment. At December 31, 2017, the
and prior years are primarily attributable to U.S. tax issues, as
company has recorded $585 million as prepaid income taxes
well as non-U.S. issues, certain tax incentives and credits and
in India. A significant portion of this balance represents cash
state issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized
tax deposits paid over time to protect the company’s right to
tax benefits for tax positions of prior years are primarily
appeal various income tax assessments made by the Indian Tax
attributable to non-U.S. audits and impacts due to lapses in
Authorities. The company believes it will prevail on these matters.
statutes of limitation.

===== PAGE 125 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In the first quarter of 2016, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service NOTE O. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for RD&E expense was $5,787 million in 2017, $5,751 million in
2013 and 2014. The company anticipates that this audit will be 2016 and $5,247 million in 2015. In addition, RD&E expense
substantially completed in the first quarter of 2018. included in discontinued operations was $1 million in 2016 and
$197 million in 2015.
Included in consolidated retained earnings at December 31,
2017 are undistributed after-tax earnings from non-U.S. The company incurred total expense of $5,367 million, $5,421
subsidiaries, as well as a provisional amount of U.S. income taxes million and $5,178 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively,
and foreign distribution taxes associated with the repatriation of for scientific research and the application of scientific advances
these earnings. to the development of new and improved products and their uses,
as well as services and their application. Within these amounts,
software-related expense was $3,275 million, $3,470 million and
$3,064 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
Expense for product-related engineering was $420 million,
$332 million and $267 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively.
NOTE P. EARNINGS PER SHARE OF COMMON STOCK
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share
calculations are based
Basic 932,828,295 955,422,530 978,744,523
Add — incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 3,094,373 2,416,940 3,037,001
Add — incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 1,462,957 874,626 918,744
Assuming dilution 937,385,625 958,714,097 982,700,267
Income from continuing operations $5,758 $11,881 $13,364
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax (5) (9) (174)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $5,753 $11,872 $13,190
Income from continuing operations $5,758 $11,881 $13,364
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares (2) 0 (1)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings
per share is calculated $5,756 $11,881 $13,363
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic
and diluted earnings per share is calculated (5) (9 ) (174 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $5,752 $11,872 $13,189
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 6.14 $ 12.39 $ 13.60
Discontinued operations 0.00 (0.01) (0.18)
Total $ 6.14 $ 12.38 $ 13.42
Basic
Continuing operations $ 6.17 $ 12.44 $ 13.66
Discontinued operations 0.00 (0.01) (0.18)
Total $ 6.17 $ 12.43 $ 13.48
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 209,294 common exercise price of the options was greater than the average market
shares in 2017, 405,552 common shares in 2016 and 41,380 price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the
common shares in 2015 were outstanding, but were not included effect would have been antidilutive.
in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE Q. RENTAL EXPENSE AND LEASE COMMITMENTS
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and rentals are included in the determination of rental expense as
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum rental
$1,821 million in 2017, $1,508 million in 2016 and $1,474 million commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related
in 2015. Within these amounts, rental expense reflected in to vacant space associated with workforce transformation,
discontinued operations was $29 million in 2015. Rental expense sublease income commitments and capital lease commitments.
in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is These amounts reflect activities primarily related to office space,
recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent data centers, equipment and vehicles.
($ in millions)
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Beyond 2022
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,614 $1,453 $1,143 $829 $633 $896
Vacant space $ 32 $ 21 $ 15 $ 11 $ 7 $ 2
Sublease income commitments $ 13 $ 7 $ 4 $ 2 $ 2 $ —
Capital lease commitments $ 3 $ 2 $ 2 $ 2 $ 1 $ —
NOTE R. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION Incentive Awards
The following table presents total stock-based compensation Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under
cost included in income from continuing operations. the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans
(the “Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive
($ in millions) Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 Board of Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under
Cost $ 91 $ 88 $ 100 the Plans principally include restricted stock units, performance
share units, stock options or any combination thereof.
Selling, general and
administrative 384 401 322
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under
Research, development
the company’s existing Plans was 273 million at December 31,
and engineering 59 55 51
2017. In addition, certain incentive awards granted under
Other (income) and expense* — — (6)
previous plans, if and when those awards were canceled, could
Pre-tax stock-based
be reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2
compensation cost 534 544 468
million additional shares were considered authorized to be issued
Income tax benefits (131) (179) (156)
under the company’s existing Plans as of December 31, 2017.
Net stock-based There were 104.1 million unused shares available to be granted
compensation cost $ 403 $ 364 $ 312 under the Plans as of December 31, 2017.
* Reflects the one-time effects related to divestitures.
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all
The implementation of the new FASB guidance for share-based awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The awards
payment transactions resulted in an immaterial impact to income approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant,
tax benefits for the year ended December 31, 2017. the number of options or the value of the award, the exercise
price or formula for determining the exercise price and the
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested date of grant. All awards for senior management are approved
awards at December 31, 2017 and 2016 was $851 million and by the Committee. All awards for employees other than senior
$934 million, respectively. The amount at December 31, 2017 management are approved by senior management pursuant to
is expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee,
approximately 2.6 years. and the grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed
periodically with the Committee. Awards that are given as part
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation of annual total compensation for senior management and
cost at December 31, 2017, 2016, and 2015. other employees are made on specific cycle dates scheduled
in advance. With respect to awards given in connection with
promotions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval
of such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date
of the promotion or the date of hire.
Stock Awards
Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units
(RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or
Performance Share Units (PSUs).

===== PAGE 127 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
RSUs
2017 2016 2015
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $147 8,899,092 $159 7,527,341 $171 7,734,277
RSUs granted 137 3,540,949 140 3,985,870 143 4,230,186
RSUs released 153 (3,032,531) 174 (1,860,660) 164 (3,567,495)
RSUs canceled/forfeited 147 (852,247) 158 (753,459) 167 (869,627)
Balance at December 31 $141 8,555,263 $147 8,899,092 $159 7,527,341
PSUs
2017 2016 2015
Weighted- Weighted- Weighted-
Average Number Average Number Average Number
Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units Grant Price of Units
Balance at January 1 $155 2,874,758 $173 2,928,932 $185 3,140,707
PSUs granted at target 137 824,875 140 990,336 153 1,137,242
Performance adjustments* 175 (623,245) 194 (387,457) 185 (168,055)
PSUs released 175 (293,236) 194 (419,759) 185 (840,552)
PSUs canceled/forfeited 144 (133,839) 174 (237,294) 184 (340,410)
Balance at December 31** $144 2,649,313 $155 2,874,758 $173 2,928,932
* Represents the change in shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics were above or below specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares
issued will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically received by the employee depends on the company’s
over a one- to five-year period. For RSUs, dividend equivalents performance against specified targets and typically vest over
are not paid. The fair value of such RSUs is determined and fixed a three-year period. For PSUs, dividend equivalents are not
on the grant date based on the company’s stock price adjusted paid. The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date,
for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of
dividend equivalents, and assumes that performance targets will
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at be achieved. Over the performance period, the number of shares
December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 is the same as the period of stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward
over which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, based upon the probability of achievement of performance
which is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted targets. The ultimate number of shares issued and the related
during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was compensation cost recognized as expense will be based on a
$484 million, $557 million and $606 million, respectively. The comparison of the final performance metrics to the specified
total fair value of RSUs vested and released during the years targets. The fair value of PSUs granted at target during the years
ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $463 million, ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $113 million,
$323 million and $583 million, respectively. As of December 31, $138 million and $174 million, respectively. Total fair value of
2017, 2016 and 2015, there was $763 million, $814 million and PSUs vested and released during the years ended December 31,
$800 million, respectively, of unrecognized compensation cost 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $51 million, $81 million and $156
related to non-vested RSUs. The company received no cash from million, respectively.
employees as a result of employee vesting and release of RSUs
for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015. In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs,
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 were $180 million, $118
million and $228 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Stock Options
For the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2015, the company The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the
did not grant stock options. For the year ended December 31, date of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key
2016, the company made one grant of 1.5 million premium- inputs and assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock
priced stock options. The option award was granted with a options include the grant price of the award, the expected option
three-year cliff vesting period and a 10-year contractual term. term, volatility of the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the
The award’s cost of $12 million is recognized ratably over the company’s dividend yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended
three-year vesting period. to predict actual future events or the value ultimately realized by
employees who receive equity awards, and subsequent events
are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original estimates
of fair value made by the company.
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015.
2017 2016 2015
Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of Weighted- Number of
Average Shares Average Shares Average Shares
Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1 $137 1,613,923 $ 94 479,774 $ 97 1,750,949
Options granted — — 140 1,500,000 — —
Options exercised 103 (106,132) 91 (361,088) 98 (1,214,109)
Options canceled/expired 103 (7,791) 86 (4,763) 100 (57,066)
Balance at December 31 $140 1,500,000 $137 1,613,923 $ 94 479,774
Exercisable at December 31 $ — — $103 113,923 $ 94 479,774
The shares under option at December 31, 2017 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding
Weighted-Average
Weighted- Number of Aggregate Remaining
Average Shares Intrinsic Contractual Life
Exercise Price Range Exercise Price Under Option Value (in Years)
$129–$154 $140 1,500,000 $39,236,250 8.1
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $7 million, with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with
$20 million and $74 million, respectively. The total cash treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2017
received from employees as a result of employee stock option and 2016 were approximately 1,307 million and 1,279 million
exercises for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and shares, respectively.
2015 was approximately $11 million, $33 million and $119
million, respectively. In connection with these exercises, the tax
benefits realized by the company for the years ended December
31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 were $2 million, $7 million and $26
million, respectively.

===== PAGE 129 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisitions U.S. Plans
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an Defined Benefit Pension Plans
additional 0.3 million options outstanding at December 31, 2017, IBM Personal Pension Plan
as a result of the company’s conversion of stock-based awards IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees
previously granted by the acquired entities. The weighted- hired prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined
average exercise price of these awards was $42 per share. benefit pension benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP).
The PPP has two plans, a tax qualified plan (Qualified PPP) and a
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan non-tax qualified plan (Excess PPP). The Qualified PPP is funded
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock by company contributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants held for the sole benefit of participants and beneficiaries. The
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides benefits in excess of
a 5 percent discount off the average market price on the day IRS limitations for qualified plans.
of purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of
eligible compensation. Eligible compensation includes any Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using
compensation received by the employee during the year. The benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first
ESPP provides for offering periods during which shares may be method uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines
purchased and continues as long as shares remain available benefits based on salary, years of service, mortality and other
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the participant-specific factors. The second method is a cash
Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted balance formula that calculates benefits using a percentage of
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one employees’ annual salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased
Employees purchased 1.0 million, 1.2 million and 1.3 million December 31, 2007 for all participants.
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31,
2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively. Cash dividends declared U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
and paid by the company on its common stock also include cash The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental
dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Executive Retention Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan,
Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can be which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives
reinvested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is based on average earnings, years of service and age at
considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average termination of employment.
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted
earnings per share. Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31,
2007 for all participants.
In July 2014, the “2014 ESPP Reserve” became effective and
25 million additional shares of authorized common stock were Defined Contribution Plans
reserved and approved for issuance. The 2014 ESPP provides for IBM 401(k) Plus Plan
semi-annual offerings commencing July 1, 2014, and continuing U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to
as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified
terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. defined contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal
Revenue Code. Under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible
Approximately 20.8 million, 21.8 million and 23.1 million shares employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, generally up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those
2017, 2016 and 2015, respectively. hired prior to January 1, 2005, and, generally up to 5 percent
of eligible compensation for those hired on or after January 1,
2005. In addition, eligible employees generally receive automatic
NOTE S. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of
Description of Plans
eligible compensation based on their eligibility to participate in
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined
the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees generally receive
contribution plans that cover eligible regular employees, a
automatic contributions and matching contributions after the
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives
completion of one year of service.
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily
consisting of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible
retirees and dependents.

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
All contributions, including the company match, are made in Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
cash and invested in accordance with participants’ investment U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan
elections. There are no minimum amounts that must be invested The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension
in company stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring postretirement benefit plan that provides medical and dental
amounts out of company stock to another investment choice, benefits to eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as
other than excessive trading rules applicable to such investments. well as life insurance for eligible U.S. retirees. Benefits provided
Matching and automatic contributions are made once annually at vary based on plan design formulas and eligibility requirements.
the end of the year. In order to receive such contributions each Under all the plan arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the
year, a participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan company for these benefits.
year. However, matching and auto contributions may be made for
certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15, Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are
including for example, if the participant has completed certain not eligible for company-subsidized nonpension postretirement
service and/or age requirements at separation. The company’s benefits.
matching contributions vest immediately and participants are
always fully vested in their own contributions. Non-U.S. Plans
Certain subsidiaries and branches outside the United States
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan sponsor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that
The IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 401(k)) is an unfunded, cover eligible regular employees. The company deposits funds
nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees whose eligible under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities
compensation is expected to exceed the IRS compensation limit under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans.
for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the Excess 401(k). Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based
The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide benefits that either on years of service and the employee’s compensation
would be provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if (generally during a fixed number of years immediately before
the compensation limits did not apply. retirement) or on annual credits. The range of assumptions
that are used for the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping different economic environments within the various countries.
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants.
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries
accounts in investments which mirror the primary investment sponsor nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide
options available under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in medical and dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and
the Excess 401(k) are also eligible to receive company match eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for certain eligible
and automatic contributions (at the same rate as under the non-U.S. retirees. However, most non-U.S. retirees are covered
401(k) Plus Plan) on eligible compensation deferred into the by local government sponsored and administered programs.
Excess 401(k) and on compensation earned in excess of the
Internal Revenue Code pay limit once they have completed
one year of service. Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k),
including company contributions are recorded as liabilities
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Matching
and automatic contributions are made once annually at the end
of the year. In order to receive such contributions each year, a
participant must be employed on December 15 of the plan year.
However, matching and auto contributions may be made for
certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15,
including for example, if the participant has completed certain
service and/or age requirements at separation.

===== PAGE 131 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the
Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Defined benefit pension plans $ 237 $(334) $(284) $1,315 $1,039 $1,421 $1,552 $ 705 $1,137
Retention Plan 16 17 23 — — — 16 17 23
Total defined benefit pension
plans (income)/cost $ 253 $(317) $(261) $1,315 $1,039 $1,421 $1,568 $ 722 $1,160
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and
non-U.S. plans $ 616 $626 $ 676 $ 404 $ 420 $ 442 $1,020 $1,046 $1,117
Excess 401(k) 26 24 21 — — — 26 24 21
Total defined contribution
plans cost $ 643 $ 650 $ 697 $ 404 $ 420 $ 442 $1,046 $1,070 $1,138
Nonpension postretirement
benefit plans cost $ 180 $ 195 $ 218 $ 62 $ 16 $ 55 $ 242 $ 211 $ 273
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $1,076 $ 527 $ 654 $1,781 $1,475 $1,918 $2,857 $2,003 $2,572
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement
benefit plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $50,602 $50,403 $52,694 $51,405 $ 2,092 $ 1,002
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,532 $ 1,509 $ — $ — $ (1,532) $ (1,509)
Retention Plan 310 307 — — (310) (307)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 4,184 4,470 18 26 (4,165) (4,444)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 6,026 $ 6,286 $ 18 $ 26 $ (6,007) $ (6,260)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $19,537 $17,614 $22,088 $19,647 $ 2,551 $ 2,032
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $19,537 $17,614 $22,088 $19,647 $ 2,551 $ 2,032
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans $23,046 $21,447 $18,711 $16,374 $ (4,336) $ (5,074)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 6,527 5,919 — — (6,527) (5,919)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 732 692 70 71 (663) (622)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $30,306 $28,059 $18,780 $16,445 $(11,526) $(11,614)
Total overfunded plans $70,139 $68,017 $74,782 $71,051 $ 4,643 $ 3,034
Total underfunded plans $36,332 $34,344 $18,799 $16,470 $(17,533) $(17,874)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability)
amounts as compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2017, the company’s qualified defined benefit PPP and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans
pension plans worldwide were 100 percent funded compared to and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-
the benefit obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 104 percent U.S. Plans consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s
funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under
defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 92 percent funded. U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement
Benefit Plan.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information The tables below present the components of net periodic
The following tables through page 134 represent financial (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized
information for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined
excluding defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension contribution plans.
plans under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 410 $ 420 $ 454
Interest cost 1,913 2,048 2,028 837 1,035 1,075
Expected return on plan assets (3,014) (3,689) (3,953) (1,325) (1,867) (1,919)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 16 10 10 (97) (106) (98)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,337 1,314 1,654 1,507 1,408 1,581
Curtailments and settlements — — — 19 22 35
Multi-employer plans/other costs* — — — (36) 126 293
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ 253 $ (317) $ (261) $ 1,315 $ 1,039 $ 1,421
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Service cost $ 14 $ 17 $ 24 $ 6 $ 5 $ 7
Interest cost 154 165 163 57 51 50
Expected return on plan assets 0 0 0 (7) (6) (7)
Amortization of transition assets — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (7) (7) (7) 0 (5) (5)
Recognized actuarial losses 20 20 39 7 9 10
Curtailments and settlements — — — 0 (38) 0
Total net periodic cost $180 $195 $218 $62 $ 16 $55
* Multi-employer plans costs were $40 million, $43 million and $40 million for 2017, 2016, and 2015, respectively. The non-U.S. plans amounts
include a gain of $91 million in 2017 related to the IBM UK litigation and retirement-related obligations of $56 million and $233 million related to the
IBM Spain pension litigation for 2016, and 2015, respectively.

===== PAGE 133 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $52,218 $53,120 $44,981 $44,717 $ 4,470 $ 4,652 $ 692 $ 618
Service cost — — 410 420 14 17 6 5
Interest cost 1,913 2,048 837 1,035 154 165 57 51
Plan participants’ contributions — — 28 30 54 50 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — 24 (63) 0 0 0 0
Actuarial losses/(gains) 1,895 602 520 3,217 (98) 16 (3) 16
Benefits paid from trust (3,460) (3,430) (1,865) (1,792) (385) (400) (6) (5)
Direct benefit payments (123) (123) (384) (381) (24) (30) (30) (27)
Foreign exchange impact — — 4,657 (2,222) — — 18 35
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — (96) 20 — — (1) 0
Benefit obligation at December 31 $52,444 $52,218 $49,111 $44,981 $ 4,184 $ 4,470 $ 732 $ 692
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $51,405 $51,716 $36,020 $35,748 $ 26 $ 71 $ 71 $ 59
Actual return on plan assets 4,749 3,118 2,583 3,828 0 0 6 8
Employer contributions — — 368 464 394 305 0 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (28) (73) 0 0 0 0
Plan participants’ contributions — — 28 30 54 50 — —
Benefits paid from trust (3,460) (3,430) (1,865) (1,792) (385) (400) (6) (5)
Foreign exchange impact — — 3,694 (2,175) — — (1) 9
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — (2)* (10)* (70) — (1) 0
Fair value of plan assets
at December 31 $52,694 $51,405 $40,798 $36,020 $ 18 $ 26 $ 70 $ 71
Funded status at December 31 $ 250 $ (814) $ (8,312) $ (8,960) $(4,165) $(4,444) $(663) $(622)
Accumulated benefit obligation** $52,444 $52,218 $47,974 $44,514 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to government rulings in 2011 and 2013 allowing certain previously restricted plan
assets to be returned to IBM. Return of assets to IBM over a three-year period began June 2011 and September 2013 respectively, with
approximately $23 million returned in 2016. There were no assets returned during 2017. The remaining surplus in Brazil at December 31, 2017 is
excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
** Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A — Not applicable

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016
Prepaid pension assets $ 2,092 $ 1,002 $ 2,551 $ 2,032 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities —
compensation and benefits (120) (118) (323) (303) (353) (368) (17) (15)
Noncurrent liabilities — retirement
and nonpension postretirement
benefit obligations (1,722) (1,698) (10,541) (10,689) (3,812) (4,076) (646) (607)
Funded status — net $ 250 $ (814) $ (8,312) $ (8,960) $(4,165) $(4,444) $(663) $(622)
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in
OCI and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the
retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016 2017 2016
Net loss at January 1 $19,222 $19,363 $20,544 $20,724 $605 $609 $154 $128
Current period loss/(gain) 159 1,173 (740) 1,251 (99) 16 (2) 14
Curtailments and settlements — — (22) (22) — — 0 20
Amortization of net loss included in
net periodic (income)/cost (1,337) (1,314) (1,507) (1,408) (20) (20) (7) (9)
Net loss at December 31 $18,045 $19,222 $18,275 $20,544 $486 $605 $145 $154
Prior service costs/(credits)
at January 1 $ 90 $ 101 $ (188) $ (294) $ 37 $ 30 $ 1 $ (21)
Curtailments, settlements
and other — — 1 0 — — 2 18
Amortization of prior service
(costs)/credits included in net
periodic (income)/cost (16) (10) 97 106 7 7 0 5
Prior service costs/(credits)
at December 31 $ 74 $ 90 $ (90) $ (188) $ 45 $ 37 $ 3 $ 1
Transition (assets)/liabilities
at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition
assets/(liabilities) included in
net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 0 — — 0 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities
at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in
accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $18,119 $19,313 $18,184 $20,356 $531 $642 $147 $154
* See note L, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.

===== PAGE 135 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from AOCI into net periodic (income)/cost in 2018.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Nonpension Postretirement
Pension Plans Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss $1,538 $1,464 $9 $6
Prior service costs/(credits) 16 (81) (7) 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities — 0 — 0
On March 24, 2014, the Supreme Court of Spain issued a ruling Consolidated Statement of Earnings. As a result of the final Court
against IBM Spain in litigation involving its defined benefit and of Appeal ruling received in August 2017, the company adjusted
defined contribution plans. During the fourth quarter of 2016, an its obligation under the plan. This adjustment resulted in a gain
arbitration ruling related to the defined contribution plan resulted of $91 million for the year ended December 31, 2017, which was
in an additional charge of $56 million. For the years ended recorded in selling, general and administrative expense in the
December 31, 2016 and 2015, the company recorded pre-tax Consolidated Statement of Earnings. This gain is reflected in
retirement-related obligations of $56 million and $233 million, “Non-U.S. Plans — Multi-employer plans/other” in the table on
respectively, in selling, general and administrative expense in page 131. See note M, “Contingencies and Commitments” for
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. There were no pre-tax additional information.
retirement-related obligations for the year ended December 31,
2017. These obligations are reflected in “Non-U.S. Plans — Multi- Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
employer plans/other costs” in the table on page 131. Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
On October 12, 2012, the High Court in London issued a ruling use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years
against IBM United Kingdom Limited and IBM United Kingdom of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of
Holdings Limited, both wholly-owned subsidiaries of the which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
company, in litigation involving one of IBM UK’s defined benefit assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates
plans. As a result of the ruling, the company recorded a pre-tax and mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions,
retirement-related obligation of $162 million in the fourth quarter at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
of 2012 in selling, general and administrative expense in the
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for
retirement-related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Weighted-average assumptions used
to measure net periodic (income)/cost
for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.80% 4.00% 3.70% 1.80% 2.40% 2.34%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets 5.75% 7.00% 7.50% 3.77% 5.53% 5.67%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.45% 2.40% 2.49%
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.40% 3.80% 4.00% 1.76% 1.80% 2.40%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.41% 2.45% 2.40%
N/A — Not applicable

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2017 2016 2015 2017 2016 2015
Weighted-average assumptions used
to measure net periodic cost for the
year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.60% 3.70% 3.40% 8.26% 7.06% 7.51%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 10.47% 9.95% 10.17%
Weighted-average assumptions used to
measure benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.30% 3.60% 3.70% 7.28% 8.26% 7.06%
N/A — Not applicable
Discount Rate Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic
benefit plans accounting reflect the yields available on high- (income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on
quality, fixed-income debt instruments at the measurement plan assets based on the calculated market-related value of
date. For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of plan assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take
high-quality corporate bonds is used to construct a yield curve. into account long-term expectations for future returns and
The cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation the investment policies and strategies as described on page
payments are then matched to the yield curve to derive the 136. These rates of return are developed by the company and
discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where the markets are tested for reasonableness against historical returns. The
for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as well use of expected long-term returns on plan assets may result
developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used in recognized pension income that is greater or less than the
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate corporate actual returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed to
as the benchmark for developing the respective discount rates. approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result
in a pattern of income and cost recognition that more closely
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees.
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/ Differences between actual and expected returns are recognized
cost and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions as a component of net loss or gain in AOCI, which is amortized as
resulted in a decrease in 2017 net periodic income of $64 million, a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives
an increase in 2016 net periodic income of $103 million and a or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending on the plan,
decrease in 2015 net periodic income of $286 million. The provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds provided by
changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase accounting standards. The market-related value of plan assets
in the PBO of $1,962 million and an increase of $998 million for recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically
the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line
in net periodic (income)/cost.
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the
changes in the discount rate assumptions had no material impact For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the expected long-
on net periodic cost for the years ended December 31, 2017, term rate of return on plan assets for the years ended December
2016 and 2015 and resulted in an increase in the APBO of $88 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was 5.75 percent, 7.0 percent and
million and an increase of $33 million at December 31, 2017 and 7.5 percent, respectively. The change in the rate in 2017 resulted
2016, respectively. in a decrease in 2017 net periodic income of $656 million. For the
year ended December 31, 2016, the change in the rate resulted
For all of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, in a decrease in net periodic income of $268 million. For the year
the change in the discount rate assumptions resulted in an ended December 31, 2015, the change in the rate in resulted in
increase in the benefit obligation of approximately $2.5 billion a decrease in net periodic income of $264 million. For 2018, the
at December 31, 2017 and an increase of approximately $4.8 projected long-term rate of return on plan assets is 5.25 percent.
billion at December 31, 2016. The 50 basis point year-to-year decline is primarily driven by a
change in investment strategy.

===== PAGE 137 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
For the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the Plan Assets
company maintains a highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and
timely payments are made. As a result, for the years ended measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of
December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015, the expected long-term valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily
return on plan assets and the actual return on those assets were reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market
not material. transactions.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate Investment Policies and Strategies
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are
company, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet
rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined its future obligations. The precise amount for which these
benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, obligations will be settled depends on future events, including the
2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assumptions are retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants.
based on life expectancy and death rates for different types of The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based
participants. Mortality rates are periodically updated based on on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors
actual experience. In the U.S., the Society of Actuaries released described previously on pages 135 and 136. The Qualified PPP
new mortality tables in 2014 and updated them in 2015, portfolio’s investment strategy balances the requirement to
2016 and 2017. The company utilized these tables in its plan generate returns, using potentially higher yielding assets such
remeasurements at December 31, 2017 and 2016. For the U.S. as equity securities, with the need to control risk in the portfolio
retirement-related plans, the change in mortality assumptions with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks
resulted in a decrease to the plan benefit obligations of $0.3 billion include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity values and
and $0.6 billion at December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to become
underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on contributions
Interest Crediting Rate from the company. To mitigate any potential concentration risk,
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio among
a cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into account
is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth,
(income)/cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for currency and other factors that affect investment returns.
projecting the expected interest rate that participants will earn During 2016 and 2017, the company changed its investment
on the benefits that they are expected to receive in the following strategy, modifying the target allocation primarily by reducing
year and is based on the average from August to October of the equity securities and increasing debt securities. These changes
one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent. were designed to reduce the potential negative impact that
equity markets might have on the funded status of the plan. The
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.6 percent Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 12 percent equity
for the year ended December 31, 2017 from 1.3 percent for the securities, 79 percent fixed-income securities, 4 percent real
year ended December 31, 2016 resulted in a decrease in 2017 estate and 5 percent other investments.
net periodic income of $14 million. The change in the interest
crediting rate to 1.3 percent for the year ended December 31, The assets are managed by professional investment firms and
2016 from 1.1 percent for the year ended December 31, 2015 investment professionals who are employees of the company.
resulted in a decrease in 2016 net periodic income of $7 million. They are bound by investment mandates determined by the
The interest crediting rate of 1.1 percent for the year ended company’s management and are measured against specific
December 31, 2015 was unchanged from December 31, 2014 benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given,
and, therefore, had no impact on 2015 net periodic income. but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer
concentration, investment style and reliance on particular active
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate and passive investment strategies.
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $4,683 million
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2017 invested
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant in private market assets consisting of private equities and private
effect on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of the real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded
plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. The securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $1,845
company assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2018 million in commitments for future investments in private markets
will be 6.5 percent. In addition, the company assumes that the to be made over a number of years. These commitments are
same trend rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next six years. expected to be funded from plan assets.
A one percentage point increase or decrease in the assumed
healthcare cost trend rate would not have had a material effect on Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment
2017, 2016 and 2015 net periodic cost or the benefit obligations objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
as of December 31, 2017 and 2016. strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are
fixed income management, including duration, interest rate
management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
manage currency and commodity strategies.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to in slight differences compared with the strategies previously
those described previously, subject to local regulations. The described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid
weighted-average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan
23 percent equity securities, 62 percent fixed-income securities, and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management,
3 percent real estate and 12 percent other investments, which is credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
consistent with the allocation decisions made by the company’s
management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans
to fixed income is required to manage solvency and funding are underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company
risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure
typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent of timely benefit payments.
members elected by employees and retirees. This can result
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2017. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $2,215 $ 0 $ — $ 2,215 $3,508 $ 0 $ — $ 3,508
Equity mutual funds (2) 108 — — 108 24 — — 24
Fixed-income
Government and related (3) — 19,762 — 19,762 — 10,103 8 10,111
Corporate bonds (4) — 17,864 372 18,236 — 2,000 — 2,000
Mortgage and asset-backed
securities — 619 4 623 — 5 — 5
Fixed-income mutual funds (5) 338 — — 338 86 — — 86
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,366 — 1,366
Cash and short-term investments (6) 100 1,903 — 2,004 221 606 — 827
Real estate — — — — — — 356 356
Derivatives (7) 21 (4) — 17 20 744 — 764
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 60 — — 60
Subtotal 2,782 40,144 376 43,302 3,918 14,824 365 19,107
Investments measured at net asset
value using the NAV practical
expedient (9) — — — 9,537 — — — 21,744
Other (10) — — — (145) — — — (52)
Fair value of plan assets $2,782 $40,144 $376 $52,694 $3,918 $14,824 $365 $40,798
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $14 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $7 million, representing 0.02 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $1 million, representing 0.002 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate
bonds of $1 million representing 0.002 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5) I nvests predominantly in fixed-income securities.
(6) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(9) I nvestments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical e xpedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(10) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.

===== PAGE 139 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $18 The following table presents the company’s defined benefit
million were invested primarily in cash equivalents, categorized pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension December 31, 2016. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP
postretirement benefit plan assets of $70 million, primarily in and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the
Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were company’s subsidiaries.
invested primarily in government and related fixed-income
securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the
fair value hierarchy.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $5,778 $ 1 $ — $ 5,779 $4,080 $ 0 $ — $ 4,080
Equity mutual funds (2) 93 — — 93 35 — — 35
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 14,897 — 14,897 — 7,577 16 7,593
Corporate bonds (4) — 18,063 101 18,164 — 2,045 1 2,045
Mortgage and asset-backed
securities — 652 5 656 — 4 — 4
Fixed-income mutual funds (5) 359 — — 359 22 — — 22
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,137 — 1,137
Cash and short-term investments (6) 55 1,927 — 1,982 294 707 — 1,001
Real estate — — — — — — 294 294
Derivatives (7) 18 20 — 38 43 752 — 796
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 114 — — 114
Subtotal 6,303 35,560 106 41,969 4,589 12,223 310 17,122
Investments measured at net
asset value using the NAV
practical expedient (9) — — — 9,641 — — — 18,946
Other (10) — — — (205) — — — (48)
Fair value of plan assets $6,303 $35,560 $106 $51,405 $4,589 $12,223 $310 $36,020
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $28 million, representing 0.1 percent of the U.S. Plan
assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $15 million, representing 0.04 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $4 million, representing 0.01 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. plans include IBM corporate
bonds of $1 million representing 0.003 percent of the non-U.S. Plan assets.
(5) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(6) Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7) Includes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(9) I nvestments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(10)R epresents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $26 extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested primarily in
million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair government and related fixed-income securities and corporate
value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
plan assets of $71 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser

===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2017 and 2016 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage and
Corporate Asset-Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2017 $101 $ 5 $106
Return on assets held at end of year 12 0 11
Return on assets sold during the year 1 0 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 259 (1) 258
Balance at December 31, 2017 $372 $ 4 $376
($ in millions)
Mortgage and
Corporate Asset-Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2016 $ 2 $10 $ 12
Return on assets held at end of year (3) 0 (2)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 1 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 103 (5) 99
Transfers, net (2) (2) (3)
Balance at December 31, 2016 $101 $ 5 $106
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2017 and 2016 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Real
and Related Bonds Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2017 $16 $ 1 $294 $310
Return on assets held at end of year 2 0 24 26
Return on assets sold during the year (3) 0 (1) (4)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (2) 0 9 7
Transfers, net (6) 0 — (6)
Foreign exchange impact 2 0 30 31
Balance at December 31, 2017 $ 8 $— $356 $365

===== PAGE 141 =====
140 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Government Corporate Private Real
and Related Bonds Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2016 $16 $ 4 $411 $431
Return on assets held at end of year 1 0 (22) (21)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 35 35
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 0 (3) (68) (72)
Transfers, net 0 — — 0
Foreign exchange impact 0 0 (62) (63)
Balance at December 31, 2016 $16 $ 1 $294 $310
Valuation Techniques hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used typically valued using the NAV provided by the administrator of
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the
valuation techniques during 2017 and 2016. value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding.
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the In accordance with FASB guidance, these investments have
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM not been classified in the fair value hierarchy. Refer to note B,
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New “Accounting Changes.”
York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued based
on quoted market prices. These assets are generally classified Contributions
as Level 1. Defined Benefit Pension Plans
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar in applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it
classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing deems appropriate.
price reported on the major market on which the individual
securities are traded. The company contributed $192 million in cash and $176 million
in U.S. Treasury securities to non-U.S. defined benefit pension
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their plans as well as $40 million in cash to multi-employer plans for
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair the year ended December 31, 2017. The contribution of U.S.
value. Short-term investments represent securities with original Treasury securities is considered a non-cash transaction in
maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For the year ended
Level 1 or Level 2. December 31, 2016, the company contributed $169 million in
cash and $295 million in U.S. Treasury securities to non-U.S.
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the defined benefit pension plans as well as $43 million in cash to
absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity multi-employer plans. The cash contributions to multi-employer
and the long-term nature of such assets. These assets are initially plans represent the annual cost included in net periodic (income)/
valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available cost recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The
and relevant market data, including appraisals, to determine company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These impact on the company’s financial statements.
assets are classified as Level 3.
In 2018, the company is not legally required to make any
Exchange-traded derivatives are valued at the closing price contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using PPP during the year.
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including,
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility In 2018, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
and foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
1 or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices. $400 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined
benefit pension plans in the UK, Japan and Spain. This amount
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net generally represents legally mandated minimum contributions.
asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical
expedient. These investments, which include commingled funds,

===== PAGE 142 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial market performance in 2018 could increase the legally contribution in 2017 consisted of U.S. Treasury securities. In
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which 2017, excess cash in the plan of $70 million was subsequently
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. transferred to the Active Employee Medical Trust. The $305
The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally million contribution in 2016 consisted of $80 million in cash and
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors. $225 million in U.S. Treasury securities. The contribution of U.S.
Treasury securities is considered a non-cash transaction in the
Defined Contribution Plans Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
The company contributed $1,020 million and $1,046 million
in cash to the defined contribution plans during the years Expected Benefit Payments
ended December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. In 2018, Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
the company estimates cash contributions to the defined The following table presents the total expected benefit payments
contribution plans to be approximately $1.0 billion. to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2017 and include
The company contributed $394 million and $305 million to the benefits attributable to estimated future compensation
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended increases, where applicable.
December 31, 2017 and 2016, respectively. The $394 million
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2018 $ 3,528 $123 $1,879 $ 338 $ 5,868
2019 3,510 122 1,898 340 5,870
2020 3,581 124 1,913 380 5,997
2021 3,579 125 1,939 418 6,061
2022 3,486 123 1,981 439 6,029
2023–2027 16,673 588 9,936 2,388 29,585
The 2018 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions
Statement of Financial Position. used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2017.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2018 $ 373 $ 6 $ 35 $ 414
2019 382 6 38 426
2020 390 7 40 437
2021 387 7 43 437
2022 372 7 46 425
2023–2027 1,623 37 285 1,945
The 2018 expected benefit payments to nonpension Other Plan Information
postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the The following table presents information for defined benefit
respective plan assets represent a component of compensation pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated excess of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the
Statement of Financial Position. funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans,
see the table on page 132.

===== PAGE 143 =====
142 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
2017 2016
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $31,416 $18,711 $29,182 $16,374
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 27,751 15,607 28,770 16,272
Plans with assets in excess of PBO 70,139 74,782 68,017 71,051
NOTE T. SEGMENT INFORMATION
The company’s major operations consist of five business The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations
segments: Cognitive Solutions, Global Business Services, to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms, Systems and Global a result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of
Financing. The segments represent components of the company the segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage,
for which separate financial information is available that is utilized certain marketing functions and support functions such as
on a regular basis by the chief operating decision maker (the chief Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources
executive officer) in determining how to allocate resources and and Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses
evaluate performance. The segments are determined based are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g.,
on several factors, including client base, homogeneity of headcount. When a clear and measurable driver cannot be
products, technology, delivery channels and similar economic identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis
characteristics. that is consistent with the company’s management system, e.g.,
advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of the
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions segments. A portion of the shared expenses, which are recorded
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s- in net income, are not allocated to the segments. These expenses
length, market-based transfer price. Systems that are used are associated with the elimination of internal transactions and
by Technology Services & Cloud Platforms in outsourcing other miscellaneous items.
engagements are primarily sourced internally from the Systems
segment and software is sourced from various segments. The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations
Software used by Technology Services & Cloud Platforms on of the company’s segments consistent with the management and
external engagements is sourced internally through Cognitive measurement system utilized within the company. Performance
Solutions and the Systems segments. For providing IT measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing
services that are used internally, Technology Services & Cloud operations. These results are used, in part, by the chief operating
Platforms and Global Business Services recover cost, as well decision maker, both in evaluating the performance of, and in
as a reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length allocating resources to, each of the segments.
value of providing the services. They enter into arm’s-length
loans at prices equivalent to market rates with Global Financing
to facilitate the acquisition of equipment and software used
in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are
reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.

===== PAGE 144 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Technology
Global Services &
Cognitive Business Cloud Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Solutions Services Platforms Systems Financing Segments
2017
External revenue $18,453 $16,348 $34,277 $ 8,194 $1,696 $78,968
Internal revenue 2,647 363 657 750 1,471 5,889
Total revenue $21,100 $16,711 $34,934 $ 8,945 $3,168 $84,857
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,817 $ 1,401 $ 4,344 $ 1,135 $1,279 $14,977
Revenue year-to-year change 1.4% (2.3)% (3.1)% 5.7% (9.3)% (1.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 7.3% (19.1)% (7.7)% 21.6% (22.7)% (2.6)%
Pre-tax income margin 32.3% 8.4% 12.4% 12.7% 40.4% 17.6%
2016
External revenue $18,187 $16,700 $35,337 $ 7,714 $1,692 $79,630
Internal revenue 2,630 409 715 750 1,802 6,307
Total revenue $20,817 $17,109 $36,052 $ 8,464 $3,494 $85,936
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 6,352 $ 1,732 $ 4,707 $ 933 $1,656 $15,380
Revenue year-to-year change 3.8% (3.1)% 0.6% (18.0)% (22.0)% (2.7)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (12.3)% (33.4)% (17.0)% (45.8)% (29.9)% (21.5)%
Pre-tax income margin 30.5% 10.1% 13.1% 11.0% 47.4% 17.9%
2015
External revenue $17,841 $17,166 $35,142 $ 9,547 $1,840 $81,535
Internal revenue 2,215 499 698 778 2,637 6,826
Total revenue $20,055 $17,664 $35,840 $10,325 $4,477 $88,361
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 7,245 $ 2,602 $ 5,669 $ 1,722 $2,364 $19,602
Revenue year-to-year change (8.4)% (11.9)% (9.8)% (22.4)% (1.0)% (11.2)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (11.8)% (22.3)% (20.0)% 24.4% 8.0% (11.8)%
Pre-tax income margin 36.1% 14.7% 15.8% 16.7% 52.8% 22.2%

===== PAGE 145 =====
144 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Segment Assets and Other Items
Cognitive Solutions assets are mainly goodwill, acquired
($ in millions)
intangible assets and accounts receivable. Global Business
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
Services assets are primarily goodwill and accounts receivable.
Revenue Technology Services & Cloud Platforms assets are primarily
Total reportable segments $84,857 $85,936 $88,361 goodwill, plant, property and equipment including the assets
Other revenue 171 289 206 associated with the outsourcing business, deferred services
Elimination of internal arrangement transition costs and accounts receivable. Systems
transactions (5,889) (6,307) (6,826) assets are primarily goodwill, manufacturing inventory, and plant,
Total IBM consolidated property and equipment. Global Financing assets are primarily
revenue $79,139 $79,919 $81,741 financing receivables, cash and marketable securities, and fixed
assets under operating leases.
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and
($ in millions)
equipment, several segments may share plant, property and
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership
Pre-tax income from of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated
continuing operations to each user segment. This is consistent with the company’s
Total reportable segments $14,977 $15,380 $19,602 management system and is reflected accordingly in the table on
Amortization of acquired page 145. In those cases, there will not be a precise correlation
intangible assets (945) (998) (677) between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
Acquisition-related charges (52) (5) (26)
Non-operating retirement- Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment
related (costs)/income (1,468) (598) (1,050) are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be
Elimination of internal consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’
transactions (726) (1,160) (1,675) pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax
Unallocated corporate income reflect occupancy charges from the landlord segment
amounts (385) (290) (230) and are not specifically identified by the management reporting
system. Capital expenditures that are reported by each segment
Total pre-tax income from
continuing operations $11,400 $12,330 $15,945 also are consistent with the landlord ownership basis of
asset assignment.
Immaterial Items Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
Investment in Equity Alliances and expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses) associated with the Global Financing business, including the
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and intercompany financing activities discussed on pages 33 and 34,
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the as well as the income from investment in cash and marketable
segments did not have a material effect on the financial position securities. The explanation of the difference between cost of
or the financial results of the segments. financing and interest expense for segment presentation versus
presentation in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is
included on page 48 of the Management Discussion.

===== PAGE 146 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 145
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Technology
Global Services &
Cognitive Business Cloud Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Solutions Services Platforms Systems Financing Segments
2017
Assets $24,829 $8,713 $24,619 $3,898 $41,096 $103,155
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,121 101 2,359 341 267 4,190
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 373 50 2,290 189 364 3,265
Interest income — — — — 1,527 1,527
Interest expense — — — — 381 381
2016
Assets $25,517 $8,628 $24,085 $3,812 $36,492 $ 98,534
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 1,228 104 2,224 375 317 4,248
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 495 55 2,382 453 380 3,764
Interest income — — — — 1,547 1,547
Interest expense — — — — 371 371
2015
Assets $20,017 $8,327 $23,530 $3,967 $36,157 $ 91,999
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles* 921 81 1,944 321 343 3,610
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 448 86 2,619 321 356 3,830
Interest income — — — — 1,720 1,720
Interest expense — — — — 469 469
* Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.

===== PAGE 147 =====
146 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Revenue by Classes of Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar
($ in millions)
classes of products or services within the company’s reportable
At December 31: 2017 2016 2015
segments. Client solutions often include IBM software and
Assets systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution
Total reportable segments $103,155 $ 98,534 $ 91,999 requires it. For each of the segments that include services;
Elimination of internal Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other
transactions (6,272) (5,670) (4,709) product-related services are included as services. For each of
Unallocated amounts these segments, software includes product license charges and
Cash and marketable ongoing subscriptions.
securities 9,900 6,752 6,634
Notes and accounts ($ in millions)
receivable 2,554 2,660 2,333 For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015
Deferred tax assets 4,746 5,078 4,693 Cognitive Solutions
Plant, other property Software $13,598 $13,969 $14,557
and equipment 2,659 2,656 2,650 Services 4,752 4,111 3,175
Pension assets 4,643 3,034 1,734 Systems 103 107 108
Other 3,972 4,425 5,161 Global Business Services
Total IBM consolidated Services $16,004 $16,399 $16,851
assets $125,356 $117,470 $110,495
Software 179 179 164
Systems 165 121 151
Major Clients Technology Services &
Cloud Platforms
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s
total revenue in 2017, 2016 or 2015. Services $23,629 $24,311 $23,947
Maintenance 5,783 5,862 6,085
Geographic Information Software 3,610 3,818 3,907
The following provides information for those countries that are Systems 1,254 1,346 1,203
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Systems
Servers $ 3,993 $ 3,567 $ 5,032
Revenue*
Storage 2,243 2,083 2,325
($ in millions)
Software 1,520 1,586 1,749
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 Services 439 478 442
United States $29,759 $30,194 $30,514
Global Financing
Japan 8,239 8,339 7,544
Financing $ 1,167 $ 1,231 $ 1,386
Other countries 41,141 41,386 43,683
Used equipment sales 530 461 454
Total IBM consolidated
revenue $79,139 $79,919 $81,741
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client. NOTE U. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 30, 2018, the company announced that the Board of
Plant and Other Property — Net Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.50 per common
($ in millions) share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2018 to shareholders
of record on February 9, 2018.
At December 31: 2017 2016 2015
United States $ 4,670 $ 4,701 $ 4,644
On February 6, 2018, IBM Credit LLC issued $2.0 billion in bonds
Other countries 5,985 5,607 5,532
as follows: $450 million of 3-year floating-rate bonds priced at
Total $10,655 $10,308 $10,176 LIBOR plus 16 basis points, $800 million of 3-year fixed-rate
bonds with a 2.65 percent coupon and $750 million of 5-year
fixed-rate bonds with a 3.0 percent coupon.

===== PAGE 148 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 147
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Revenue $ 79,139 $ 79,919 $ 81,741 $ 92,793 $ 98,367
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758 $ 11,881 $ 13,364 $ 15,751 $ 16,881
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (5) $ (9) $ (174) $ (3,729) $ (398)
Net income $ 5,753 $ 11,872 $ 13,190 $ 12,022 $ 16,483
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 12,935 $ 13,031 $ 14,659 $ 16,702 $ 18,356
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 6.14 $ 12.39 $ 13.60 $ 15.59 $ 15.30
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.18) $ (3.69) $ (0.36)
Total $ 6.14 $ 12.38 $ 13.42 $ 11.90 $ 14.94
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 6.17 $ 12.44 $ 13.66 $ 15.68 $ 15.42
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.18) $ (3.71) $ (0.36)
Total $ 6.17 $ 12.43 $ 13.48 $ 11.97 $ 15.06
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 13.80 $ 13.59 $ 14.92 $ 16.53 $ 16.64
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 5,506 $ 5,256 $ 4,897 $ 4,265 $ 4,058
Per share of common stock $ 5.90 $ 5.50 $ 5.00 $ 4.25 $ 3.70
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 3,229 $ 3,567 $ 3,579 $ 3,740 $ 3,623
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 31.1% 74.0% 101.1% 72.5% 83.8%
At December 31: 2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Total assets $125,356 $117,470 $110,495 $117,271 $125,641
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 11,116 $ 10,830 $ 10,727 $ 10,771 $ 13,821
Working capital $ 12,373 $ 7,613 $ 8,235 $ 7,797 $ 9,610
Total debt $ 46,824 $ 42,169 $ 39,890 $ 40,722 $ 39,637
Total equity $ 17,725 $ 18,392 $ 14,424 $ 12,014 $ 22,929
* Refer to the “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 59 of the company’s 2015 Annual Report for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2014
and 2013. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on pages 49 and 55 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2017, 2016 and 2015.

===== PAGE 149 =====
148 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth
2017 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Full Year
Revenue $18,155 $19,289 $19,153 $22,543 $79,139
Gross profit $ 7,772 $ 8,794 $ 8,800 $10,862 $36,227
Income/(loss) from continuing operations $ 1,753 $ 2,332 $ 2,726 $ (1,053) $ 5,758
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (3) $ (1) $ 0 $ (1) $ (5)
Net income/(loss) $ 1,750 $ 2,331 $ 2,726 $ (1,054) $ 5,753
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,255 $ 2,792 $ 3,079 $ 4,809 $12,935
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock**
Assuming dilution $ 1.85 $ 2.48 $ 2.92 $ (1.14) $ 6.14
Basic $ 1.86 $ 2.49 $ 2.93 $ (1.14) $ 6.17
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.38 $ 2.97 $ 3.30 $ 5.18 $ 13.80
Dividends per share of common stock $ 1.40 $ 1.50 $ 1.50 $ 1.50 $ 5.90
Stock prices++
High $181.95 $174.52 $155.58 $162.07
Low $165.52 $150.37 $139.70 $146.48
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
First Second Third Fourth
2016 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Full Year
Revenue $18,684 $20,238 $19,226 $21,770 $79,919
Gross profit $ 8,686 $ 9,702 $ 9,013 $10,893 $38,294
Income from continuing operations $ 2,016 $ 2,505 $ 2,854 $ 4,505 $11,881
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (3) $ 0 $ (1) $ (4) $ (9)
Net income $ 2,014 $ 2,504 $ 2,853 $ 4,501 $11,872
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings* $ 2,270 $ 2,835 $ 3,149 $ 4,776 $13,031
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock**
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 2.09 $ 2.61 $ 2.98 $ 4.73 $ 12.39
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.01)
Total $ 2.09 $ 2.61 $ 2.98 $ 4.72 $ 12.38
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 2.09 $ 2.62 $ 2.99 $ 4.75 $ 12.44
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.01)
Total $ 2.09 $ 2.62 $ 2.99 $ 4.74 $ 12.43
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* $ 2.35 $ 2.95 $ 3.29 $ 5.01 $ 13.59
Dividends per share of common stock $ 1.30 $ 1.40 $ 1.40 $ 1.40 $ 5.50
Stock prices++
High $151.45 $155.35 $163.53 $168.51
Low $117.85 $143.50 $151.68 $149.63
* Refer to page 68 of the company’s first-quarter 2017 Form 10-Q filed on April 25, 2017, page 82 of the company’s second-quarter 2017 Form 10-Q
filed on July 25, 2017, page 85 of the company’s third-quarter 2017 Form 10-Q filed on October 31, 2017, and page 55 under the heading “GAAP
Reconciliation” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the fourth quarter of 2017 and 2016. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on
page 49 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2017 and 2016.
** Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for
the full year is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not
equal the full-year EPS.
++ The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the periods presented.

===== PAGE 150 =====
Performance Graphs 149
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF FIVE- AND TEN-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM,
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graphs compare the five- and ten-year cumulative index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index.
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable IBM is also included in this index.
cumulative of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the
fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial
the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the required year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index used for on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons
comparison may be a published industry or line-of-business assume that all dividends are reinvested.
Five-Year Ten-Year
280 320
240 280
240
200
200
160
160
120
120
80
80
40 40
0 0
12 13 14 15 16 17 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $ 99.82 $ 87.44 $ 77.47 $ 96.98 $ 93.12
S & P 500 Index 100.00 132.39 150.51 152.59 170.84 208.14
S & P Information Technology Index 100.00 128.43 154.26 163.40 186.03 258.28
Ten-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
IBM Common Stock $100.00 $79.24$125.67$143.62$183.01$193.87$193.51$169.53$150.18$188.01$180.52
S & P 500 Index 100.00 63.00 79.67 91.67 93.61 108.59 143.76 163.44 165.70 185.52 226.03
S & P Information
Technology Index 100.00 56.86 91.96 101.32 103.77 119.15 153.02 183.81 194.70 221.66 307.74

===== PAGE 151 =====
150 Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Kenneth I. Chenault Shirley Ann Jackson Virginia M. Rometty
Retired Chairman and President Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Chief Executive Officer
American Express Company IBM
Andrew N. Liveris
Michael L. Eskew Executive Chairman Joseph R. Swedish
Retired Chairman and DowDuPont Inc. Executive Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer Past President and
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
United Parcel Service, Inc. Chief Executive Officer
The Dow Chemical Company
Anthem, Inc.
David N. Farr
W. James McNerney, Jr.*
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Sidney Taurel
Retired Chairman and
Emerson Electric Co. Chairman Emeritus
Chief Executive Officer
Eli Lilly and Company
The Boeing Company
Mark Fields*
Chairman
Previous President and Senior Advisor
Pearson plc
Chief Executive Officer Clayton, Dubilier & Rice, LLC
Ford Motor Company
Peter R. Voser
Hutham S. Olayan
Senior Advisor Retired Chief Executive Officer
Vice Chairman
TPG Capital Royal Dutch Shell plc
The Olayan Group
Chairman
Alex Gorsky
James W. Owens ABB Ltd.
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Retired Chairman and
Johnson & Johnson
Chief Executive Officer Frederick H. Waddell
Caterpillar Inc. Chairman and
Retired Chief Executive Officer
Northern Trust Corporation
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Simon J. Beaumont Martin Jetter Christina M. Montgomery
Vice President Senior Vice President Vice President
Tax and Treasurer IBM Global Technology Services Assistant General Counsel
and Secretary
Michelle H. Browdy James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Michelle Peluso
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, Chief Financial Officer Senior Vice President and
and General Counsel Chief Marketing Officer
John E. Kelly III
Erich Clementi Senior Vice President Robert J. Picciano
Senior Vice President IBM Cognitive Solutions Senior Vice President
IBM Global Integrated Accounts and IBM Research IBM Cognitive Systems
Robert F. Del Bene David W. Kenny Virginia M. Rometty
Vice President and Controller Senior Vice President Chairman, President and
IBM Watson and Chief Executive Officer
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen IBM Cloud Platform
Senior Vice President Thomas W. Rosamilia
Kenneth M. Keverian Senior Vice President
Mark Foster Senior Vice President IBM Systems
Senior Vice President Corporate Strategy
IBM Global Business Services Martin J. Schroeter
Arvind Krishna Senior Vice President
Diane J. Gherson Senior Vice President IBM Global Markets
Senior Vice President and IBM Hybrid Cloud and
Chief Human Resources Officer Director of IBM Research Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President
IBM Industry Platforms
* Term on the Board ends on April 24, 2018

===== PAGE 152 =====
Stockholder Information 151
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services IBM Stock
Stockholders with questions about their accounts IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,
should contact: the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005,
Stockholder Communications
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005 (888) IBM-6700
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada of the Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727. meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to
infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations,
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company,
New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a tele- Annual Meeting
communications device (TDD) can communicate directly with The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Tuesday, April 24, 2018, at 10 a.m. at the Hyatt Regency
Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and Milwaukee, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
IBM on the Internet The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at charge from:
www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005,
services and other activities can also be found at that website.
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005 (888) IBM-6700.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
(SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any
other filings required by the SEC. The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant
business. The 10-K report is released by the end of February;
amount of information about IBM, including the company’s
10-Q reports are released by early May, August and November.
annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q,
current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s
reports as soon as reasonably practicable after such material values and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility,
is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. These including its innovative strategies to transform communities
materials are available free of charge on or through our website. through global citizenship. Highlights from the Corporate
Responsibility Report are available online at www.ibm.com/
The public may read and copy any materials the company files
responsibility. The full Corporate Responsibility Report
with the SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street,
is available in printed form by downloading the report at
NE, Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information
www.ibm.com/responsibility/report.
on the operation of the Public Reference Room by calling
the SEC at (800) SEC-0330. The SEC maintains a website
General Information
(www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information
Stockholders of record can receive account information and
statements, and other information regarding issuers that file
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder
electronically with the SEC.
accounts online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of
record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports
Computershare Investment Plan (CIP)
and Proxy Statements online through this site.
(formerly IBM Investor Services Program)
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a For answers to general questions about IBM from within the
number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside
IBM investors, including the reinvestment of dividends, the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
direct purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for
safekeeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of the brochure.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder
Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk,
New York 10504.

===== PAGE 153 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
AIX, AlchemyAI, Blekko, Blue Box, Bluewolf, Clearleap, Cleversafe, Explorys,
Global Business Services, Global Technology Services, Gravitant, IBM, IBM
Cloud, IBM Flex System, IBM iX, IBM Q, IBM Watson, IBM Z, Merge Healthcare,
Phytel, POWER, POWER9, Power Systems, Resilient, Resource Ammirati, Sanovi,
StrongLoop The Weather Company, Truvan Health Analytics, Ustream, Watson,
Watson Health, Watson IoT, z14, z/OS and Z Systems are trademarks or registered
trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation or its wholly owned
subsidiaries. GLOBALFOUNDRIES is a registered trademark of GLOBALFOUNDRIES
Inc. Lenovo is a trademark of Lenovo Group Limited in the United States, other
countries, or both. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United
States, other countries, or both. UNIX is a registered trademark of the Open Group
in the United States and other countries. Other company, product and service
names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on papers harvested to sustainable standards.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-17
Printing: RR Donnelley

===== PAGE 154 =====
2017
IBM
Annual
Report
Let’s put
smart
to work.
2017
Annual
Report