

===== PAGE 1 =====
Dear
IBM Investor:
Over the past
decade, hundreds
of thousands
of IBMers have
transformed your
company. Today,
IBM has laid the
foundation for a new
era of technology
and business.
2019
Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
Over the past decade,
hundreds of thousands of
IBMers have transformed
your company. Today, IBM
has laid the foundation for
a new era of technology
and business.
It’s easy to forget that we are still in the early stages
of a long cycle of technological revolution. The driving forces
of this change are well understood: the phenomenon of data,
the value of cloud and the scaling of artificial intelligence.
As a result, we are experiencing a great wave
of corporate transformations, as the most essential
organizations in the world—transportation providers,
hospital networks, financial services, telecommunications
networks, government agencies and more—become digital.
But the most challenging and complex work of these
digital transformations still lies ahead. We call this work
“Chapter 2,” in which our clients modernize and move their
mission-critical workloads to the cloud, and infuse AI deep
into the decision-making workflows of their business.
At the end of this journey is something we have termed the
Cognitive Enterprise: an agile organization that is fueled
by data, guided by AI insight and built for change
on a hybrid cloud.
The IBM company itself has been transformed
to enable our clients’ digital reinvention. In my last letter
to you as CEO, I will share our 2019 financial results, detail
the many changes we have made to build a strong foundation
for growth and prepare your company for the future, and
share our plans for transitioning to new leadership in 2020.

===== PAGE 3 =====
2
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer

===== PAGE 4 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 3
2019: Enabling sustainable growth 2. Portfolio: Built for the future
In 2019, IBM delivered a second consecutive year of revenue The shifts in capital allocation were designed to build a
growth excluding the impact of currency and divestitures. portfolio that is stronger and more aligned with the fastest
We ended the year on a strong note, with accelerating growing segments of the market. Since 2012, we also
revenue growth and our strongest year-to-year increase divested businesses with annual revenues of more than
in gross profit margins in over a decade. $10 billion ($2 billion in 2019 alone) that do not strengthen
For the full year, the company achieved $77.1 billion our hand in Chapter 2. We did this while keeping annualized
in revenue, operating gross profit margins of 48 percent revenue growth approximately flat, excluding the impact
and operating earnings per share of $12.81. We had strong of divestitures and currency. Today, we have reinvented
cash generation with net cash from operating activities of 50 percent of our portfolio, including:
$14.8 billion and free cash flow of $11.9 billion. We returned
$7.1 billion in capital to our shareholders, including – Cloud: In 2013, cloud represented only 4 percent
dividends of $5.7 billion. This was the 24th consecutive year of IBM’s revenue. Today, cloud is 27 percent—
of raising our dividend, and the 104th consecutive year a $21.2 billion business—and growing rapidly. In the
of providing one. past year, we’ve substantially enhanced our public
These results are the product of bold moves to cloud offerings, including dramatic improvements
transform your company from top to bottom, strengthening in ease of use, 99.999% availability and the strongest
our integrated value proposition and positioning us for security posture in the industry. That’s why clients
sustainable growth. with the most demanding regulatory and resiliency
requirements, like BNP Paribas, are moving their most
The new foundation of integrated value critical workloads to the IBM Cloud.
The problems we solve for clients are complex equations
that cannot be satisfied with technology alone. They require – Data and AI: Our investments in data and AI have
a partner that can also offer deep industry expertise cemented our position of enterprise market leadership.
and a relationship of trust. For the third straight year, IDC has named IBM the
IBM is the only company that combines the portfolio, global leader in AI. We secured more than 1,800
people and sense of purpose necessary to meet today’s AI patents in 2019 alone. Our Data Science Elite team
enterprise demands. Over the last decade, we have forged the is accelerating client journeys to AI. And there are
foundations of our end-to-end, integrated value proposition more than 30,000 Watson client engagements across
through a series of transformative actions. 20 different industries, helping clients like Yara build
a digital farming platform, Woodside Energy optimize
1. Capital: A bold shift to drive innovation its operations and Vodafone Idea transform its core
Transformation requires investment. And since 2012, IT infrastructure.
we have devoted significant capital to developing new
capabilities. In all, we invested more than $120 billion – Security: IBM helps secure 95 percent of the Fortune
to transform our strategy, our portfolio and our workforce. Global 500 and manages more than 70 billion events
At the same time, we returned $97 billion to shareholders. every day. In 2019, we introduced Cloud Pak for Security,
We invested nearly $30 billion in capital expenditures, a powerful new security solution designed to solve
building our cloud and cognitive offerings and bolstering a critical pain point in the industry: connecting and
our security and services capabilities. orchestrating disparate security tools.
We have also invested $45 billion in research and
development, forging the futures of cloud, AI, blockchain – Blockchain: IBM is the global leader in enterprise
and quantum computing. IBM inventors received 9,262 blockchain solutions, with hundreds of client
U.S. patents in 2019, the most ever awarded to a U.S. engagements infusing new levels of trust and
company. It was our 27th straight year of patent leadership. transparency into the global supply chain. We have
We have bolstered our portfolio with 65 companies, more than 2,000 blockchain experts. And we are
including Red Hat, the largest acquisition in the history working with more than 20 large consortium networks
of IBM. In Red Hat, we acquired a powerful growth engine, that are reshaping entire industries, like IBM Food Trust
and a company synonymous with the cloud, open source for reliable food supply and TradeLens for shipping.
and interoperability. Its singular architecture allows
clients to build an application once and run it anywhere.
And it enables the seamless integration of multiple clouds,
from any vendor, addressing a $1.2 trillion hybrid cloud
market opportunity.

===== PAGE 5 =====
4
Moments
from IBM’s
transformation
As our company has led IBM Cloud IBM Q Red Hat
clients on their digital IBM Cloud has grown to be a more A fundamentally different way One of the largest technology
than $21 billion business offering of computing, quantum has the acquisitions in history combined
journeys, IBM has also
enterprises public, private and potential to transform business and the power and flexibility of
transformed itself— hybrid cloud solutions. In 2019, solve some of the world’s biggest Red Hat’s open hybrid cloud
through acquisitions, IBM introduced the world’s first problems. IBM has led in quantum technologies with the scale
financial services-ready public research and development and and depth of IBM’s innovation
breakthrough technologies
cloud, secure and purpose-built now offers a fleet of 15 advanced and industry expertise.
and social innovations. for the industry. quantum computers.
IBM Watson IBM Security IBM Garage Strategic Divestitures
IBM Watson helped AI emerge IBM Security was built for industry- A comprehensive approach Over eight years, IBM has sold
from a long “winter” and is now leading compliance, threat to innovation and transformation, businesses with more than
deployed in customer service, monitoring and container security. the IBM Garage process brings $10 billion in revenue, including
healthcare, supply chain, weather In 2019, Cloud Pak for Security designers and developers together semiconductor manufacturing
forecasts, energy exploration was introduced to orchestrate tools with clients and stakeholders. The and x86 servers, in order to
and other fields—totaling more across the entire security stack. process helps create and scale new allocate capital to innovation.
than 30,000 client engagements. ideas and achieve business value.
1. Purpose
2. Ownership
3. Transparency
P-TECH IBM Blockchain Principles for Trust & Transparency Business Roundtable
Pathways in Technology Early IBM Food Trust, TradeLens and For more than a century, IBM In 2019, IBM signed the
College High Schools (P-TECH) other initiatives are streamlining has earned the trust of clients Business Roundtable Statement
is a new education model supply chain processes and and society. In 2018, we codified on the Purpose of a Corporation.
co-developed by IBM working bringing trust and transparency the core principles that guide The Business Roundtable is
together with educators, to transactions. everything we do, from handling a group that brings together the
policymakers and elected officials. client data to the responsible CEOs of nearly 200 American
deployment of new technologies. companies.

===== PAGE 6 =====
A Letter from the Chairman 5
– IBM Services: From digital strategy to infrastructure 4. Speed: Changing the way we work
services, IBM Services exemplifies the end-to-end Today, enterprise client expectations are dictated by their
capability of our company. Over the last 10 years, consumer technology experiences. In order to match the
we have built the world’s largest digital agency, with speed of development found in consumer markets, we
57 studios and 17,000 IBM iX digital consultants. needed to fundamentally change the way IBM worked.
And we have scaled our global delivery network, with This process began with the creation of IBM Design
services professionals that have breadth of experience Thinking, an enterprise-grade variant of the well-known
and industry expertise in areas like financial services, human-centered design process. We then adopted agile
telecommunications and supply chain, around the world. development practices, to create the working conditions
for small, diverse teams to solve problems and introduce
– IBM Systems: The recently launched IBM z15 is new solutions quickly.
our most secure and capable mainframe ever, with IBM has hired more than 20,000 designers. We have
encryption that can be applied across hybrid cloud more than 100,000 employees working in agile methodology.
environments, cloud-native development capabilities And we have converted more than 10 million square feet
and an industry-first approach to instant recovery. of offices into agile workspaces.
This led to a significant change in the way our clients
– Quantum: In 2019, IBM introduced a 53-qubit quantum experience IBM today: the IBM Garage. These are dedicated,
computer, the largest universal quantum computing physical spaces in which clients work side by side with
system available for commercial use. More than IBMers to co-create solutions, applying IBM Design Thinking
100 global clients and 200,000 registered users have and agile methods. They can happen anywhere in the world,
run over 160 billion experiments on the IBM Quantum in dedicated IBM spaces or client offices.
Computation Center’s fleet of 15 quantum systems In 2019, we conducted approximately 600 engagements
through the cloud, including Daimler AG, JPMorgan in which we helped clients adopt these same practices.
Chase and Anthem. The end result has been record Net Promoter Scores from
clients across all IBM businesses.
3. IBMers: Talent, skills and culture
AI and other advanced technologies are changing the very 5. Good tech: A model of responsible stewardship
nature of work. To keep up with the rate and pace of these for the digital age
changes, IBM has revitalized the skills of our workforce. Of all the work we have done to transform IBM, I am most
In the last five years, the percentage of IBMers with skills proud of the way in which we are defining responsible
of the future increased to 90 percent. stewardship in the digital age.
At the heart of our workforce transformation is the At IBM, we have always taken the long view. That means
constant acquisition of relevant skills. To support this work, grounding strategy and business decisions in core values
we built a platform that allows IBMers to plainly see the skills that endure through decades of political, technological
they have, and the skills they need. And we developed an and societal change. They are:
AI-based, personalized learning system to help them acquire
those skills. More than 26 million learning hours were logged – Dedication to every client’s success.
in 2019 alone. – Innovation that matters, for our company
As important, IBM is committed to fostering a culture and for the world.
in which all IBMers feel they can bring their best selves to – Trust and personal responsibility in all relationships.
work. Diversity and inclusion are essential to our business.
They fuel innovation and drive employee satisfaction. Leading with values is not wide-eyed altruism. It is clear-
And in 2019, we achieved record diversity across all eyed business strategy. Values attract the best employees.
representation groups and best-in-class inclusion scores. They sustain our client relationships. And they have guided
We were again widely recognized as one of the best places our efforts to lead the industry in modeling what “good tech”
to work for mothers, veterans, LGBTQ employees and more. looks like.
IBM understands that diversity is a fact, but inclusion
is a choice. We have made our choice. And that is just one
reason why our employee engagement score is at an all-time
high, improving 17 points since 2014.

===== PAGE 7 =====
6
For example, our Principles for Trust and Transparency New leadership for a new era
have become the global ethical standard of digital I am enormously proud of the work we have done to transform
responsibility, inspiring similar doctrine in businesses IBM for this moment. And with the foundation for growth now
and governments around the world: in place, it is the right time for a new leader to continue this
critically important journey for IBM and our clients.
– The purpose of new technology is to augment As such, I have elected to retire at the end of 2020 after
mankind, not replace it. nearly 40 years with the company. Effective April 6, 2020,
– Data and the insights it yields belong only Arvind Krishna, our Senior Vice President for Cloud and
to the owner of that data. Cognitive, will become the next Chief Executive Officer of IBM
– AI should be open, transparent and explainable. and a member of the Board. Jim Whitehurst, CEO of Red Hat,
will become President of IBM.
At IBM, we consider the full impact of our technology on Arvind is a brilliant business leader and technologist
society. And we readily accept our leadership role in making who has played a significant role in developing our key
the digital era an inclusive era. technologies including artificial intelligence, cloud, quantum
As such, we have pioneered programs that ensure computing and blockchain. And Jim is a seasoned leader who
the many—not just a few—benefit from the digital economy. built Red Hat into the world’s leading provider of open source
To that end, we substantially expanded our 21st-century enterprise IT software solutions and services. Together,
apprenticeship program and P-TECH six-year high school this dream team of technological acumen and business
education model in 2019. Enrollment in the apprentice savvy will build on IBM’s new foundations.
program grew twice as fast as expected. And P-TECH doubled As we make this transition, I want you to know that my
the number of participating schools to 220, in 24 countries, belief in IBM and IBMers has never been stronger. It has been
with a pipeline of 150,000 students. the privilege of my life to lead this great company during this
Our Call for Code and Code and Response programs time of significant transformation. And, most importantly,
continue to scale, tapping the talents of developers to address I would like to thank our employees for their tireless
some of society’s most intractable challenges. In 2019, dedication, our clients for their trust and partnership,
180,000 developers from 165 countries created more than and our investors for their continued belief in our company
5,000 applications focused on disaster relief. and its strategy.
In 2019, IBM published its 29th annual IBM and the At IBM, we believe in the fundamental promise of
Environment Report, and advanced our environmental technology: that when we apply science to real-world
leadership as a founding member of the Climate Leadership problems, we can create a tomorrow that is better than today;
Council, where we have supported a carbon tax that will a tomorrow that is more sustainable, more profitable and
reduce carbon emissions globally through market-based more equitable.
incentives. At the same time, we remain on track to achieve a And I believe that IBM is essential to fulfilling
40 percent reduction of carbon dioxide emissions associated that promise.
with our own energy consumption by 2025. In addition, IBM
developed a breakthrough method of recycling polyethylene
terephthalate (PET), a widely used plastic with a high carbon
footprint that is difficult to recycle. IBM’s new method will
make it possible for more types of PET plastic to become
100 percent recyclable, helping to reduce the 8 million tons
Virginia M. Rometty
of plastics that enter our oceans each year. Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s
financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP), these materials contain non-GAAP financial measures
on a continuing operations basis, including operating earnings per share, operating
gross profit margin, free cash flow, and revenue adjusted for divested businesses and
constant currency. The rationale for management’s use of this non-GAAP information
is included on pages 26, 27 and 58 of the company’s 2019 Annual Report, which is
Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K submitted with the SEC on February 25, 2020. For
reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP and other information,
please refer to pages 39, 46, 59 and 139 of the company’s 2019 Annual Report.

===== PAGE 8 =====
7
What does it + Innovative Technology
We help build agile organizations,
take to lead fueled by data, guided by AI insight
and built for change in any cloud
IBM’s clients environment. Add blockchain
and the coming era of quantum
in their next
computing, and we’ll continue
leading our clients’ journeys
chapter of digital
to the Cognitive Enterprise.
transformation?
+ Industry Expertise
The problems we solve and
the opportunities we discover
for clients cannot be achieved
through technology alone.
Providing counsel and insights,
based on deep industry knowledge
and experience, IBM is the
only company with the portfolio
and the people to meet today’s
enterprise demands.
+ Trust and Security
We build trust, privacy and security
into even our most cutting-edge
technologies. Just as crucial is the
trust we build into our business
relationships. Continually
considering the full impact
of our technology on society,
we are committed to responsible
stewardship for the digital age.

===== PAGE 9 =====
88
Hybrid cloud is a potential $1.2 trillion
market, with IBM already in the lead.
Innovative
As businesses construct and connect
multiple clouds, IBM offers customers
Technology
the ability to build applications once
and run them anywhere. Whether
for public cloud, private cloud or
on-premises systems, IBM’s hybrid
approach enables clients to unleash
any cloud’s full potential.
Our acquisition of Red Hat has been
a game changer. Red Hat OpenShift is
the platform of choice for hybrid cloud.
$ 21.2
b illion
cloud revenue
in 2019
2 ,000+
clients using Red Hat
and IBM’s hybrid
cloud platform

===== PAGE 10 =====
Innovative Technology 9
Banks are
accelerating their
transformations
Banks were pioneers in building consumer-facing apps,
but deeper digital reinvention in the finance industry
has been slower, limited by concerns that include data
security and privacy. Today, many institutions are working
with IBM to reinvent their infrastructure—and create new
technology models for finance, such as the world’s first
financial services-ready cloud.
When the global bank BNP Paribas began accelerating
its digitization strategy, its goal was to deliver superior
services to its customers and corporate clients while
ensuring the security and confidentiality of their data.
The bank discovered that it could not digitize quickly enough
with its existing private cloud. It turned to IBM to co-create
a public cloud that would be robust, reliable and secure
enough to support its banking applications and its extensive
compliance and security requirements. The BNP Paribas
dedicated public cloud will combine the security of a private
cloud with the speed, scalability and cost savings of a public
cloud. The bank will also benefit from IBM Watson AI and
other services—enabling it to tap into new technologies,
innovate more quickly and, ultimately, deliver a better
customer experience.
Consumers expect convenience and security from their
banks. The challenge: how to increase convenience without
giving up on security. State Bank of India, the country’s
largest bank, partnered with IBM Services to create a
secure mobile platform, YONO (You Only Need One), that
is transforming how more than 18 million people in India
bank, invest, shop, order food and more.

===== PAGE 11 =====
10
Airlines are building
new travel experiences
Airlines must deliver superior passenger experiences with
every flight. To do that, they are rethinking and reinventing
their technology core—and how their employees work.
Carriers are shifting mission-critical workloads to
IBM Cloud and hybrid cloud environments, taking advantage
of the open, scalable architecture and microservices to
improve their processes, accommodate growth and offer new
digital services such as automatic rebooking. And airlines
are using AI to offer personalized pricing and other
new services.
The IBM Travel Platform offers a range of customized
mobile applications that empower airline employees, allowing
them to offer higher levels of service, manage boarding more
efficiently, deploy maintenance resources, and more. Aloft,
The Weather Company’s Total Turbulence can predict
turbulence ahead of time, so plane routes can be optimized.
Across the industry, these shifts are allowing carriers
to find new ways to improve the journey.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Innovative Technology 11
Telcos are innovating
more nimbly
Success in any market requires rapid, agile innovation.
In Europe, Vodafone Business partnered with IBM to combine
Vodafone’s leadership in Edge, 5G and IoT with IBM’s public
and hybrid cloud, industry expertise and professional
services. The partnership is enabling companies like
National Express to deliver digital solutions faster, utilizing
a multicloud approach and capitalizing on AI, blockchain
and other advanced technologies.
In India, Vodafone Idea, a Vodafone Group joint venture,
signed an IT outsourcing partnership with IBM to deliver
enhanced customer experience to millions of connected
customers and yield synergies by consolidating two large
pre-merger IT environments. The partnership uses IBM’s
hybrid cloud, analytics and security capabilities to accelerate
Vodafone Idea’s progression to an open, agile and secure
IT environment.
IBM, with Red Hat, is also helping Vodafone Idea build
an open universal hybrid cloud, able to serve all aspects
of core network and IT from a common cloud. This will enable
continued improvements in customer service, a step change
reduction in cost, and the rapid deployment of Edge-based
offerings to enterprise clients.

===== PAGE 13 =====
1122
Artificial intelligence is transforming
how businesses operate, how people
do their jobs and how customers
engage. Across industries, IBM clients
are rapidly moving from pilots to
enterprise-wide AI adoption. With
IBM Watson, the pieces are now in place
to scale AI with trust and transparency.
And with IBM’s allegiance to open
source technology, these AI solutions
perform with seamless interoperability,
whatever the software platform
or cloud environment.
Infrastructure can
maintain its own safety
The world’s civil infrastructure is aging. Catastrophic
failures of bridges and roads are a growing threat. A recent
study determined that in the U.S. alone, 47,052 bridges
were structurally deficient.
Sund & Bælt, which owns and operates some of the
# 1 largest infrastructure in the world—including the Great Belt
Bridge in Denmark—has partnered with IBM to create
market leader Maximo for Civil Infrastructure, a solution that uses machine
intelligence to monitor the effects of stress, use and age
in enterprise AI
on bridges and tunnels—and to announce when intervention
is required.
It will measure the impacts of cracks, rust, corrosion
3 0,000+
and other potential stressors by integrating and analyzing
data from The Weather Company, maintenance records
IBM Watson client and sensors that are placed on structures, worn by workers
engagements and flown by drones. Using predictive and prescriptive
maintenance strategies, the system can flag the most serious
issues. As a result, maintenance crews will be able to work
with maximum efficiency and effectiveness.
1 ,800+
AI patents in 2019

===== PAGE 14 =====
Innovative Technology 13
Energy production Advertisers are getting
is embedded with AI closer to their audiences
Gaining real value from AI requires moving from In advertising, insights allow brands to better understand
experiments to scale—embedding AI into processes and engage with their audiences. As the volume of data
throughout an organization. accelerates, so do the challenges of aggregating and
Woodside Energy takes a forward-looking, technology- interpreting it.
based approach to energy. The Australian natural gas Wunderman Thompson Data, the data and analytics
company has deployed IBM Watson since 2016 and now arm of global creative and technology agency Wunderman
estimates that around 80 percent of Woodside employees Thompson, had data dispersed across many clouds.
have used Watson in their work. The company knew that if it could pull together and mine
Now, Woodside and IBM are collaborating to explore this data, it could build new and expanded customized
quantum computing and to deploy and scale AI further campaigns for its clients. It partnered with IBM to create an
into operations. New applications could help Woodside unprecedented machine learning practice using IBM Watson
save a significant portion of annual maintenance costs to discover new customer insights and deliver increased
and optimize workflows, part of Woodside’s vision ROI for brands. The use of Watson also helped Wunderman
for an “intelligent plant.” Thompson Data amplify its capabilities by being able
to leverage the company’s entire portfolio of data assets.
To make it happen, it brought in IBM’s Data Science Elite
team—all experts in helping companies push AI and machine
learning models into production—to accelerate and modernize
the building of their machine learning practice. This allowed
Wunderman Thompson Data to build a proof of concept
with IBM; the collaboration resulted in a new machine
learning pipeline—in the time span of just several weeks.

===== PAGE 15 =====
1144
Quantum computing is an entirely
new paradigm. Based on the principles
of quantum physics, quantum
computing has the potential to crack
previously unsolvable problems in
chemistry, materials science, finance
and any other field that has hit the
limits of classical computing—and could
lead to breakthroughs in areas such as
weather forecasting and drug discovery.
For decades, IBM has led the
research and development of quantum
information science and quantum
machines. And IBM was the first to
give the world the chance to experience
it by putting a quantum computer
on the cloud in 2016. Now, quantum
computing is moving out of the lab and
into the hands of users and commercial
clients worldwide.
1 00+
organizations in
the IBM Q Network
1 60
b illion
executions on IBM’s
quantum fleet

===== PAGE 16 =====
Innovative Technology 15
Quantum is being
applied to our
toughest problems
More than 100 companies and institutions have joined
the IBM Q Network to explore practical applications of
quantum computing. They are using IBM’s fleet of 15 of the
most advanced quantum computers commercially available.
Daimler AG and IBM are exploring ways the automotive
and transportation industry can leverage quantum
computing. Daimler’s research currently focuses on the
development of novel quantum algorithms for chemistry
and materials science to support its long-term goal
of designing new batteries. New materials may lead
to the development of higher performance, longer lasting
and less expensive vehicle batteries.
JPMorgan Chase and IBM are researching methodologies
for financial modeling and risk management. The joint
research has led to the creation of a methodology to price
financial derivative contracts, known as options, as well
as portfolios of options, which may have future potential
to substantially accelerate and enhance business operations.
This collaboration recently led to the first experiment modeling
a European call option on a real quantum computer.

===== PAGE 17 =====
1166
Our industry expertise is a key
advantage as we help clients
Industry
respond to their customers’ evolving
needs and stay nimble in the face
Expertise
of continuous technological change.
“Mission-critical” means more than
technology. To fundamentally change
the way businesses work and innovate,
they need expert guidance. From
manufacturing to financial services,
to retail and more—our experts possess
deep knowledge developed through
decades of work with the world’s
most complex systems.
~ 90%
of credit card
transactions run
on IBM systems
8 3%
of the world’s
largest telcos
are IBM clients

===== PAGE 18 =====
Industry Expertise 17
Supply chains
are getting more
transparent
The worldwide container logistics ecosystem carries
90 percent of the goods we use daily, but only recently moved
beyond paper-based processes. Technology that can cut
costs, ensure transparency and eliminate inefficiencies has
become a necessity.
Enter blockchain, which is the basis for TradeLens,
the global container logistics digitization platform
developed jointly by A.P. Moller-Maersk and IBM. In 2019,
the major ocean carriers CMA CGM, MSC Mediterranean
Shipping Company, Hapag-Lloyd and Ocean Network
Express joined TradeLens.
Today, TradeLens is on pace to trace 12 million
documents annually, accounting for data on more than
60 percent of the world’s ocean container cargo. The digital
ship—secure, transparent and open-standards-based—
has come in.
Insurers can deliver
world-class customer
experience
Consumers’ expectations of how they interact with
companies are continually rising—regardless of the industry
or technology platforms involved.
To meet its customers’ evolving needs, State Farm, the
largest property and casualty insurer in the U.S., wanted to
accelerate its development of new digital services. To do that,
it needed to adopt a DevOps model in order to unlock cloud-
native development across its core systems—something often
thought impossible in the industry. For State Farm, this
meant transforming most of its mission-critical workloads,
run on the IBM Z platform, to a new way of working.
The first step for State Farm in implementing modern
DevOps practices on its z/OS systems was using industry-
standard tools—a mix of open source, homegrown and
proprietary—drawing from its experience in cloud
development.
Moving to continuous development and integration
cycles accelerated delivery of new functionality—and opened
up its enterprise servers to a new generation of developers.

===== PAGE 19 =====
1188
Whether gusty winds that send a delivery drone off-track
or a tornado that flattens a town, disruptive weather
patterns are affecting the lives of individuals, businesses
and institutions around the world.
IBM GRAF, the Global High-Resolution Atmospheric
Forecasting system, from The Weather Company, an IBM
Business, can now offer the whole world forecasts with
3-kilometer resolution. GRAF is democratizing weather
data, promising to improve farming and other industries
as well as our everyday lives.
An IBM supercomputer called Dyeus assimilates
108 gigabytes worth of atmospheric observations every
second and performs about 12 trillion computations
per day on that data. The result: much finer-grained
predictions of the atmosphere and forecasts updated
Weather data is
up to a dozen times more frequently than conventional
global modeling systems, from one of the world’s most
becoming democratized
trusted sources for weather data.
Somalia
Uganda
Kenya
Tanzania

===== PAGE 20 =====
Industry Expertise 19
Yara, a global crop nutrition company based in Norway,
is on a mission to responsibly feed and protect the planet
by advancing more productive and sustainable agriculture
to create a world without hunger.
The company is combining its 115 years of agronomic
expertise with IBM technology and agriculture industry
experience to bring more knowledge to farmers by building
the world’s leading digital farming platform. By merging
Yara’s crop knowledge and modeling capabilities with
insights from IBM Watson Studio, IBM PAIRS technology,
The Weather Company and other services, the platform
will be able to provide hyperlocal weather forecasts in
addition to offering real-time recommendations, tailored
to the specific needs of individual fields and crops.
Agriculture is being
One example: Yara’s FarmWeather app, installed by more
than 800,000 small farmers in Asia and Africa, is one
enriched by data
of the fastest-growing digital farming tools.

===== PAGE 21 =====
2200
Trust is becoming the most important
competitive differentiator of our
Trust and
time. We know our obligations don’t
begin and end with the technology
Security
itself. That’s why many of IBM’s
investments have been made in
building trust, privacy and security
into our technology.
For more than a century, IBM has
earned the confidence of businesses
and society by acting as a steward
of our clients’ data and insights,
and by responsibly ushering powerful
new technologies into the world.
That includes ensuring that our
clients’ data is theirs and theirs alone,
while helping them secure it from
mishap or malfeasance. Our values
also guide us to work with purpose
and to act as responsible stewards
of technology.
7 0
b illion
security events
managed each day
1 80,000
developers
participated in
Call for Code

===== PAGE 22 =====
Trust and Security 21
Cities are growing
more secure
Ransomware struck more than 170 U.S. cities in
2019, costing millions, disrupting critical services and
threatening public safety. And it is often targeted at smaller
companies and organizations that don’t have the tools
to combat it.
In Los Angeles, IBM Security and the LA Cyber Lab
are helping businesses fight back. Together, they are building
the Threat Intelligence Sharing Platform to provide the city’s
businesses, utilities and local governments with threat
data. This helps them detect and identify ransomware and
other dangers.
Making enterprise-grade threat intelligence available
to these organizations lets them understand and respond
to threats with speed and tactics previously available only
to large firms. The platform is giving them a fighting chance
against ransomware and other cybercrime.
AI can now
explain itself
In every industry, key workflows and decisions are
benefiting from AI and machine learning.
But a potential drawback is the “black box problem”—
the difficulty in understanding why AI has made a decision
or recommendation. IBM holds as a core principle that
new technology such as AI must always be transparent
and explainable. Now that AI is being used in consequential
use cases, ensuring “explainability” is essential.
To empower users to understand their AI models,
IBM Research released the AI Explainability 360 toolkit.
This comprehensive, open source toolkit uses state-of-
the-art algorithms and methods to provide insights into
a machine’s decision-making process through a single
interface. By adding interpretability and explainability
in AI systems, we can help advance the theory and practice
of responsible and trustworthy AI.

===== PAGE 23 =====
2222
We are working
with purpose and
responsibility
IBM pursues the highest standards of responsibility
in all we do. Our stewardship is focused on three areas:
Data responsibility. We have an obligation to
responsibly handle the data we collect, manage or process.
Through this commitment, IBM earns the trust of the world’s
largest enterprises as a steward of their most valuable data.
Jobs and skills. IBM has invested in building
and preparing a workforce for the 21st century, through
apprenticeship programs, returnships for women reentering
the workforce, veterans programs and skills-building
sessions for more than 3.2 million students worldwide.
Diversity and inclusion. Consciously building
inclusive teams and encouraging diversity of ideas helps
us make the greatest impact for our clients, our colleagues
and the world.
Developers are tackling
natural disasters
As the Founding Partner of Call for Code, a worldwide
developer competition, IBM is rallying the developer
community to envision innovative solutions to the world’s
most pressing problems. The effort is supported by
IBM Code and Response, a multiyear initiative dedicated
to building and deploying open source technologies
to tackle these challenges.
In Barcelona, a nurse, a firefighter and three developers
teamed up to win the 2019 Call for Code Global Challenge
with Prometeo, a solution that uses IBM’s Cloud IoT platform
to help monitor the safety of firefighters in real time as
they battle blazes. The team received a $200,000 prize as
well as support from IBM and the Linux Foundation.
Next up: deployments in Spain.
In 2020, the Call for Code challenge will focus on climate
change, inviting developers to create applications that can
help smooth the path to sustainability.

===== PAGE 24 =====
Trust and Security 23
150,000 students
are learning
new collar skills
It began as a challenge almost a decade ago: How could IBM,
with educators and business and community leaders,
reinvent high school education and help address the global
STEM skills shortage?
Since that time, the P-TECH education model has
grown from one school in Brooklyn, New York, into a global
network of 220 schools and 650 companies. More than
150,000 students are in the pipeline in two dozen countries.
The model integrates high school, college and career
readiness training with curricula mapped to industry needs.
Academically rigorous and economically transformative,
P-TECH schools prepare young women and men, many from
underserved communities, for 21st-century careers. Students
benefit from one-on-one mentoring and paid internships
with partners such as IBM, graduate debt-free with a high
school diploma and a community college degree, and are
first in line for new collar jobs with partner companies.
In 2020, IBM is launching Open P-TECH to equip
young people and educators with foundational knowledge
and professional skills in emerging technologies like
cybersecurity, AI and more, all for free.

===== PAGE 25 =====
24 Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018
Revenue $ 77,147 $ 79,591
Net Income $ 9,431* $ 8,728*
Income from continuing operations $ 9,435* $ 8,723*
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 11,436 $ 12,657
Earnings per share of common stock—continuing operations
Assuming dilution $ 10.57* $ 9.51*
Basic $ 10.63* $ 9.56*
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 12.81 $ 13.81
Net cash provided by operating activities $ 14,770 $ 15,247
Capital expenditures, net $ 2,370 $ 3,716
Share repurchases $ 1,361 $ 4,443
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 5,707 $ 5,666
Per share of common stock $ 6.43 $ 6.21
At December 31: 2019 2018
Cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities $ 9,009 $ 12,222
Total assets $152,186 $123,382
Working capital $ 718 $ 10,918
Total debt $ 62,899 $ 45,812
Total equity $ 20,985 $ 16,929
Common shares outstanding (in millions) 887 892
Stock price per common share $ 134.04 $ 113.67
* Includes charges of $0.1 billion in 2019 and $2.0 billion in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
** See page 46 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.

===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Financials 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Overview 26 Basis & Policies
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 27 A Significant Accounting Policies 74
Management Discussion Snapshot 27 B Accounting Changes 86
Description of Business 29 Performance & Operations
Year in Review 34 C Revenue Recognition 88
Prior Year in Review 53 D Segments 89
Other Information 56 E Acquisitions & Divestitures 93
Looking Forward 56 F Research, Development & Engineering 96
Liquidity and Capital Resources 57 G Taxes 97
Critical Accounting Estimates 60 H Earnings Per Share 99
Currency Rate Fluctuations 63 Balance Sheet & Liquidity
Market Risk 63 I Financial Assets & Liabilities 100
Cybersecurity 64 J Inventory 101
Employees and Related Workforce 64 K Financing Receivables 101
L Property, Plant & Equipment 105
Report of Management 65 M Leases 105
Report of Independent Registered N Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 109
Public Accounting Firm 66
O Investments & Sundry Assets 110
P Borrowings 110
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS Q Other Liabilities 113
Income Statement 68
R Commitments & Contingencies 114
Comprehensive Income 69
S Equity Activity 116
Balance Sheet 70
Risk Management, Compensation/Benefits & Other
Cash Flows 71
T Derivative Financial Instruments 120
Equity 72
U Stock-Based Compensation 123
V Retirement-Related Benefits 125
W Subsequent Events 138
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 139
Selected Quarterly Data 140
Performance Graphs 141
Stockholder Information 142
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 143

===== PAGE 27 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW it is done so that certain financial results can be viewed
The financial section of the International Business Machines without the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency
Corpor ation (IBM or the company) 2019 Annual Report includes exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period
the Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial Statements comparisons of business performance. Financial results
and the Notes to Consolidated Financial State ments. This Over view adjusted for currency are calculated by translating current
is designed to provide the reader with some perspective regarding period activity in local currency using the comparable
the information contained in the financial section. prior-year period’s currency conversion rate. This approach
is used for countries where the functional currency is the
Organization of Information local currency. Generally, when the dollar either strengthens
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant
with an overview of the business and a narrative on our currency rates or adjusting for currency will be higher or lower
financial results and certain factors that may affect our than growth reported at actual exchange rates. See “Currency
future prospects from the perspective of management. Rate Fluctuations” for additional information.
The “Management Discussion Snap shot” presents an
• To provide better transparency on the recurring performance
overview of the key performance drivers in 2019.
of the ongoing business, the company provides revenue
• B eginning with the “Year in Review,” the Manage ment growth rates excluding divested businesses and at constant
Discussion contains the results of operations for each currency. These divested businesses are included in the
reportable segment of the business and a discussion of company’s Other segment.
our financial position and cash flows. Other key sections
• Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual
within the Management Discussion include: “Looking
Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to the
Forward” and “Liquidity and Capital Resources,” which
use of rounded numbers for disclosure purposes.
includes a description of management’s definition and
Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying
use of free cash flow.
whole-dollar numbers.
• T he Consolidated Financial Statements provide an overview
of income and cash flow performance and financial position. Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements.
results of the business, supplementally, management separates
Among other items, the Notes contain our accounting
business results into operating and non-operating categories.
policies, revenue information, acquisitions and divestitures,
Operating earnings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP
certain commitments and contingencies and retirement-
measure that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related
related plans information.
charges, intangible asset amortization, expense resulting from basis
• On July 9, 2019, IBM acquired 100 percent of the differences on equity method investments, retirement-related costs
outstanding shares of Red Hat, Inc. (Red Hat). Red Hat is and discontinued operations and their related tax impacts. Due to
reported within the Cloud & Cognitive Software segment, in the unique, non-recurring nature of the enactment of the U.S. Tax
Cloud & Data Platforms. The consolidated financial results Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. tax reform), management characterizes the
at and as of the year ended December 31, 2019 reflect the one-time provisional charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017
impacts of the acquisition on IBM; including: recognition of and adjustments to that charge as non-operating. Adjustments,
goodwill, intangible assets and related amortization and among others, include true-ups, accounting elections, any changes
deferred tax liabilities, along with other purchase accounting to regulations, laws and audit adjustments that affect the recorded
adjustments including a deferred revenue fair value one-time charge. For acquisitions, operating (non-GAAP) earnings
adjustment. The Consolidated Income Statement for the exclude the amortization of purchased intangible assets and
year ended December 31, 2019 includes impacts from these acquisition-related charges such as in-process research and
purchase accounting adjustments, higher interest expense, development, transaction costs, applicable retention, restructuring
transaction-related costs and other acquisition-related and related expenses, tax charges related to acquisition integration
activities. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures” for and pre-closing charges, such as financing costs. These charges are
additional information. excluded as they may be inconsistent in amount and timing from
period to period and are significantly impacted by the size, type
• Effective the first quarter of 2019, we made a number of
and frequency of the company’s acquisitions. All other spending for
changes to our organizational structure and management
acquired companies is included in both earnings from continuing
system. As a result of these changes, we revised our
operations and in operating (non-GAAP) earnings. Throughout the
reportable segments. There was no change to the
Management Discussion, the impact of acquisitions over the prior
Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to note D,
12-month period may be a driver of higher expense year to year. For
“Segments” for additional information on our reportable
retirement-related costs, management characterizes certain items
segments. The periods presented in this Annual Report are
as operating and others as non-operating, consistent with GAAP.
reported on a comparable basis. We provided recast
We include defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement
historical segment information reflecting these changes
benefit plan service costs, multi-employer plan costs and
in a Form 8-K dated April 4, 2019.
the cost of defined contribution plans in operating earnings.
• T he references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant Non-operating retirement-related costs include defined benefit
currency” in the Management Discussion do not include plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan amortization
operational impacts that could result from fluctuations in of prior service costs, interest cost, expected return on plan
foreign currency rates. When we refer to growth rates at assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any
constant currency or adjust such growth rates for currency,

===== PAGE 28 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
plan curtailments/settlements and pension insolvency costs and FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
other costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are primarily Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute
related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
tied to financial market performance, and the company considers Secur ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking
these costs to be outside of the operational performance of statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on
the business. which it is made; IBM assumes no obligation to update or revise
any such statements except as required by law. Forward-looking
Overall, management believes that supplementally providing statements are based on IBM’s current assumptions regarding
investors with a view of operating earnings as described above future business and financial performance; these statements,
provides increased transparency and clarity into both the by their nature, address matters that are uncertain to different
operational results of the business and the performance of the degrees. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks,
company’s pension plans; improves visibility to management uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to
decisions and their impacts on operational performance; enables be materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this
better comparison to peer companies; and allows the company Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities and
to provide a long-term strategic view of the business going Exchange Commission (SEC), including IBM’s 2019 Form 10-K
forward. Our reportable segment financial results reflect pre-tax filed on February 25, 2020.
operating earnings from continuing operations, consistent with
our management and measurement system. In addition, these
non-GAAP measures provide a perspective consistent with areas
of interest we routinely receive from investors and analysts.
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change**
Revenue $ 77,147 $ 79,591 (3.1)%*
Gross profit margin 47.3% 46.4% 0.9 pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 26,322 $ 25,594 2.8%
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 10,166 $ 11,342 (10.4)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 731 $ 2,619+ (72.1)%
Income from continuing operations $ 9,435 $ 8,723+ 8.2%
Income from continuing operations margin 12.2% 11.0% 1.3 pts.
Net income $ 9,431 $ 8,728+ 8.1%
Earnings per share from continuing operations—assuming dilution $ 10.57 $ 9.51+ 11.1%
Weighted-average shares outstanding—assuming dilution 892.8 916.3 (2.6)%
Assets++ $152,186 $123,382 23.3%
Liabilities++ $131,202 $106,452 23.2%
Equity++ $ 20,985 $ 16,929 24.0%
* (1.0) percent adjusted for currency; 0.2 percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
** 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
+ Includes charges of $2.0 billion or $2.23 of diluted earnings per share in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
++At December 31
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2019 and 2018. See page 46 for additional information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Percent Change*
Net income as reported $ 9,431 $ 8,728 ** 8.1%
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (4) 5 NM
Income from continuing operations $ 9,435 $ 8,723 ** 8.2%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 1,343 649 107.0
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 512 1,248 (58.9)
U.S. tax reform charge 146 2,037 (92.8)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $11,436 $12,657 (9.6)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 12.81 $ 13.81 (7.2)%
* 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
** Includes charges of $2.0 billion in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 29 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In 2019, we reported $77.1 billion in revenue, $9.4 billion in From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue declined
income from continuing operations and operating (non-GAAP) 1.9 percent year to year as reported (1 percent adjusted for
earnings of $11.4 billion, resulting in diluted earnings per share currency), but grew 1 percent excluding divested businesses
from continuing operations of $10.57 as reported and $12.81 on and adjusted for currency. Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA)
an operating (non-GAAP) basis. We also generated $14.8 billion in decreased 4.1 percent (flat adjusted for currency), but grew 1
cash from operations, $11.9 billion in free cash flow and delivered percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
shareholder returns of $7.1 billion in dividends and gross common Asia Pacific declined 4.0 percent year to year as reported
stock repurchases. These results reflect solid performance in key (3 percent adjusted for currency) and 2 percent excluding
high-value areas as we continued to strengthen our foundation divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
for the next chapter of our clients’ digital reinventions. During
2019, we completed the acquisition of Red Hat and have started The consolidated gross margin of 47.3 percent increased 0.9
to benefit from the synergies of IBM and Red Hat together. We points year to year, and the operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
continued to bring new innovations to the market, launching the of 48.0 percent increased 1.1 points versus the prior year. The
new z15, delivering new high-end storage and modernizing and improved margins in 2019 reflect the actions we have taken to
containerizing our software portfolio. We have expanded our focus on higher value and portfolio optimization while also driving
services offerings and skills for the cloud journey and the reach productivity and operational efficiency.
of our Watson/AI offerings. We also divested select businesses
as we continue to prioritize our investments and optimize our Total expense and other (income) increased 2.8 percent in 2019
portfolio for this next chapter in cloud. compared to the prior year. The year-to-year performance was
driven by higher spending including investment to deliver new
Total consolidated revenue decreased 3.1 percent as reported innovations, Red Hat operational spending and interest expense
and 1 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year. from debt issuances to fund the acquisition (8 points), amortization
Excluding divested businesses, revenue increased 0.2 percent of acquired intangible assets and other non-operating activity
adjusted for currency. Cloud & Cognitive Software increased related to the Red Hat acquisition (3 points) and a decrease in
4.5 percent as reported and 6 percent adjusted for currency, intellectual property (IP) income (1 point), partially offset by lower
with strong results from the contribution of Red Hat beginning non-operating retirement-related costs (4 points), gains from
in the third quarter. Cloud & Data Platforms, which includes divestitures (3 points) and the impact of currency (3 points). Total
Red Hat, grew 10.4 percent as reported (12 percent adjusted operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased 4.1
for currency), Cognitive Applications increased 2.3 percent as percent year to year, driven primarily by the same factors excluding
reported (4 percent adjusted for currency), while Transaction the non-operating retirement-related costs and the amortization
Processing Platforms declined 0.5 percent as reported but grew of acquired intangible assets and other non-operating activity
1 percent adjusted for currency. Global Business Services (GBS) related to the Red Hat acquisition.
grew 0.2 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency
led by Consulting which grew 3.7 percent (6 percent adjusted Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $10.2 billion
for currency) with year-to-year improvement in each quarter of decreased 10.4 percent and the pre-tax margin was 13.2
2019. Global Technology Services (GTS) decreased 6.1 percent percent, a decrease of 1.1 points versus 2018. The second
as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency with declines half of 2019 was impacted by the deferred revenue purchase
in Infrastructure & Cloud Services and Technology Support accounting adjustment and Red Hat acquisition-related activity.
Services. Performance in Infrastructure & Cloud Services was The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2019 was 7.2
impacted by lower in-period revenue from client business percent, a decrease of 15.9 points compared to 2018. The
volumes, while the decline in Technology Support Services was year-to-year change was primarily driven by a charge of $2.0
primarily due to transitions in the hardware product cycle. As billion in 2018 for U.S. tax reform. Net income from continuing
we continued to take actions to accelerate the shift to the higher operations of $9.4 billion increased 8.2 percent and the net
value segments of the market opportunity, there was solid growth income from continuing operations margin was 12.2 percent,
in the cloud offerings within GTS. Systems decreased 5.3 percent up 1.3 points year to year primarily due to the 2018 $2.0 billion
year to year as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency. IBM charge for U.S. tax reform. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income
Z decreased 1.1 percent (flat adjusted for currency) reflecting from continuing operations of $12.5 billion decreased 9.0 percent
product cycle dynamics. There was a year-to-year decline year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from
through the first three quarters of the year at the end of the continuing operations decreased 1.1 points to 16.2 percent.
z14 product cycle, but strong growth in the fourth quarter after The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2019 was 8.5 percent, an
shipment of the new z15 mainframe began in the last week of increase of 0.7 points compared to 2018. Operating (non-GAAP)
September. Storage Systems declined 8.9 percent as reported income from continuing operations of $11.4 billion decreased
(8 percent adjusted for currency) with improved year-to-year 9.6 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin from
performance in the second half of the year and growth in the continuing operations of 14.8 percent was down 1.1 points
fourth quarter led by high-end products. Power Systems declined year to year driven primarily by the Red Hat deferred revenue
13.5 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) compared with purchase accounting adjustment and acquisition-related activity.
strong performance in the prior year. Across the segments, total
IBM cloud revenue of $21.2 billion in 2019 grew 11 percent as Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $10.57
reported and 13 percent adjusted for currency and represented in 2019 increased 11.1 percent and operating (non-GAAP) diluted
27 percent of our total 2019 revenue. earnings per share of $12.81 decreased 7.2 percent versus 2018.
In 2019, we repurchased 10.0 million shares of common stock at
a cost of $1.3 billion before the share repurchase program was
suspended at the time of the Red Hat closing.

===== PAGE 30 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2019, we continued to have the financial flexibility Financing activities were a net source of cash of $9.0 billion in
to support the business. Cash, restricted cash and marketable 2019 compared to a net use of cash of $10.5 billion in 2018. The
securities at year end were $9.0 billion, a decrease of $3.2 billion year-to-year increase in cash flow of $19.5 billion was driven by
from December 31, 2018 as we had built up our cash position in an increase in net cash sourced from debt transactions ($16.6
advance of the closing of the Red Hat acquisition. Goodwill and billion) primarily driven by net issuances to fund the Red Hat
intangible assets increased $34.1 billion and total debt increased acquisition and a decrease in cash used for gross common stock
$17.1 billion since December 31, 2018, primarily due to the Red repurchases ($3.1 billion).
Hat acquisition. With strong cash flow from operating activities
and free cash flow, and disciplined financial management, we In January 2020, the company disclosed that it is expecting
significantly deleveraged in the second half of 2019. GAAP earnings per share from continuing operations of at least
$10.57 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at least $13.35 per
Total assets increased $28.8 billion (increased $29.0 billion diluted share for 2020. The company expects free cash flow to be
adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2018 primarily driven by: approximately $12.5 billion in 2020. Refer to the Looking Forward
section for additional information on the company’s expectations.
• Increases in goodwill of $22.0 billion and net intangible
assets of $12.1 billion primarily associated with the
acquisition of Red Hat; and DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the
• An increase in operating right-of-use assets of $5.0 billion
SEC on February 25, 2020, for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
resulting from the adoption of the new leasing standard on
January 1, 2019; partially offset by
We create value for clients by providing integrated solutions
• A decrease in financing receivables of $8.6 billion and products that leverage: data, information technology, deep
primarily due to the wind down of OEM IT commercial expertise in industries and business processes, with trust and
financing operations. security and a broad ecosystem of partners and alliances. IBM
solutions typically create value by enabling new capabilities for
Total liabilities increased $24.7 billion (increased $25.0 billion clients that transform their businesses and help them engage
adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2018 driven by: with their customers and employees in new ways. These solutions
draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting and IT
• An increase in total debt of $17.1 billion primarily driven by
implementation services, cloud, digital and cognitive offerings,
new issuances to finance the Red Hat acquisition; and
and enterprise systems and software which are all bolstered by
• An increase in operating lease liabilities of $5.3 billion one of the world’s leading research organizations.
resulting from the adoption of the new leasing standard.
IBM Strategy
Total equity of $21.0 billion increased $4.1 billion from December IBM’s strategy begins with our clients. IBM is distinguished as
31, 2018 as a result of: being first and foremost an Enterprise company, serving the
world’s leaders in their industries.
• Increases from net income of $9.4 billion and retirement
related plans of $1.4 billion; partially offset by
Serving enterprises requires a distinct set of skills as our clients
• Decreases from dividends of $5.7 billion and gross share entrust us with building, integrating and running the world’s
repurchases of $1.3 billion. mission-critical systems. These are systems that cannot fail,
systems that require the highest levels of privacy and security.
Cash provided by operating activities was $14.8 billion in 2019, a They are built with our software and on our systems, designed
decrease of $0.5 billion compared to 2018, driven primarily by an and managed by IBM services. For example, we manage
increase in cash income tax payments ($0.3 billion), an increase approximately ninety percent of the credit card transactions
in interest payments on debt ($0.3 billion) driven by incremental and half of the world’s wireless connections. We do this with an
debt used to fund the acquisition of Red Hat, and performance- unparalleled commitment to our clients’ data security.
related declines within net income, including lower operating cash
flows due to businesses divested in 2019; partially offset by an We are unique in bringing innovative technology and industry
increase in cash provided by financing receivables ($0.8 billion). expertise on a foundation of trust and security as an integrated
proposition to our clients. This integrated proposition allows us
Net cash used in investing activities of $26.9 billion was $22.0 to deliver business impact that matters to our clients, impact that
billion higher than the prior year, primarily driven by an increase requires bringing together technologies such as hybrid cloud, data
in net cash used for acquisitions ($32.5 billion) driven by the and AI insight with workflow and advanced industry skills. This
acquisition of Red Hat. This was partially offset by an increase integrated proposition helps our clients transform themselves
in cash provided by net non-operating finance receivables from traditional businesses to what we call Cognitive Enterprises.
($7.2 billion) primarily driven by the wind down of the OEM IT
commercial financing operations, a decrease in cash used for
net capital expenditures ($1.3 billion) and an increase in cash
provided by divestitures ($1.1 billion).

===== PAGE 31 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Furthermore, as technology becomes more central for business, Our public cloud is built on a foundation of open source software
as well as in our personal lives, trust matters more than ever. and enterprise grade infrastructure. It is the most open and
For decades we have followed core principles grounded secure public cloud, and it is built for the enterprise with Cloud
in commitments to trust and transparency that guide our Paks—enterprise-ready, containerized software solutions for
responsible development and deployment of new technologies. applications, automation, data, integration and multi-cloud
These values ground our business decisions, inspire our management.
employees, and sustain our client relationships. We have not only
followed guidelines around the responsible handling of data and To accelerate our clients’ success, we acquired Red Hat in 2019,
the stewardship of new technology, but created them, published further strengthening our leadership in hybrid cloud. Red Hat is
them and invited others to adopt similar commitments. Our focus the world’s leader in open source technology, including Enterprise
is not just on our direct client work, but extends to society at Linux, the operating system of the cloud, as well as containers
large, as we have been very active in areas such as education, and OpenShift, technology platforms that create seamless
sustainability and security. This is reinforced through a culture integration between traditional and cloud environments. As the
of inclusion and diversity. All of IBM treats this “responsible leader in open source, Red Hat brings capability that enables
stewardship” as core to our mission. applications to be “written once and run anywhere”, in turn
helping companies avoid lock-in to a single cloud provider,
A New Chapter in Technology thereby taking advantage of the entire industry’s innovation.
2019 ushered in Chapter 2 of our clients’ digital journeys in which These technologies are central to the next era of computing.
the two predominant technology forces of our day—hybrid cloud
and data/AI—are moving from “start-up” to “production at scale”. Our systems and services play a large role in these hybrid
These two forces work together to help companies become what cloud offerings as well. We have introduced new versions of our
we call Cognitive Enterprises—companies that are powered by systems that work securely and seamlessly in the hybrid cloud,
innovation, agility and data-driven intelligent decision making. bringing mission-critical workloads into our clients’ digital
journeys. Through our services, we play a large role in helping
We describe below how IBM is leading the way in Chapter 2. our clients map out their digital journeys, and then helping them
build, manage and run the technology and the workflows.
Hybrid Cloud
Chapter 1 marked the early stages of cloud with the rise of public This integrated value proposition of innovative technology and
cloud. This stage was focused on new end-user applications, industry expertise built on trust and security, and now together
including applications that have allowed consumers to check with Red Hat, is helping our clients realize the full potential and
their bank balances, access social media, make online purchases competitive advantage of the hybrid cloud.
and receive online support. While movement to public cloud
has been strong, only twenty percent of workloads have been Data and AI
addressed in Chapter 1. Clients are merely at the beginning of a A new era of business reinvention is emerging as leading
multi-stage journey. companies are moving from merely improving their processes
to creating truly “intelligent workflows,” processes that are not
Chapter 2 is about clients modernizing the remaining eighty only efficient at what they do, but intrinsically smart: capable of
percent of workloads, moving mission-critical workloads to finding, connecting and analyzing data to uncover deep insights
the cloud and infusing AI deep into the decision-making of that can inform intelligent decisions. Data and AI, in concert with
their businesses. These mission-critical workloads include hybrid cloud, are making intelligent workflows possible.
core financial transaction systems, customer databases and
Enterprise Resource Planning systems. Some of these workloads We have been a pioneer of technologies and services that help
will gravitate to the public cloud in Chapter 2, while others will clients collect, organize, and analyze their vast data stores and
move to a private cloud or remain in traditional IT environments then operationalize AI across their business. Our long-running
for security, compliance and/or performance reasons. innovation in automation, data science, and natural language
processing is helping clients manage their data as a strategic
Wherever clients’ workloads reside, these environments resource and deploy AI for greater insight and more accurate,
must work together seamlessly to communicate, share data trusted predictions.
and share capacity. With enterprises having accumulated
as many as fifteen public clouds, each with its own means of Our data offerings help clients organize, collect, analyze and
management, harmonizing these different clouds has become embed their data into their workflow. IBM software spans areas
a necessity. Bringing these multiple public clouds, private cloud ranging from data management and discovery to reporting,
and traditional IT together is what we call hybrid cloud. Hybrid governance, compliance and risk management. Our systems
cloud defines the mission for Chapter 2 in IT. process our clients’ data with unparalleled speed, accuracy and
security and our services help clients capture and embed the
We are a leader in hybrid cloud, and our mission in Chapter 2 is value of their data into their business.
to bring our expertise and experience in building and managing
mission-critical systems to lead our enterprise clients along this
multi-stage journey.

===== PAGE 32 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Our IBM Watson AI system has been named by industry analysts This business model, supported by our financial model, has
as the worldwide market leader in AI for three consecutive enabled IBM to deliver strong earnings, cash flows and returns
years. Watson is not only a leading AI technology, but a leader to shareholders over the long term.
in enterprise deployments in production and at scale. In addition
to extracting deep insight from data, IBM Watson allows clients Business Segments and Capabilities
to trace the origins of the data that their AI models use, explain Our major operations consist of five business segments: Cloud &
what is behind their recommendations and ensure that bias Cognitive Software, Global Business Services, Global Technology
has not crept into results. Furthermore, IBM Watson is the only Services, Systems and Global Financing.
system that is built for the hybrid cloud, able to work on numerous
public and private clouds. These innovations are making AI more Cloud & Cognitive Software brings together IBM’s software
consumable by everyday users, not just data scientists. platforms and solutions, enabling us to deliver integrated and
secure cloud, data and AI solutions to our clients. It includes
Creating intelligent workflows relies on our integrated proposition all software, except operating system software reported in the
of technology, services and industry expertise, built on a Systems segment.
foundation of trust and security. The way in which we bring these
together is through an interactive process with our clients that we Cloud & Cognitive Software comprises three business areas—
call the IBM Garage, a process of deep collaboration, co-creation Cognitive Applications, Cloud & Data Platforms, and Transaction
and innovation. Processing Platforms.
* * * * * Cloud & Cognitive Software Capabilities
We are in an era when our clients are embedding technology into Cognitive Applications: includes software that address vertical and
their businesses in ways they have never done before. Technology domain-specific solutions, increasingly infused with AI, enabled
is no longer merely a “tool”, it is at the center of their businesses, by IBM’s Watson technology. Application areas such as health,
the source of their competitive advantage and the force behind financial services, Internet of Things (IoT) solutions, weather, and
their emerging business models. security software and services are among the offerings.
In Chapter 2, IBM is bringing hybrid cloud and data/AI together Cloud & Data Platforms: includes the company’s distributed
to help our clients reinvent themselves as Cognitive Enterprises. middleware and data platform software, including Red Hat, which
The most challenging and complex work still lies ahead. With our enables the operation of clients’ hybrid multi-cloud environments,
strong commitment to responsible stewardship and our integrated whether on-premise or in public and private clouds. It also
value proposition, this makes us unique in helping our clients on includes product areas such as Cloud Paks, WebSphere
their transformative digital journeys. distributed, analytics platform software such as DB2 distributed,
information integration, and enterprise content management, as
Business Model well as IoT, Blockchain and AI/Watson platforms.
Our business model is built to provide long-term value to
stakeholders. We bring together innovative technology, industry As clients increasingly move more of their mission-critical
expertise and a commitment to trust and transparency to help workloads to the cloud, their multi-cloud environments will
enterprise clients move from one era to the next. We provide be based on a foundation of Linux, with Kubernetes open-
integrated solutions and platforms, leveraging global capabilities source software to deploy, manage and scale container-based
that include services, software, systems, related financings and applications. Red Hat, which provides the leading Linux operating
fundamental research. The business model has been developed system—Red Hat Enterprise Linux—and the leading hybrid
over time through strategic investments in capabilities and cloud platform—Red Hat OpenShift—is at the center of this
technologies that have long-term growth and profitability transformational shift among clients.
prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
Transaction Processing Platforms: the software that supports
The business model is dynamic, adapting to the continuously client mission critical on-premise workloads in industries such as
changing industry and economic environment, including our shift banking, airlines and retail. This includes transaction processing
to cloud delivery models. We continue to strengthen our position software such as Customer Information Control System and
through strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher- storage software, as well as the analytics and integration
value areas, broadening our industry expertise and integrating AI software running on IBM operating systems (e.g., DB2 and
into more of what we offer. In addition, we are transforming into WebSphere running on z/OS).
a more agile enterprise to drive innovation and speed, as well
as helping to drive productivity, which supports investments for Global Business Services provides clients with consulting,
participation in markets with significant long-term opportunity. business process and application management services.
We also regularly evaluate our portfolio and investments, These professional services deliver value and innovation to
proactively bringing products to end of life, engaging in IP clients through solutions which leverage industry, technology
partnerships and executing divestitures to optimize our portfolio. and business strategy and process expertise. GBS is the
digital reinvention partner for IBM clients, combining industry
knowledge, functional expertise, and applications with the power

===== PAGE 33 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
of business design and cognitive and cloud technologies. The in building and running contemporary, software-defined IT
full portfolio of GBS services is backed by its globally integrated environments. These offerings integrate long-standing expertise
delivery network and integration with technologies, solutions in service management and emerging technologies, drawn from
and services across IBM including IBM Research and Global across IBM’s businesses and ecosystem partners. The portfolio
Technology Services. is built leveraging platforms, such as the IBM Services Platform
with Watson, which augment human intelligence with cognitive
GBS assists clients on their journeys to becoming Cognitive technologies and address complex, hybrid cloud environments.
Enterprises, helping them build business platform strategies IBM’s services capabilities integrate IBM Cloud, cognitive
and experiences, transform processes to intelligent workflows computing and multi-cloud management to provide clients with
using AI and other exponential technologies, and build hybrid, high-performance, end-to-end innovation and an improved ability
open cloud infrastructures. to achieve business objectives.
GBS Capabilities Technology Support Services: delivers comprehensive support
Consulting: provides business consulting services focused on services to maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT
bringing to market solutions that help clients shape their digital infrastructures. These offerings include maintenance for IBM
blueprints and customer experiences, define their cognitive products and other technology platforms, as well as open-source
operating models, unlock the potential in all data to improve and cross-vendor software and solution support, drawing on
decision-making, set their next-generation talent strategies and innovative technologies and leveraging IBM Services Platform
create new technology architectures in a cloud-centric world. with Watson capabilities.
Application Management: delivers system integration, application Systems provides clients with innovative infrastructure platforms
management, maintenance and support services for packaged to help meet the new requirements of hybrid multi-cloud and
software, as well as custom and traditional applications. Value enterprise AI workloads. IBM Systems also designs advanced
is delivered through advanced capabilities in areas such as semiconductor and systems technology in collaboration with IBM
security and privacy, application testing and modernization, Research, primarily for use in our systems.
cloud application migration and automation.
Systems Capabilities
Global Process Services (GPS): delivers finance, procurement, Systems Hardware: includes IBM’s servers and Storage Systems.
talent and engagement, and industry-specific business process
outsourcing services. These services deliver improved business Servers: a range of high-performance systems designed to
results to clients through a consult-to-operate model which address computing capacity, security and performance needs
includes the strategic change and/or operation of the client’s of businesses, hyperscale cloud service providers and scientific
processes, applications and infrastructure. GBS is redefining computing organizations. The portfolio includes IBM Z and
process services for both growth and efficiency through the LinuxONE, trusted enterprise platforms for integrating data,
application of the power of cognitive technologies like Watson, transactions and insight; and Power Systems, a system designed
as well as the IoT, blockchain and deep analytics. from the ground up for big data and enterprise AI, optimized for
hybrid cloud and Linux.
Global Technology Services provides compre hensive IT
infrastructure and platform services that create business value Storage Systems: data storage products and solutions that
for clients. Clients gain access to leading-edge, high-quality allow clients to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex
services, and realize greater flexibility and economic value. volumes of digital information and to fuel data-centric cognitive
This is enabled through insights drawn from IBM’s decades applications. These solutions address critical client requirements
of experience across thousands of engagements, the skills of for information retention and archiving, security, compliance and
practitioners, advanced technologies, applied innovation from storage optimization, including data deduplication, availability
IBM Research and global scale. and virtualization. The portfolio consists of a broad range of flash
storage, disk and tape storage solutions.
GTS Capabilities
Infrastructure & Cloud Services: delivers a portfolio of project, Operating Systems Software: IBM Z operating system
managed, outsourcing and cloud-delivered services focused on environments include z/OS, a security-rich, high-performance
clients’ enterprise IT infrastructure environments to enable digital enterprise operating system, as well as Linux. Power Systems
transformation with improved quality, flexibility and economic offers a choice of AIX, IBM i or Linux operating systems. These
value. The portfolio contains the IBM Cloud and a comprehensive operating systems leverage POWER architecture to deliver
set of hybrid cloud services and solutions that include resiliency, secure, reliable and high performing enterprise-class workloads
network and security capabilities to assist enterprise clients across a breadth of server offerings.

===== PAGE 34 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing encompasses two primary businesses: Global Markets
financing, primarily conducted through IBM Credit LLC (IBM IBM operates in more than 175 countries with a broad distribution
Credit), and remanufacturing and remarketing. IBM Credit is a of revenue. To manage this global footprint, Global Markets leads
wholly owned subsidiary of IBM that accesses the capital markets our dedicated country-based IBM operations in order to serve
directly. IBM Credit, through its financing solutions, facilitates IBM clients, develop markets, and ultimately, ensure IBM is led
clients’ acquisition of information technology systems, software through a client lens.
and services in the areas where we have expertise. The financing
arrangements are predominantly for products or services that are These integrated teams serve our clients locally, complemented
critical to the end users’ business operations. Global Financing by digital capabilities, global talent and resources, and an
conducts a comprehensive credit evaluation of its clients prior extensive partner ecosystem. These country teams have client
to extending financing. As a captive financier, Global Financing relationship managers at their center, who integrate teams of
has the benefit of both deep knowledge of its client base and IBM consultants, solution specialists, delivery professionals
a clear insight into the products and services financed. These and business partners on behalf of clients. Their mission is to
factors allow the business to effectively manage two of the provide insights and innovation and co-create with clients to
major risks associated with financing, credit and residual value, help them address their most pressing business challenges and
while generating strong returns on equity. Global Financing also opportunities.
maintains a long-term partnership with IBM’s clients through
various stages of the IT asset life cycle—from initial purchase In this way, we serve as a trusted partner to clients, establishing
and technology upgrades to asset disposition decisions. and maintaining relationships that deliver long-term value based
on industry expertise, innovative technologies and an ability to
Global Financing Capabilities deliver mission critical capabilities to an enterprise at scale.
Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan
financing to end users and internal clients for terms up to seven Research, Development and Intellectual Property
years. Assets financed are primarily new and used IT hardware, Our research and development (R&D) operations differentiate
software and services where we have expertise. Internal us from our competitors. In 2019, we invested approximately
financing is predominantly in support of Global Technology 8 percent of total revenue for R&D, focusing on high-growth,
Services’ long-term client service contracts. All internal financing high-value opportunities. IBM Research works with clients and
arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are based upon our business units through global labs on near- and mid-term
market conditions. innovations. It delivers many new technologies to our portfolio
every year and helps clients address their most difficult challenges.
Commercial Financing: short-term working capital financing IBM Research scientists are conducting pioneering work in
to suppliers, distributors and resellers of IBM. Beginning in the artificial intelligence, quantum computing, security, cloud, systems
second quarter of 2019 and continuing throughout the year, we and more—applying these technologies across industries including
wound down the portion of our commercial financing operations financial services, healthcare, manufacturing and automotive.
which provides short-term working capital solutions for Original
Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) IT suppliers, distributors In 2019, for the 27th consecutive year, IBM was awarded more
and resellers. This wind down is consistent with IBM’s capital U.S. patents than any other company. IBM’s 9,262 patents
allocation strategy and high-value focus. Commercial Financing awarded in 2019 represent a diverse range of inventions in
also includes internal activity where Global Financing factors a strategic growth areas for the company, including more than
selected portion of IBM’s accounts receivable primarily for cash 4,500 patents related to work in artificial intelligence, cloud,
management purposes, at arm’s-length rates. This program was cybersecurity and quantum computing.
suspended in the second quarter of 2019.
We actively continue to seek IP protection for our innovations,
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: assets include used while increasing emphasis on other initiatives designed
equipment returned from lease transactions, or used and surplus to leverage our IP leadership. Some of our technological
equipment acquired internally or externally. These assets may breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM products, while
be refurbished or upgraded, and sold or leased to new or existing others are licensed and may be used in IBM products and/or
clients both externally and internally. Externally remarketed the products of the licensee. As part of our business model,
equipment revenue represents sales or leases to clients and we license certain of our IP assets, which constitute high-value
resellers. Internally remarketed equipment revenue primarily technology, but may be applicable in more mature markets. The
represents used equipment that is sold internally to Global licensee drives the future development of the IP and ultimately
Technology Services. Systems may also sell the equipment that expands the customer base. This generates IP income for IBM
it purchases from Global Financing to external clients. both upon licensing, and with any ongoing royalty arrangements
between it and the licensee. While our various proprietary IP
IBM Worldwide Organizations rights are important to our success, we believe our business as
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s a whole is not materially dependent on any particular patent or
delivery of value to its clients: license, or any particular group of patents or licenses. IBM owns
or is licensed under a number of patents, which vary in duration,
• Global Markets
relating to its products.
• Research, Development and Intellectual Property

===== PAGE 35 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2019 versus 2018 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s
external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to
reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Revenue
Cloud & Cognitive Software $23,200 $22,209 * 4.5%** 6.2%
Gross margin 76.7% 77.6%* (0.9)pts.**
Global Business Services 16,634 16,595* 0.2% 2.4%
Gross margin 27.7% 26.8%* 0.9 pts.
Global Technology Services 27,361 29,146* (6.1)% (3.7)%
Gross margin 34.8% 34.4%* 0.3 pts.
Systems 7,604 8,034 (5.3)% (4.1)%
Gross margin 53.1% 49.8% 3.2 pts.
Global Financing 1,400 1,590 (11.9)% (10.0)%
Gross margin 35.6% 29.1% 6.4 pts.
Other 948 2,018* (53.0)% (51.7)%
Gross margin 4.7% 37.8%* (33.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $77,147 $79,591 (3.1)%+ (1.0)%
Total consolidated gross profit $36,488 $36,936 (1.2)%**
Total consolidated gross margin 47.3% 46.4% 0.9 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 534 372 43.8%
Acquisition-related charges 13 — NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $37,035 $37,307 (0.7)%**
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 48.0% 46.9% 1.1 pts.
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
** 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
+ 0.2 percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
NM—Not meaningful
Cloud & Cognitive Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018* Change** Currency**
Cloud & Cognitive Software external revenue $23,200 $22,209 4.5% 6.2%
Cognitive Applications $ 5,765 $ 5,633 2.3% 3.9%
Cloud & Data Platforms 9,499 8,603 10.4 12.3
Transaction Processing Platforms 7,936 7,974 (0.5) 1.4
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
** 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting.
Cloud & Cognitive Software revenue of $23,200 million increased and IBM are driving synergies with strong adoption of Cloud Paks
4.5 percent as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2019 since their introduction, expansion of our combined client base
compared to the prior year. There was strong growth in Cloud and more than 2,000 clients using our hybrid cloud platform.
& Data Platforms, as reported and at constant currency, driven Cognitive Applications also grew as reported and at constant
primarily by the acquisition of Red Hat in the third quarter of 2019. currency. Transaction Processing Platforms declined year to year
Red Hat had continued strong performance since the acquisition, as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted for currency driven by
in Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), application development and strong fourth-quarter performance.
emerging technologies, led by OpenShift and Ansible. Red Hat

===== PAGE 36 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cognitive Applications revenue of $5,765 million grew 2.3 percent ($ in millions)
as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the Yr.-to-Yr.
prior year, driven by double-digit growth as reported and adjusted Percent/
Margin
for currency in Security, and growth in industry verticals such as For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018* Change**
IoT. The Security performance included continued strong results Cloud & Cognitive Software
in threat management software and services offerings. Within
External gross profit $17,790 $17,224 3.3%
IoT, we had good revenue performance across the portfolio as
External gross profit
we continued to invest in new offerings and industry-specific
margin 76.7% 77.6% (0.9)pts.
solutions.
Pre-tax income $ 7,952 $ 8,882 (10.5)%
Cloud & Data Platforms revenue of $9,499 million increased 10.4 Pre-tax margin 30.6% 35.0% (4.4)pts.
percent as reported (12 percent adjusted for currency) compared * Recast to reflect segment changes.
to the prior year. Performance was driven by the addition of RHEL ** 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and
and OpenShift and the continued execution of the combined Red acquisition-related activity.
Hat and IBM hybrid strategy.
The Cloud & Cognitive Software gross profit margin decreased
Transaction Processing Platforms revenue of $7,936 million 0.9 points to 76.7 percent in 2019 compared to the prior year.
decreased 0.5 percent as reported, but grew 1 percent adjusted The gross profit margin decline was driven by the purchase price
for currency in 2019, compared to the prior year. Revenue accounting impacts from the Red Hat acquisition.
performance reflects the ongoing investment in IBM platforms,
and the timing of larger transactions that are tied to client Pre-tax income of $7,952 million decreased 10.5 percent
business volumes and buying cycles. compared to the prior year with a pre-tax margin decline of 4.4
points to 30.6 percent which reflects the acquisition of Red Hat,
Within Cloud & Cognitive Software, cloud revenue of $4.2 ongoing investments in key strategic areas and lower income
billion grew 40 percent as reported and 42 percent adjusted for from IP partnership agreements.
currency year to year, reflecting the acquisition of Red Hat and
client adoption of our hybrid cloud offerings.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $16,634 $16,595 * 0.2% 2.4%
Consulting $ 7,993 $ 7,705 3.7% 5.6%
Application Management 7,646 7,852 (2.6) (0.3)
Global Process Services 995 1,037* (4.1) (1.3)
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
GBS revenue of $16,634 million increased 0.2 percent as reported Application Management revenue of $7,646 million decreased
and 2 percent adjusted for currency in 2019 compared to the 2.6 percent as reported, but was flat adjusted for currency. We
prior year. The strong growth in Consulting reflected GBS’ ability had growth in offerings that help clients develop and manage
to bring together our industry specific expertise and innovative cloud applications and modernize and automate their application
technology portfolio to help clients with their digital reinventions. portfolio, offset by continued decline in the more traditional
Our performance reflects continued investment in offerings and application management engagements. With the acquisition
capabilities to help advise clients and move their applications to of Red Hat, we continued to integrate OpenShift as clients’
hybrid multi-cloud environments. In the second half, we saw an preferred cloud-native application development platform.
acceleration in new Red Hat engagements.
Global Process Services revenue of $995 million decreased
Consulting revenue of $7,993 million increased 3.7 percent 4.1 percent as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) as
as reported and 6 percent adjusted for currency compared to demand has been shifting away from traditional Business Process
the prior year. This strong performance was driven primarily by Outsourcing (BPO) offerings to new business platforms around
growth in offerings that enable each phase of our clients’ digital intelligent workflows.
journey. These offerings include cognitive technology and data
platform services, application modernization and next-generation Within GBS, cloud revenue of $5.2 billion grew 10 percent as
enterprise applications and offerings that use AI to help clients reported and 13 percent adjusted for currency, reflecting the
unlock new opportunities and realize productivity improvements. growth in cloud consulting engagements and cloud application
development.

===== PAGE 37 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions) The GBS profit margin increased 0.9 points to 27.7 percent and
Yr.-to-Yr. pre-tax income of $1,666 million increased 2.2 percent year to
Percent/ year. The pre-tax margin of 9.9 percent increased slightly year
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018* Change to year. The year-to-year improvements in margins and pre-tax
Global Business Services income were driven by the continued mix shift to higher-value
offerings, the yield from delivery productivity improvements and
External gross profit $4,606 $4,448 3.5%
a currency benefit from leveraging the global delivery resource
External gross profit
model. We continued to invest in our services offerings and skills
margin 27.7% 26.8% 0.9 pts.
necessary to assist our clients on their cloud journey.
Pre-tax income $1,666 $1,629 2.2%
Pre-tax margin 9.9% 9.6% 0.2 pts.
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
Global Technology Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Global Technology Services external revenue $27,361 $29,146 * (6.1)% (3.7)%
Infrastructure & Cloud Services $20,736 $22,185* (6.5)% (4.1)%
Technology Support Services 6,625 6,961 (4.8) (2.2)
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
GTS revenue of $27,361 million decreased 6.1 percent as Technology Support Services (TSS) revenue of $6,625 million
reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2019 compared to decreased 4.8 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted for
the prior year. We had continued growth in cloud services that currency) in 2019, partially driven by dynamics in the hardware
help clients move and manage workloads. However, performance product cycles.
reflected lower client business volumes in more traditional
labor-based managed services. We continue to take actions to Within GTS, cloud revenue of $8.6 billion grew 8 percent as
accelerate the shift to higher-value segments of the market and reported and 10 percent adjusted for currency.
are introducing new managed services offerings for public and
private cloud, in areas like cybersecurity, data management and ($ in millions)
hybrid orchestration. We are investing in joint services offerings Yr.-to-Yr.
integrating GTS and GBS, and deploying joint go-to-market Percent/
Margin
capabilities, as clients demand solutions that merge applications For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018* Change
and infrastructure. Although lower business volumes impacted Global Technology Services
full-year revenue and profit in 2019, we ended the year with
External total gross profit $9,515 $10,035 (5.2)%
growth in cloud signings and a solid pipeline of future deals that
External total gross
will deliver productivity to our clients.
profit margin 34.8% 34.4% 0.3 pts.
Pre-tax income $1,645 $ 1,781 (7.6)%
Infrastructure & Cloud Services revenue of $20,736 million
decreased 6.5 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for Pre-tax margin 5.8% 5.9% (0.2)pts.
currency) compared to the prior year. Revenue was impacted by * Recast to reflect segment changes.
our customers’ own business volumes which were lower year
to year in certain offerings. Clients are modernizing their core The GTS gross profit margin increased 0.3 points year to year
infrastructures to hybrid multi-cloud infrastructures. GTS is to 34.8 percent, due to the benefits of workforce actions and
continuing to invest in cloud capabilities, introduce new managed the continued scale out of our public cloud. We continued to
services offerings and build out its cloud data center footprint take structural actions to improve our cost competitiveness
to capture this opportunity. Growth in cloud signings reflects and are accelerating the use of AI and automation in delivery
our re-alignment of GTS offerings to help our clients on their operations, including leveraging Red Hat’s Ansible platform.
journey to cloud, infusing offerings with IP and leveraging Red Pre-tax income of $1,645 million decreased 7.6 percent, driven
Hat’s capabilities. primarily by the decline in revenue and gross profit, and a higher
level of workforce rebalancing charges in the current year.
Pre-tax margin of 5.8 percent was essentially flat year to year,
with the 2019 pre-tax margin reflecting benefits from structural
and workforce actions.

===== PAGE 38 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Services Backlog and Signings
($ in billions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
At December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Total backlog $112.4 $116.1 (3.1)% (2.7)%
The estimated total services backlog at December 31, 2019 was calculation of signings. The calculation used by management
$112 billion, a decrease of 3.1 percent as reported (3 percent involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s
adjusted for currency). commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement,
and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Total services backlog includes Infrastructure & Cloud Services,
Security Services, Consulting, Global Process Services, Signings include Infrastructure & Cloud Services, Security
Application Management and TSS. Total backlog is intended to Services, Consulting, Global Process Services and Application
be a statement of overall work under contract which is either Management contracts. Contract extensions and increases in
noncancellable, or which historically has very low likelihood scope are treated as signings only to the extent of the incremental
of termination, given the criticality of certain services to the new value. TSS is generally not included in signings as the
company’s clients. Total backlog does not include as-a-Service maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where
arrangements that allow for termination under contractual revenues equal renewals. Certain longer-term TSS contracts
commitment terms. Backlog estimates are subject to change and that have characteristics similar to outsourcing contracts are
are affected by several factors, including terminations, changes included in signings.
in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for
revenue not materialized and adjustments for currency. Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the
Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be
value of a client’s commitment under a services contract. There recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or
are no third-party standards or requirements governing the coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Total signings $40,741 $44,700 (8.9)% (6.9)%
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $7,604 $8,034 (5.3)% (4.1)%
Systems Hardware $5,918 $6,363 (7.0)% (5.9)%
IBM Z (1.1) (0.3)
Power Systems (13.5) (12.1)
Storage Systems (8.9) (7.6)
Operating Systems Software 1,686 1,671 0.9 2.6
Systems revenue of $7,604 million decreased 5.3 percent year Within Systems Hardware, IBM Z revenue decreased 1.1 percent
to year as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency). Systems as reported but was essentially flat adjusted for currency,
Hardware revenue of $5,918 million declined 7.0 percent as reflecting the mainframe product cycles. Revenue declined
reported (6 percent adjusted for currency), driven primarily by through the first three quarters due to the end of the z14 product
declines in Power Systems and Storage Systems. Operating cycle, but there was strong growth in the fourth quarter driven
Systems Software revenue of $1,686 million grew 0.9 percent by z15 shipments. The z15’s strong performance demonstrates
as reported (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the client demand for technology that offers improved data privacy
prior year. and resiliency in the hybrid cloud environment. The z15

===== PAGE 39 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
mainframe’s capabilities extend the platform’s differentiation Pre-tax income of $701 million declined 22.4 percent and pre-tax
with encryption everywhere, cloud-native development and margin of 8.4 percent decreased 1.8 points year to year driven
instant recovery. In October, we announced OpenShift for IBM Z, by the declines in Power Systems and Storage Systems revenue
bringing together the industry’s most comprehensive enterprise and the continued investment in innovation across the Systems
container and Kubernetes platform with the enterprise server portfolio, mitigated by the benefit from the new hardware
platforms of IBM Z and LinuxONE. IBM Z continues to deliver a launches in the second-half 2019.
high-value, secure and scalable platform for our clients.
Global Financing
Power Systems revenue decreased 13.5 percent as reported Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as
(12 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, due to the strong a stand-alone entity. Global Financing facilitates IBM clients’
performance during the second half of 2018 driven by Linux and the acquisition of information technology systems, software and
introduction of the POWER9-based architecture in our mid-range services by providing financing solutions in the areas where
and high-end products. the company has expertise, while generating strong returns on
equity. Global Financing also optimizes the recovery of residual
Storage Systems revenue decreased 8.9 percent as reported values by selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used
(8 percent adjusted for currency) year to year, with improvements equipment to new clients, or extending lease arrangements
in year-to-year performance in the fourth quarter of 2019, driven with current clients. Sales of equipment include equipment
primarily by the launch of the next generation high-end storage returned at the end of a lease, surplus internal equipment
system DS8900 in November. and used equipment purchased externally. Residual value is a
risk unique to the financing business and management of this
Within Systems, cloud revenue of $2.9 billion declined 4 percent risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately project future
as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency. equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing has
insight into product plans and cycles for both the IBM and OEM
($ in millions) IT products under lease. Based upon this product information,
Yr.-to-Yr. Global Financing continually monitors projections of future
Percent/ equipment values and compares them with the residual values
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change reflected in the portfolio.
Systems
Results of Operations
External Systems
Hardware gross profit $2,622 $2,590 1.2% ($ in millions)
External Systems Yr.-to-Yr.
Hardware gross Percent
profit margin 44.3% 40.7% 3.6 pts. For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change
External revenue $1,400 $1,590 (11.9 )%
External Operating
Systems Software Internal revenue 1,232 1,610 (23.5)
gross profit $1,412 $1,412 0.0% Total revenue $2,632 $3,200 (17.8 )%
External Operating Pre-tax income $1,055 $1,361 (22.5)%
Systems Software
gross profit margin 83.8% 84.5% (0.7)pts.
External total In 2019, Global Financing delivered external revenue of $1,400
gross profit $4,034 $4,002 0.8% million and total revenue of $2,632 million, with a decrease in
External total gross gross margin of 2.7 points to 58.8 percent. Total pre-tax income
profit margin 53.1% 49.8% 3.2 pts. of $1,055 million decreased 22.5 percent compared to 2018 and
Pre-tax income $ 701 $ 904 (22.4)% return on equity decreased 5.0 points to 25.8 percent.
Pre-tax margin 8.4% 10.2% (1.8)pts.
Global Financing total revenue decreased 17.8 percent compared
to the prior year. This was due to a decrease in internal revenue
of 23.5 percent, driven by decreases in internal used equipment
The Systems gross profit margin increased 3.2 points to 53.1
sales (down 27.4 percent to $862 million) and internal financing
percent in 2019 compared to the prior year. The increase was
(down 12.6 percent to $370 million). External revenue declined
driven by actions taken in 2018 to better position the cost
11.9 percent due to decreases in external financing (down 8.5
structure over the longer term, a mix to IBM Z hardware and
percent to $1,120 million) and external used equipment sales
operating systems and margin improvement in Storage Systems.
(down 23.4 percent to $281 million).

===== PAGE 40 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The decrease in internal financing revenue was due to lower Global Financing pre-tax income decreased 22.5 percent year to
average asset balances, partially offset by higher asset yields. year primarily driven by a decrease in gross profit ($422 million),
The decrease in external financing revenue reflects the wind partially offset by a decrease in total expense ($115 million),
down of the OEM IT commercial financing operations. which was mainly driven by a decline in IBM shared expenses in
line with the segment’s performance, a lower provision for credit
Sales of used equipment represented 43.4 percent and 48.5 losses and a gain from the sale of certain commercial financing
percent of Global Financing’s revenue for the years ended capabilities in the first quarter of 2019.
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The decrease in
2019 was due to a lower volume of internal used equipment The decrease in return on equity from 2018 to 2019 was primarily
sales. The gross profit margin on used sales was 52.2 percent and due to lower net income. Refer to page 45 for the details of the
54.2 percent for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, after-tax income and return on equity calculations.
respectively. The decrease in the gross profit margin was driven by
lower margins on internal used equipment sales.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, we also measure revenue performance on a geographic basis.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent Change
Yr.-to-Yr. Excluding Divested
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change Businesses And
Percent Adjusted for Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Currency Currency
Total revenue $77,147 $79,591 (3.1 )% (1.0)% 0.2%
Americas $36,274 $36,994 (1.9)% (1.1)% 0.8%
Europe/Middle East/Africa 24,443 25,491 (4.1) 0.4 1.3
Asia Pacific 16,430 17,106 (4.0) (3.0) (2.5)
Total revenue of $77,147 million in 2019 decreased 3.1 percent Total Expense and Other (Income)
year to year as reported (1 percent adjusted for currency),
($ in millions)
but increased 0.2 percent excluding divested businesses and
Yr.-to-Yr.
adjusted for currency. Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change*
Americas revenue decreased 1.9 percent as reported (1 percent
Total consolidated expense
adjusted for currency), but grew 1 percent excluding divested
and other (income) $26,322 $25,594 2.8%
businesses and adjusted for currency. Within North America, the
U.S. decreased 2.4 percent and Canada increased 4.0 percent Non-operating adjustments
as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency). Latin America Amortization of acquired
declined as reported but grew adjusted for currency. Within Latin intangible assets (764) (437) 74.8
America, Brazil declined 4.8 percent as reported, but was flat Acquisition-related charges (409) (16) NM
adjusted for currency. Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income (615) (1,572) (60.9)
EMEA revenue decreased 4.1 percent as reported, but was Operating (non-GAAP)
essentially flat adjusted for currency and increased 1 percent expense and
excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency. As other (income) $24,533 $23,569 4.1%
reported, the U.K., France and Italy decreased 2.9 percent, Total consolidated
4.1 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively, but grew 1 percent, expense-to-revenue ratio 34.1% 32.2% 2.0 pts.
1 percent and 4 percent, respectively, adjusted for currency. Operating (non-GAAP)
Germany decreased 7.9 percent as reported and 3 percent expense-to-revenue ratio 31.8% 29.6% 2.2 pts.
adjusted for currency. The Middle East and Africa region decreased
* 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and
3.5 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted for currency.
acquisition-related activity.
NM—Not meaningful
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 4.0 percent as reported
(3 percent adjusted for currency) and 2 percent excluding The following Red Hat-related expenses were included in
divested businesses and adjusted for currency. Japan increased 2019 total consolidated expense and other (income), with no
2.3 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for currency. corresponding expense in the prior-year: Red Hat operational
Australia decreased 17.3 percent as reported and 11 percent spending, interest expense from debt issuances to fund the
adjusted for currency. China decreased 13.4 percent as reported acquisition and other acquisition-related activity, including:
and 11 percent adjusted for currency and India decreased amortization of acquired intangible assets, retention and legal
8.1 percent as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency. and advisory fees associated with the transaction.

===== PAGE 41 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) increased 2.8 percent in Bad debt expense increased $22 million in 2019 compared
2019 versus the prior year primarily driven by higher spending to 2018. The receivables provision coverage was 1.7 percent
including Red Hat operational spending and investments in at December 31, 2019, an increase of 10 basis points from
software and systems innovation, higher interest expense, December 31, 2018.
non-operating acquisition-related activity associated with the
Red Hat transaction and lower IP income, partially offset by Research, Development and Engineering Expense
lower non-operating retirement-related costs, divesture-related
($ in millions)
activity (gains on divestitures and lower spending) and the effects
Yr.-to-Yr.
of currency. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other Percent
(income) increased 4.1 percent year to year, driven primarily by For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change
the factors above excluding the higher non-operating acquisition Total consolidated
related activity and lower non-operating retirement-related costs research, development
described above. and engineering $5,989 $5,379 11.3%
Non-operating adjustment
For additional information regarding total expense and other Acquisition-related charges (53) — NM
(income) for both expense presentations, see the following Operating (non-GAAP)
analyses by category. research, development
and engineering $5,936 $5,379 10.4%
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
NM—Not meaningful
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense was
Percent 7.8 percent of revenue in 2019 and 6.8 percent of revenue in 2018.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change
Selling, general and
RD&E expense increased 11.3 percent in 2019 versus 2018
administrative expense
primarily driven by:
Selling, general and
administrative—other $17,099 $16,438 4.0% • Higher spending (11 points) including investment in the z15
Advertising and promotional and Red Hat spending in the second half of 2019 (8 points);
expense 1,647 1,466 12.3 and
Workforce rebalancing
• Higher acquisition-related charges associated with the
charges 555 598 (7.2)
Red Hat transaction (1 point); partially offset by
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets 762 435 74.9 • The effects of currency (1 point).
Stock-based compensation 453 361 25.2
Operating (non-GAAP) expense increased 10.4 percent year
Bad debt expense 89 67 32.5
to year primarily driven by the same factors excluding the
Total consolidated
acquisition-related charges associated with the Red Hat
selling, general and
transaction.
administrative expense $20,604 $19,366 6.4%
Non-operating adjustments
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
Amortization of acquired
intangible assets (762) (435) 74.9 ($ in millions)
Acquisition-related charges (282) (15) NM Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
Operating (non-GAAP) For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change
selling, general and Licensing of intellectual
administrative expense $19,560 $18,915 3.4% property including
royalty-based fees $367 $ 723 (49.2)%
NM—Not meaningful
Custom development income 246 275 (10.5)
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense Sales/other transfers of
increased 6.4 percent in 2019 versus 2018, driven primarily by intellectual property 34 28 22.6
the following factors: Total $648 $1,026 (36.9)%
• Higher spending (5 points) driven by Red Hat spending
(5 points); and Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based
• Higher acquisition-related charges and amortization of fees decreased 49.2 percent in 2019 compared to 2018. This
acquired intangible assets associated with the Red Hat was primarily due to a decline in new partnership agreements
acquisition (3 points); partially offset by compared to the prior year. The timing and amount of licensing,
sales or other transfers of IP may vary significantly from period
• The effects of currency (2 points). to period depending upon the timing of licensing agreements,
economic conditions, industry consolidation and the timing of
Operating (non-GAAP) expense increased 3.4 percent year new patents and know-how development.
to year primarily driven by the same factors excluding the
acquisition-related charges and amortization of acquired
intangible assets associated with the Red Hat transaction.

===== PAGE 42 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense Interest expense increased $621 million compared to 2018.
Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the
($ in millions)
Consolidated Income Statement only if the related external
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest) in 2019
Other (income) and expense was $1,952 million, an increase of $473 million year to year,
Foreign currency transaction driven by a higher average debt balance and higher interest rates
losses/(gains) $ (279) $ (427) (34.6)% as we issued debt to finance the Red Hat acquisition.
(Gains)/losses on derivative
instruments 15 434 (96.6) Operating (non-GAAP) interest expense increased $393 million
Interest income (349) (264) 32.2 compared to the prior-year period. It excludes the Red Hat
pre-closing debt financing costs.
Net (gains)/losses from
securities and investment
assets (32) (101) (67.9) Stock-Based Compensation
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $679 million increased
Retirement-related
costs/(income) 615 1,572 (60.9) $169 million compared to 2018. This was primarily due to
increases related to the issuances and conversions of stock-based
Other (937) (63) NM
compensation for Red Hat ($150 million) and issuance of restricted
Total consolidated other
stock units ($27 million). Stock-based compensation cost, and the
(income) and expense $ (968) $ 1,152 NM
year-to-year change, was reflected in the following categories:
Non-operating adjustments
Cost: $100 million, up $18 million; SG&A expense: $453 million,
Amortization of acquired
up $91 million; and RD&E expense: $126 million, up $60 million.
intangible assets (2) (2) 50.0%
Acquisition-related Retirement-Related Plans
charges 154 0 NM
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all
Non-operating retirement- retirement-related plans. Total operating costs/(income) are
related costs/(income) (615) (1,572) (60.9)%
included in the Consolidated Income Statement within the
Operating (non-GAAP) other caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of
(income) and expense $(1,431) $ (422) 239.4% the plan participants.
NM—Not meaningful
($ in millions)
Total consolidated other (income) and expense was income of Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
$968 million in 2019 compared to expense of $1,152 million in For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change
2018. The year-to-year change was primarily driven by:
Retirement-related
• Lower non-operating retirement-related costs ($957 million). plans—cost
Refer to “Retirement-Related Plans” for additional information. Service cost $ 385 $ 431 (10.7)%
Multi-employer plans 32 38 (16.9)
• Higher gains from divestitures ($833 million) reflected in
Cost of defined
Other; and
contribution plans 1,040 1,024 1.5
• Higher net exchange gains (including derivative instruments) Total operating costs/
($272 million). The company’s hedging programs help (income) $ 1,457 $ 1,494 (2.5)%
mitigate currency impacts in the Consolidated Income Interest cost $ 2,929 $ 2,726 7.4%
Statement.
Expected return on
plan assets (4,192) (4,049) 3.5
Operating (non-GAAP) other (income) and expense was $1,431
Recognized actuarial
million of income in 2019 and increased $1,010 million compared
losses 1,819 2,941 (38.2)
to the prior-year period. The year-to-year change was primarily
Amortization of prior
driven by the same factors excluding lower non-operating
service costs/(credits) (9) (73) (87.6)
retirement-related costs.
Curtailments/settlements 41 11 262.2
Other costs 28 16 76.2
Interest Expense
Total non-operating
($ in millions) costs/(income) $ 615 $ 1,572 (60.9)%
Yr.-to-Yr.
Total retirement-related
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change plans—cost $ 2,072 $ 3,066 (32.4)%
Interest expense $1,344 $723 85.9%
Non-operating adjustment Total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost decreased by $994
Acquisition-related charges (228) — NM million compared to 2018, primarily driven by a decrease in
Operating (non-GAAP) recognized actuarial losses ($1,123 million), primarily due to the
interest expense $1,116 $723 54.4% change in the amortization period in the U.S. Qualified Personal
Pension Plan and higher expected return on plan assets ($143
NM—Not meaningful
million), partially offset by higher interest costs ($203 million).

===== PAGE 43 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section, Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2019 and 2018
we characterize certain retirement-related costs as operating were 887.1 million and 892.5 million, respectively. The year-
and others as non-operating. Utilizing this characterization, to-year decrease was primarily the result of the common stock
operating retirement-related costs in 2019 were $1,457 million, repurchase program. The average number of common shares
a decrease of $37 million compared to 2018. Non-operating costs outstanding assuming dilution was 23.5 million shares lower in
of $615 million in 2019 decreased $957 million year to year, driven 2019 versus 2018.
primarily by the same factors as above.
Financial Position
Income Taxes Dynamics
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2019 was 7.2 At December 31, 2019, we continued to have the financial
percent, a decrease of 15.9 points versus the prior year. The flexibility to support the business over the long term. Cash,
decrease in the effective tax rate was primarily driven by the restricted cash and marketable securities at year end were
following factors: $9,009 million. We continued to manage the investment portfolio
to meet our capital preservation and liquidity objectives.
• A lower charge year to year of 16.5 points from the impacts
of U.S. tax reform;
Total assets increased $28,805 million since December 31,
• A charge in 2018 from intercompany payments of 3.4 points; 2018. This was primarily due to an increase in goodwill and
partially offset by net intangible assets of $34,104 million, driven by the Red Hat
acquisition and an increase of $4,996 million in right-of-use
• A lower benefit year to year from audit settlements of
assets recorded as a result of the adoption of the new leasing
4.4 points.
standard in 2019. This was partially offset by a decline in net
receivables of $7,312 million since year-end 2018 levels,
The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate was 8.5 percent in 2019, an
primarily due to the wind down of OEM IT commercial financing
increase of 0.7 points versus 2018, principally driven by the same
operations which we announced in February 2019.
factors described above, excluding the impacts of U.S. tax reform.
Total debt of $62,899 million increased $17,087 million from
For more information, see note G, “Taxes.”
prior year-end levels primarily to fund the Red Hat acquisition.
The commercial paper balance at December 31, 2019 was $304
Earnings Per Share
million, a decrease of $2,691 million from the prior year end.
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the
Within total debt, $24,727 million is in support of the Global
weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding
Financing business which is leveraged at a 9 to 1 ratio. During
during the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the
2019, we completed bond issuances totaling $25,712 million, with
basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock
terms ranging from 2 to 30 years, and interest rates ranging from
outstanding plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares
0.375 to 4.25 percent depending on maturity. We have reduced
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
total debt $10,140 million since the end of the second quarter
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock
of 2019. We have consistently generated strong cash flow from
options and stock awards.
operations and continue to have access to additional sources of
liquidity through the capital markets and our credit facilities.
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 Change Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured
Earnings per share of the funded status of our retirement and postretirement plans at
common stock from December 31. At December 31, 2019, the overall net underfunded
continuing operations position was $11,090 million, an improvement of $2,043 million
Assuming dilution $10.57 $ 9.51* 11.1% from December 31, 2018 driven by higher returns on assets
partially offset by lower discount rates and interest costs. At year
Basic $10.63 $ 9.56* 11.2%
end, our qualified defined benefit plans were well funded and the
Diluted operating
required contributions related to these plans and multi-employer
(non-GAAP) $12.81 $13.81 (7.2)%
plans are expected to be approximately $300 million in both 2020
Weighted-average shares
and 2021. In 2019, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan
outstanding (in millions)
assets was 14.9 percent and the plan was 107 percent funded
Assuming dilution 892.8 916.3 (2.6)%
at December 31, 2019. Overall, global asset returns were 13.6
Basic 887.2 912.0 (2.7)% percent and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were
* Includes a charge of $2.0 billion or $2.23 of basic and diluted earnings 102 percent funded at December 31, 2019.
per share in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
During 2019, we generated $14,770 million in cash from
operations, a decrease of $477 million compared to 2018.
Our free cash flow for 2019 was $11,909 million, an increase
of $33 million versus the prior year. See pages 58 and 59 for
additional information on free cash flow. We returned $7,068
million to shareholders in 2019, with $5,707 million in dividends
and $1,361 million in gross share repurchases. In 2019, we

===== PAGE 44 =====
Management Discussion 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
repurchased 10.0 million shares and had $2.0 billion remaining Working capital decreased $10,200 million from the year-end
in share repurchase authorization at year end. We suspended 2018 position. The key changes are described below:
our share repurchase program at the time of the Red Hat closing
to focus on debt repayment. Our cash generation permits us Current assets decreased $10,726 million ($10,477 million
to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive adjusted for currency) due to:
long-term opportunities.
• A decline in receivables of $6,769 million ($6,695 million
adjusted for currency) driven by a decline in financing
Global Financing Financial Position Key Metrics
receivables of $8,197 million primarily due to the wind down
($ in millions) of OEM IT commercial financing operations; partially offset
At December 31: 2019 2018 by an increase in other receivables of $989 million primarily
Cash and cash equivalents $ 1,697 $ 1,833 related to divestitures; and
Net investment in sales-type • A decrease of $3,213 million ($3,052 million adjusted for
and direct financing leases (1) 6,224 6,924 currency) in cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash, and
Equipment under operating leases— marketable securities primarily due to retirement of debt.
external clients (2) 238 444
Client loans 12,884 12,802 Current liabilities decreased $526 million ($449 million adjusted
Total client financing assets 19,346 20,170 for currency) as a result of:
Commercial financing receivables 3,820 11,838
• A decrease in accounts payable of $1,662 million primarily
Intercompany financing receivables (3) (4) 3,870 4,873 due to the wind down of OEM IT commercial financing
Total assets $29,568 $41,320 operations; and
Debt 24,727 31,227
• A decrease in short-term debt of $1,410 million due to
Total equity $ 2,749 $ 3,470 maturities of $12,649 million and a decrease in commercial
(1) Includes deferred initial direct costs which are eliminated in paper of $2,691 million; partially offset by reclassifications
IBM’s consolidated results. of $7,592 million from long-term debt to reflect upcoming
(2) Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on maturities and issuances of $6,334 million; offset by
products purchased from the company’s product divisions which is
eliminated in IBM’s consolidated results. • An increase in operating lease liabilities of $1,380 million
(3) E ntire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results as a result of the adoption of the new leasing standard on
and therefore does not appear in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. January 1, 2019; and
(4) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are
leveraged at the value in the table using Global Financing debt. • An increase in deferred income of $861 million
($890 million adjusted for currency).
At December 31, 2019, substantially all financing assets were
IT-related assets, and approximately 62 percent of the total Receivables and Allowances
external portfolio was with investment-grade clients with no Roll Forward of Total IBM Receivables Allowance
direct exposure to consumers, an increase of 7 points year to for Credit Losses
year. This investment-grade percentage is based on the credit ($ in millions)
ratings of the companies in the portfolio.
January 1, December 31,
2019 Additions* Write-offs** Other+ 2019
We have a long-standing practice of taking mitigation actions, $639 $89 $(178 ) $4 $554
in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to third parties,
* Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense.
including credit insurance, financial guarantees, nonrecourse
** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional
borrowings, transfers of receivables recorded as true sales in
information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs.
accordance with accounting guidance or sales of equipment + Primarily represents translation adjustments.
under operating lease. Adjusting for the mitigation actions,
the investment-grade content would increase to 67 percent, a The total IBM receivables provision coverage was 1.7 percent
decrease of 3 points year to year. at December 31, 2019, an increase of 10 basis points compared
to December 31, 2018. The increase was primarily driven by the
IBM Working Capital overall decline in gross financing receivables. The majority of the
($ in millions) write-offs during the year related to receivables which had been
previously reserved.
At December 31: 2019 2018
Current assets $38,420 $49,146
Current liabilities 37,701 38,227
Working capital $ 718 $10,918
Current ratio 1.02:1 1.29:1

===== PAGE 45 =====
44 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances • An increase in prepaid pension assets of $2,199 million
The following table presents external Global Financing receivables ($2,152 million adjusted for currency) driven by
excluding residual values, the allowance for credit losses and higher returns on plan assets and plan remeasurements;
immaterial miscellaneous receivables: partially offset by
• A decrease in net property, plant and equipment of
($ in millions)
$782 million ($785 million adjusted for currency).
At December 31: 2019 2018
Recorded investment (1) $22,446 $31,182
Long-term debt increased $18,497 million ($18,550 million
Specific allowance for credit losses 177 220 adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 45 72
• Issuances of $26,081 million; partially offset by
Total allowance for credit losses 221 292
Net financing receivables $22,224 $30,890 • Reclassifications to short-term debt of $7,592 million to
reflect upcoming maturities.
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.0% 0.9%
(1) Includes deferred initial direct costs which are eliminated in Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) increased $6,778 million
IBM’s consolidated results.
($6,911 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved was • An increase in long-term operating lease liabilities of
1.0 percent at December 31, 2019, compared to 0.9 percent $3,879 million ($3,893 million adjusted for currency) as a
at December 31, 2018. The decline in the allowance for credit result of the adoption of the new leasing standard on
losses was driven by write-offs of $64 million, primarily of January 1, 2019; and
receivables previously reserved, and net releases of $7 million as
• An increase in other liabilities of $2,352 million
a result of lower average asset balances in client and commercial
($2,320 million adjusted for currency), primarily driven by
financing. See note K, “Financing Receivables,” for additional
increases in deferred tax liabilities of $1,534 million and
information.
income tax reserves of $923 million.
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables Allowance
Debt
for Credit Losses (included in Total IBM)
Our funding requirements are continually monitored and we
($ in millions) execute our strategies to manage the overall asset and liability
January 1, Additions/ December 31, profile. Additionally, we maintain sufficient flexibility to access
2019 (Releases)* Write-offs** Other+ 2019 global funding sources as needed.
$292 $(7 ) $(64 ) $0 $221
($ in millions)
* Additions for Allowance for Credit Losses are charged to expense.
** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional At December 31: 2019 2018
information regarding Allowance for Credit Loss write-offs. Total company debt $62,899 $45,812
+ Primarily represents translation adjustments. Total Global Financing segment debt $24,727 $31,227
Debt to support external clients 21,487 27,536
Global Financing’s bad debt expense was a release of $7 million
Debt to support internal clients 3,239 3,690
in 2019, compared to an addition of $14 million in 2018, due to
Non-Global Financing debt 38,173 14,585
lower specific reserves and a higher unallocated reserve release
in 2019.
Total debt of $62,899 million increased $17,087 million from
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities December 31, 2018, driven by issuances of $32,415 million;
($ in millions) partially offset by debt maturities of $12,673 million and a
decrease in commercial paper of $2,691 million.
At December 31: 2019 2018
Noncurrent assets $113,767 $74,236
Non-Global Financing debt of $38,173 million increased $23,587
Long-term debt $ 54,102 $35,605
million from prior year-end levels primarily driven by issuances
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $ 39,398 $32,621 to fund the Red Hat acquisition.
Global Financing debt of $24,727 million decreased $6,500
The increase in noncurrent assets of $39,531 million ($39,470
million from December 31, 2018, primarily due to the wind down
million adjusted for currency) was driven by:
of OEM IT commercial financing operations.
• A net increase in goodwill and net intangible assets of
$34,104 million ($34,058 million adjusted for currency) due Global Financing provides financing predominantly for IBM’s
to the acquisition of Red Hat; and external client assets, as well as for assets under contract
by other IBM units. These assets, primarily for GTS, generate
• An increase in operating right-of-use assets of $4,996
long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing
million ($5,010 million adjusted for currency) as a
asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these GTS assets are
result of the adoption of the new leasing standard on
leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset base.
January 1, 2019; and

===== PAGE 46 =====
Management Discussion 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The debt used to fund Global Financing assets is composed Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $477 million
of intercompany loans and external debt. Total debt changes in 2019 driven by the following key factors:
generally correspond with the level of client and commercial
• An increase in cash income tax payments of $346 million;
financing receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents,
the change in intercompany and external payables and the • An increase in interest payments on debt of approximately
change in intercompany investment from IBM. The terms of $300 million, driven by incremental debt used to fund the
the intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially acquisition of Red Hat; and
match the term, currency and interest rate variability underlying
• Performance-related declines within net income,
the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing.
including lower operating cash flows due to businesses
The Global Financing debt-to-equity ratio remained at 9 to 1 at
divested in 2019; partially offset by
December 31, 2019.
• An increase of $836 million in cash provided by
As previously stated, we measure Global Financing as a financing receivables.
stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense relating
to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and Net cash used in investing activities increased $22,023 million
internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results driven by:
of Operations” and in note D, “Segments.” In the Consolidated
• An increase in net cash used for acquisitions of $32,491
Income Statement, the external debt-related interest expense
million, primarily driven by the acquisition of Red Hat;
supporting Global Financing’s internal financing to IBM is
offset by
reclassified from cost of financing to interest expense.
• An increase of $7,223 million in cash provided by net
Equity non-operating finance receivables primarily driven by the
Total equity increased by $4,055 million from December 31, wind down of OEM IT commercial financing operations;
2018 as a result of net income of $9,431 million, a decline in
• A decrease in cash used for net capital expenditures of
accumulated other comprehensive losses of $893 million
$1,346 million; and
primarily due to retirement-related benefits plans, and an
increase in common stock of $745 million; partially offset by • An increase in cash provided by divestitures of
decreases from dividends of $5,707 million, and an increase in $1,076 million.
treasury stock of $1,342 million mainly due to share repurchases.
Financing activities were a net source of cash of $9,042 million in
Cash Flow 2019 compared to a net use of cash of $10,469 million in 2018.
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, The year-to-year increase in cash flow of $19,512 million was
as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows on page driven by:
71 are summarized in the table below. These amounts include
• An increase in net cash sourced from debt transactions of
the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
$16,584 million primarily driven by net issuances to fund
the Red Hat acquisition; and
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 • A decrease in cash used for gross common share
Net cash provided by/(used in) repurchases of $3,082 million.
continuing operations
Operating activities $ 14,770 $ 15,247 Global Financing Return on Equity Calculation
Investing activities (26,936) (4,913) ($ in millions)
Financing activities 9,042 (10,469) At December 31: 2019 2018
Effect of exchange rate changes Numerator
on cash, cash equivalents and Global Financing after-tax income (1) * $ 765 $1,065
restricted cash (167) (495)
Denominator
Net change in cash, cash equivalents
Average Global Financing equity (2) ** $2,968 $3,460
and restricted cash $ (3,290) $ (630)
Global Financing return on equity (1)/ (2) 25.8% 30.8%
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on
Global Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for
income taxes is determined on a consolidated basis.
** Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last
five quarters.

===== PAGE 47 =====
46 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating
earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented,
may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section
for management’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2019: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charges (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $36,488 $ 547 $ — $ — $37,035
Gross profit margin 47.3% 0.7 pts. — pts. — pts. 48.0%
SG&A $20,604 $(1,044) $ — $ — $19,560
RD&E 5,989 (53) — — 5,936
Other (income) and expense (968) 152 (615) — (1,431)
Interest expense 1,344 (228) — — 1,116
Total expense and other (income) 26,322 (1,173) (615) — 24,533
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 10,166 1,721 615 — 12,503
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 13.2% 2.2 pts. 0.8 pts. — pts. 16.2%
Provision for income taxes* $ 731 $ 378 $ 103 $(146) $ 1,067
Effective tax rate 7.2% 2.0 pts. 0.5pts. (1.2)pts. 8.5%
Income from continuing operations $ 9,435 $ 1,343 $ 512 $ 146 $11,436
Income margin from continuing operations 12.2% 1.7 pts. 0.7 pts. 0.2 pts. 14.8%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 10.57 $ 1.50 $0.58 $0.16 $ 12.81
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2018 : GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charges (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $36,936 $ 372 $ — $ — $37,307
Gross profit margin 46.4% 0.5 pts. — pts. — pts. 46.9%
SG&A $19,366 $(451) $ — $ — $18,915
RD&E 5,379 — — — 5,379
Other (income) and expense 1,152 (2) (1,572) — (422)
Interest expense 723 — — — 723
Total expense and other (income) 25,594 (453) (1,572) — 23,569
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 11,342 824 1,572 — 13,739
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 14.3% 1.0 pts. 2.0 pts. — pts. 17.3%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,619 $ 176 $ 324 $(2,037) $ 1,082
Effective tax rate 23.1% (0.1) pts. (0.3) pts. (14.8) pts. 7.9%
Income from continuing operations $ 8,723 $ 649 $ 1,248 $ 2,037 $12,657
Income margin from continuing operations 11.0% 0.8 pts. 1.6 pts. 2.6 pts. 15.9%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 9.51 $0.71 $ 1.36 $ 2.23 $ 13.81
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income
which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 48 =====
Management Discussion 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2019 2018 Change*
Revenue $21,777 $21,760 0.1%**
Gross profit margin 51.0% 49.1% 1.9 pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 7,107 $ 6,253 13.7%
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 3,993 $ 4,434 (10.0)%
Provision for income taxes from continuing operations $ 324 $ 2,481+ (87.0)%
Income from continuing operations $ 3,669 $ 1,954+ 87.8%
Income from continuing operations margin 16.8% 9.0% 7.9 pts.
Net income $ 3,670 $ 1,951+ 88.1%
Earnings per share from continuing operations—assuming dilution $ 4.11 $ 2.15+ 91.2%
Weighted-average shares outstanding—assuming dilution 893.7 905.2 (1.3)%
* 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
** 0.7 percent adjusted for currency; 2.8 percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
+ Includes a charge of $1.9 billion or $2.15 of diluted earnings per share in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
The following table provides operating (non-GAAP) earnings for the fourth quarter of 2019 and 2018. See page 52 for additional information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the fourth quarter: 2019 2018 Change*
Net income/(loss) as reported $3,670 $1,951 ** 88.1%
Loss from discontinued operations, net of tax 0 (2) NM
Income/(loss) from continuing operations $3,669 $1,954** 87.8%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 376 171 119.7
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 175 348 (49.8)
U.S. tax reform charge (14) 1,944 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $4,206 $4,417 (4.8)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 4.71 $ 4.87 (3.3)%
* 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
** Includes a charge of $1.9 billion in 2018 associated with U.S. tax reform.
NM—Not meaningful

===== PAGE 49 =====
48 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2019, we reported $21.8 billion in The consolidated gross margin of 51.0 percent increased 1.9
revenue, $3.7 billion in income from continuing operations points year to year reflecting contribution from our high-value
and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of $4.2 billion, resulting in software and systems, partially offset by impacts related to
diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $4.11 Red Hat (deferred revenue adjustment and amortization of
as reported and $4.71 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. We intangibles). The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 51.8
also generated $3.5 billion in cash from operations, $6.0 billion percent increased 2.3 points versus the prior year, primarily
in free cash flow and delivered shareholder returns of $1.4 billion driven by the same factors, excluding the amortization of
in dividends. We had solid transactional performance across our intangibles.
high-value software and systems. In addition, benefits from the
synergies of IBM and Red Hat drove growth in our services to Total expense and other (income) increased 13.7 percent in the
migrate, build and manage hybrid cloud environments. Overall, fourth quarter of 2019 versus the prior year primarily driven by
performance resulted in revenue growth, margin expansion and higher spending including Red Hat operational spending, higher
strong free cash flow generation in the quarter. interest expense from debt issuances to fund the acquisition,
continued investment in innovation and go-to-market capabilities,
Total consolidated revenue increased 0.1 percent as reported higher acquisition-related charges and higher amortization of
and 1 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year. acquired intangibles. These increases were partially offset by
Excluding divested businesses, revenue was up 2.2 percent divestiture-related gains and lower non-operating retirement-
as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency. Cloud & related costs. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other
Cognitive Software increased 8.7 percent as reported and 9 (income) increased 14.7 percent year to year, driven primarily
percent adjusted for currency with growth across all three by the higher spending and investment, partially offset by the
lines of business. Cloud & Data Platforms, which includes Red divestiture-related gains described above.
Hat, grew 19.0 percent (20 percent adjusted for currency),
Cognitive Applications grew 0.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $4.0 billion,
currency) and Transaction Processing Platforms increased 2.9 decreased 10.0 percent and the pre-tax margin was 18.3
percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). GBS decreased 0.6 percent, a decrease of 2.0 points versus the prior-year period
percent as reported and was flat adjusted for currency. There reflecting the purchase accounting deferred revenue adjustment
was continued growth in Consulting which grew 3.5 percent (4 for Red Hat (lower revenue without an equivalent adjustment to
percent adjusted for currency) driven by services that enable each cost and expense) and acquisition-related activity. The continuing
phase of our clients’ digital journeys. GTS decreased 4.8 percent operations effective tax rate for the fourth quarter of 2019 was
as reported and 4 percent adjusted for currency, with declines 8.1 percent and net income from continuing operations was
in Infrastructure & Cloud Services and Technology Support $3.7 billion. This is compared with net income from continuing
Services. While there was continued year-to-year growth in our operations of $2.0 billion in the fourth quarter of 2018, which
cloud offerings within GTS, there were declines in client-based included a $1.9 billion charge for tax reform. Our net income
volumes, in some of the more traditional labor-based managed margin from continuing operations was 16.8 percent, an increase
services. Systems increased 16.0 percent as reported and 16 of 7.9 points year to year.
percent adjusted for currency with growth in IBM Z and Storage
Systems, partially offset by a decline in Power Systems. IBM Z had Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing
strong growth of 62.3 percent (63 percent adjusted for currency) operations of $4.7 billion decreased 6.6 percent year to year
in the first full quarter of z15 shipments. Storage Systems and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing
increased 2.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) year to operations decreased 1.5 points to 21.6 percent. The operating
year led by growth in the high end, while Power Systems declined (non-GAAP) effective tax rate from continuing operations in the
23.7 percent (23 percent adjusted for currency) compared with fourth quarter of 2019 was 10.5 percent versus 12.2 percent
strong performance in the prior year. Across the segments, total in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing
IBM cloud revenue of $6.8 billion in the fourth quarter of 2019 operations of $4.2 billion decreased 4.8 percent with an
grew 21 percent as reported and adjusted for currency. operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing operations
of 19.3 percent, down 1.0 points year to year.
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue increased 2.3
percent year to year as reported (3 percent adjusted for currency) Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $4.11
and 6 percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for in the fourth quarter of 2019 increased 91.2 percent, primarily
currency. EMEA increased 0.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for due to the prior-year tax reform charge. Operating (non-GAAP)
currency) and 4 percent excluding divested businesses and diluted earnings per share of $4.71 decreased 3.3 percent versus
adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific declined 5.2 percent year to the fourth quarter of 2018.
year as reported (7 percent adjusted for currency) and 6 percent
excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.

===== PAGE 50 =====
Management Discussion 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2019 versus the fourth quarter of 2018 reportable segment external revenue and
gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length
transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the fourth quarter: 2019 2018 Change Currency
Revenue
Cloud & Cognitive Software $ 7,238 $ 6,661* 8.7% 9.4%
Gross margin 79.2% 79.4%* (0.2)pts.**
Global Business Services 4,243 4,269* (0.6)% (0.3)%
Gross margin 27.5% 27.8%* (0.3) pts.
Global Technology Services 6,949 7,299* (4.8)% (4.0)%
Gross margin 35.2% 34.9%* 0.2 pts.
Systems 3,042 2,621 16.0% 16.5%
Gross margin 56.0% 50.8% 5.2 pts.
Global Financing 301 402 (25.3)% (24.9)%
Gross margin 35.6% 29.1% 6.5 pts.
Other 4 507* (99.2)% (99.1)%
Gross margin NM 42.0%* NM
Total consolidated revenue $21,777 $21,760 0.1%+ 0.7%
Total consolidated gross profit $11,100 $10,687 3.9%**
Total consolidated gross margin 51.0% 49.1% 1.9 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 189 89 112.2%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $11,289 $10,776 4.8%**
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 51.8% 49.5% 2.3 pts.
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
** 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and acquisition-related activity.
+ 2.8 percent excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency.
NM—Not meaningful
Cloud & Cognitive Software
Cloud & Cognitive Software revenue of $7,238 million grew Cloud & Data Platforms revenue of $3,101 million increased
8.7 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for currency in 19.0 percent as reported and 20 percent adjusted for currency
the fourth quarter of 2019 compared to the prior year. We had compared to the prior year reflecting the acquisition of Red Hat
growth as reported and adjusted for currency in all three lines in 2019. Demand for our cloud capabilities continued to ramp
of business: Cognitive Applications, Cloud & Data Platforms and we began to realize synergies across IBM and Red Hat. We
and Transaction Processing Platforms. Growth in Cloud & Data had strong performance in the quarter in Red Hat’s RHEL and
Platforms and total cloud revenue in the segment reflected the OpenShift, and broad-based traction across the suite of Cloud
acquisition of Red Hat and clients’ continued adoption of our Paks that addresses workloads across automation, data and
hybrid cloud solutions. integration. Clients are realizing the benefits of hybrid cloud
with our containerized middleware and data platform software
In the fourth quarter, Cognitive Applications revenue of $1,619 portfolio, including faster deployment and improved automation.
million increased 0.6 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted
for currency, reflecting the strength of our AI-led software Transaction Processing Platforms revenue of $2,517 million
solutions including Security and IoT. We continue to drive new increased 2.9 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for
innovations in these areas, and in November 2019, we launched currency) reflecting the value we provided clients by managing
Cloud Pak for Security which allows clients to leverage their their critical workloads, and providing for predictability in IT spend.
investments in cybersecurity by integrating their security tools
with existing data sources to more quickly resolve security Within Cloud & Cognitive Software, total cloud revenue of $1.6
incidents. In IoT, we extended our Maximo suite of offerings billion grew 78 percent as reported and adjusted for currency,
with the announcement of Maximo Asset Monitor, an AI-powered which reflects the acquisition of Red Hat.
monitoring solution designed to help clients better maintain and
improve performance of their high-value physical assets.

===== PAGE 51 =====
50 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud & Cognitive Software gross profit margin of 79.2 percent Global Technology Services
decreased 0.2 points during the fourth quarter of 2019 compared GTS revenue of $6,949 million decreased 4.8 percent as reported
to the prior year. Pre-tax income of $2,901 million decreased 7.1 (4 percent adjusted for currency), primarily due to lower client
percent compared to the prior year and pre-tax margin decreased business volumes which impacted some of the more traditional
6.0 points to 36.6 percent, driven primarily by the purchase labor-based managed services. We continued to have solid
accounting impacts from the Red Hat acquisition. growth in our cloud offerings as clients turn to IBM to enable
their transition to cloud. GTS’ knowledge of our clients’ industries,
Global Business Services business and regulatory requirements is a differentiator as clients
GBS revenue of $4,243 million decreased 0.6 percent as accelerate their shift of mission-critical workloads to the cloud.
reported, but was flat adjusted for currency in the fourth quarter
of 2019 compared to the prior year. We had growth in Consulting, Infrastructure & Cloud Services revenue of $5,282 million
offset by declines in Application Management and Global Process declined 5.3 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency).
Services. We have been investing in offerings and capabilities to Revenue was impacted by lower client business volumes. We are
help advise our clients and move their applications to a hybrid taking actions to accelerate the shift to higher-value segments
multi-cloud environment. of the market opportunity, such as introducing new managed
services offerings for public and private cloud in the areas of
Consulting revenue of $2,078 million increased 3.5 percent cybersecurity, data management and hybrid orchestration. We
as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency). The growth in are also expanding our cloud data center footprint and deploying
Consulting was driven by services that enable each phase of our a more asset-based delivery model.
clients’ digital journey. We had continued growth in application
modernization and development, next-generation enterprise Technology Support Services revenue of $1,667 million decreased
applications such as S/4 Hana and Salesforce, and in offerings 3.2 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency)
that use AI to help clients unlock opportunities and realize primarily due to hardware product cycle dynamics.
productivity improvements.
Within GTS, cloud revenue of $2.4 billion grew 12 percent year to
Application Management revenue of $1,922 million decreased year as reported (13 percent adjusted for currency).
3.3 percent as reported (3 percent adjusted for currency). We
had continued growth across our offerings that build and manage GTS gross profit margin of 35.2 percent expanded 0.2 points in
cloud applications, offset by declines in traditional enterprise the fourth-quarter 2019 compared to the prior-year period. This
application management. This was primarily driven by strong improvement was driven by our continued scale-out of our public
performance in the fourth-quarter 2018 as a result of significant cloud, a mix within the portfolio and productivity actions. Pre-tax
milestone achievements across a few accounts. income of $645 million decreased 1.7 percent and the pre-tax
margin increased 0.3 points to 8.9 percent year to year, reflecting
Global Process Services revenue of $243 million decreased a significant sequential improvement in pre-tax margin.
10.8 percent as reported (10 percent adjusted for currency), as
demand shifted from traditional Business Process Optimization Systems
offerings to our new business platforms around intelligent Systems revenue of $3,042 million grew 16.0 percent year
workflows. to year as reported (16 percent adjusted for currency) in the
fourth quarter of 2019. Systems Hardware revenue of $2,560
Within GBS, cloud revenue of $1.5 billion grew 3 percent as million increased 17.7 percent as reported (18 percent adjusted
reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. for currency). This growth was driven primarily by IBM Z and
Storage Systems, partially offset by a decline in Power Systems.
GBS fourth-quarter gross profit margin of 27.5 percent decreased The strong performance in IBM Z reflects our first full quarter
0.3 points year to year. Pre-tax income of $478 million decreased of shipments of the new z15 mainframe. Storage Systems
15.6 percent year to year. The pre-tax margin decreased 1.9 growth was led by the high-end systems, which includes the
points to 11.1 percent. In the quarter, we had margin contribution next generation high-end storage system DS8900 that is tightly
from the yield on our contract delivery improvements, a mix shift integrated with the z15 mainframe.
to higher-value content and a currency benefit from leveraging
our global delivery resource footprint. These benefits were offset Within Systems Hardware, IBM Z revenue grew 62.3 percent
by investments we made in capacity and offerings to capture as reported (63 percent adjusted for currency) year to year,
market opportunity. reflecting the broad adoption of the new z15 mainframe across
many industries and countries, and demonstrates our clients’
demand for technology that addresses data privacy and
resiliency, across hybrid cloud. We shipped the highest volume of
MIPs in the program’s history in the fourth-quarter 2019, driven
by growth in new workloads, and in October 2019, we announced
Red Hat OpenShift for IBM Z, integrating the industry’s most
comprehensive enterprise container and Kubernetes platform
with the enterprise server platforms of IBM Z and LinuxONE.

===== PAGE 52 =====
Management Discussion 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Power Systems revenue declined 23.7 percent as reported (23 Latin America, Brazil increased 7.3 percent as reported and 11
percent adjusted for currency) year to year, as a result of strong percent adjusted for currency, reflecting the strong acceptance
performance in the fourth-quarter 2018 with the introduction of the new z15 in the financial sector.
of our next generation high-end POWER9 processors and
the completion of the roll-out of supercomputers to the U.S. In EMEA, France increased 9.5 percent as reported and 13
Department of Energy. percent adjusted for currency and Italy increased 2.5 percent
as reported and 5 percent adjusted for currency. Germany
Storage Systems revenue increased 2.8 percent as reported declined 3.7 percent as reported and 1 percent adjusted for
(3 percent adjusted for currency), reflecting growth in the currency and the U.K. decreased 2.4 percent as reported and
high-end systems with the launch in November 2019 of the 3 percent adjusted for currency. The Middle East and Africa
new DS8900 which offers industry-leading response times, region increased 1 percent as reported and 2 percent adjusted
availability and pervasive end-to-end encryption. for currency.
In the fourth quarter, Operating Systems Software revenue Within Asia Pacific, Japan decreased 0.9 percent as reported
of $482 million increased 7.9 percent as reported (8 percent and 4 percent adjusted for currency. China declined 11.4 percent
adjusted for currency) driven primarily by growth in IBM Z as reported and 10 percent adjusted for currency. Australia
operating systems. decreased 22.0 percent as reported and 18 percent adjusted for
currency. India decreased 5.2 percent as reported and 6 percent
Within Systems, cloud revenue of $1.4 billion increased 21 adjusted for currency.
percent year to year as reported and adjusted for currency.
Total Expense and Other (Income)
The Systems gross profit margin increased 5.2 points to 56.0
($ in millions)
percent in the fourth quarter of 2019 compared to the prior
Yr.-to-Yr.
year. Pre-tax income of $802 million increased 45.6 percent and Percent/
pre-tax margin increased 5.5 points year to year to 24.8 percent. Margin
For the fourth quarter: 2019 2018 Change*
The Systems profit and margin expansion reflects the benefits
Total consolidated expense
from the new z15 mainframe and DS8900 high-end storage
and other (income) $7,107 $6,253 13.7%
system launched in 2019.
Non-operating adjustments
Global Financing Amortization of acquired
Global Financing revenue of $301 million decreased 25.3 percent intangible assets (294) (106) 176.0
year to year, which reflects the company’s wind down of the OEM IT Acquisition-related
commercial financing operations. Global Financing fourth-quarter charges (27) (13) 104.7
pre-tax income decreased 20.9 percent to $252 million and the Non-operating retirement-
pre-tax margin of 38.9 percent decreased 2.4 points year to year. related (costs)/income (196) (387) (49.4)
The decrease in pre-tax income was driven by a decrease in gross Operating (non-GAAP)
profit, partially offset by a decrease in SG&A expense. expense and other
(income) $6,591 $5,746 14.7%
Geographic Revenue Total consolidated
Total revenue of $21,777 million increased 0.1 percent as expense-to-revenue ratio 32.6% 28.7% 3.9 pts.
reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) and 3 percent Operating (non-GAAP)
excluding divested businesses and adjusted for currency in the expense-to-revenue ratio 30.3% 26.4% 3.9 pts.
fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Americas revenue of
* 2019 results were impacted by Red Hat purchase accounting and
$10,461 million increased 2.3 percent as reported (3 percent acquisition-related activity.
adjusted for currency) and 6 percent excluding divested
businesses and adjusted for currency. EMEA revenue of $7,090 Total expense and other (income) increased 13.7 percent in
million increased 0.1 percent as reported (2 percent adjusted the fourth quarter with an expense-to-revenue ratio of 32.6
for currency) and 4 percent excluding divested businesses percent compared to 28.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2018.
and adjusted for currency. Asia Pacific revenue of $4,226 The year-to-year increase was a result of higher spending
million declined 5.2 percent as reported (7 percent adjusted (15 points) driven by Red Hat (15 points) and higher acquisition-
for currency) and 6 percent excluding divested businesses and related charges and amortization of acquired intangible assets
adjusted for currency. associated with the Red Hat transaction (4 points), partially offset
by higher divestiture gains (3 points) and lower non-operating
Within Americas, revenue in the U.S. increased 2.9 percent year retirement-related costs (3 points).
to year, driven primarily by the strong performance of the new
z15. Canada increased 4.1 percent as reported and 4 percent Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other income increased
adjusted for currency. Latin America decreased 1.4 percent as 14.7 percent year to year primarily driven by the higher spending,
reported, but increased 3 percent adjusted for currency. Within partially offset by the divestiture gains, as described above.

===== PAGE 53 =====
52 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow GAAP Reconciliation
We generated $3.5 billion in cash flow from operating activities The tables below provide a reconciliation of our income statement
in the fourth quarter of 2019, a decrease of $0.7 billion compared results as reported under GAAP to our operating earnings
to the fourth quarter of 2018, primarily due to higher interest and presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. Management’s
income tax payments. Net cash sourced from investing activities calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented,
of $0.1 billion was $0.3 billion lower than the prior year, primarily may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other
driven by a decrease in cash from net proceeds from disposition companies. Refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings”
of marketable securities and other investments ($2.2 billion), section for management’s rationale for presenting operating
partially offset by an increase in cash provided by net non- earnings information.
operating finance receivables ($1.5 billion) and lower net capital
expenditures ($0.2 billion). Net cash used in financing activities
of $5.7 billion increased $1.1 billion compared to the prior year,
primarily due to lower debt issuances ($3.0 billion), partially
offset by lower gross common stock repurchases ($2.0 billion).
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the fourth quarter 2019: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charges (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $11,100 $ 189 $ — $ — $11,289
Gross profit margin 51.0% 0.9 pts. — pts. — pts. 51.8%
SG&A $ 5,433 $(320) $ — $ — $ 5,113
RD&E 1,596 0 — — 1,596
Other (income) and expense (117) (1) (196) — (314)
Interest expense 354 — — — 354
Total expense and other (income) 7,107 (320) (196) — 6,591
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 3,993 509 196 — 4,698
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 18.3% 2.3 pts. 0.9 pts. — pts. 21.6%
Provision for income taxes* $ 324 $ 133 $ 21 $ 14 $ 492
Effective tax rate 8.1% 2.0 pts. 0.1 pts. 0.3 pts. 10.5%
Income from continuing operations $ 3,669 $ 376 $ 175 $ (14) $ 4,206
Income margin from continuing operations 16.8% 1.7 pts. 0.8 pts. (0.1)pts. 19.3%
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 4.11 $0.42 $0.20 $(0.02) $ 4.71
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles
applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the fourth quarter 2018: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charges (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $10,687 $ 89 $ — $ — $10,776
Gross profit margin 49.1% 0.4 pts. — pts. — pts. 49.5%
SG&A $ 4,701 $(119) $ — $ — $ 4,582
RD&E 1,358 — — — 1,358
Other (income) and expense 185 (1) (387) — (203)
Interest expense 193 — — — 193
Total expense and other (income) 6,253 (119) (387) — 5,746
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,434 208 387 — 5,030
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 20.4% 1.0 pts. 1.8 pts. — pts. 23.1%
Provision for income taxes* $ 2,481 $ 37 $ 39 $(1,944) $ 613
Effective tax rate 55.9% (1.6) pts. (3.5) pts. (38.7) pts. 12.2%
Income from continuing operations $ 1,954 $ 171 $ 348 $ 1,944 $ 4,417
Income margin from continuing operations 9.0% 0.8 pts. 1.6 pts. 8.9 pts. 20.3%
Diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations $ 2.15 $0.19 $0.38 $ 2.15 $ 4.87
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations is calculated under the same accounting principles
applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 54 =====
Management Discussion 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
This section provides a summary of our segment results and year-to-year comparisons between 2018 and 2017. These Segment
results have been recast to conform to our segment changes effective first-quarter 2019. There was no change to consolidated
results. Refer to “Management Discussion,” pages 27 to 41 of the “Year in Review” section of our 2018 Annual Report for all other
details of our financial performance in 2018 compared to 2017.
Segment Details
The table below presents each reportable segment’s external revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes
transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change Currency
Revenue
Cloud & Cognitive Software $22,209* $21,751 * 2.1% 1.6%
Gross margin 77.6%* 78.1%* (0.5) pts.
Global Business Services 16,595* 16,073* 3.2% 2.3%
Gross margin 26.8%* 25.1%* 1.7 pts.
Global Technology Services 29,146* 29,213* (0.2)% (0.8)%
Gross margin 34.4%* 34.3%* 0.1 pts.
Systems 8,034 8,194 (2.0)% (2.3)%
Gross margin 49.8% 53.2% (3.4) pts.
Global Financing 1,590 1,696 (6.3)% (6.5)%
Gross margin 29.1% 29.3% (0.2) pts.
Other 2,018* 2,212* (8.8)% (9.4)%
Gross margin 37.8%* 47.1%* (9.3 ) pts.
Total consolidated revenue $79,591 $79,139 0.6% 0.0%
Total consolidated gross profit $36,936 $36,943 0.0%
Total consolidated gross margin 46.4% 46.7% (0.3) pts.
Non-operating adjustment
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 372 449 (17.2)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $37,307 $37,392 (0.2)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 46.9% 47.2% (0.4) pts.
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
Cloud & Cognitive Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2018* 2017* Change Currency
Cloud & Cognitive Software external revenue $22,209 $21,751 2.1% 1.6%
Cognitive Applications $ 5,633 $ 5,533 1.8% 1.4%
Cloud & Data Platforms 8,603 8,381 2.6 2.0
Transaction Processing Platforms 7,974 7,838 1.7 1.2
* Recast to reflect segment changes.

===== PAGE 55 =====
54 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud & Cognitive Software revenue increased in 2018 compared ($ in millions)
to the prior year with growth in all three lines of business, as Yr.-to-Yr.
reported and adjusted for currency. Within Cognitive Applications, Percent/
Margin
the increase was driven by strong double-digit growth in security For the year ended December 31: 2018* 2017* Change
services, while growth in Cloud & Data Platforms was led by Cloud & Cognitive Software
analytics platforms and integration offerings. Transaction
External gross profit $17,224 $16,986 1.4%
Processing Platforms grew with improved revenue performance
External gross profit
sequentially in the fourth-quarter 2018 versus the third-quarter
margin 77.6% 78.1% (0.5) pts.
2018 reflecting clients’ commitment to the company’s platform for
Pre-tax income $ 8,882 $ 8,068 10.1%
the long term and the value it provides in managing mission-critical
workloads. Within Cloud & Cognitive Software, cloud revenue of Pre-tax margin 35.0% 32.4% 2.6 pts.
$3.0 billion grew 10 percent as reported and adjusted for currency * Recast to reflect segment changes.
compared to the prior year.
Gross margin in Cloud & Cognitive Software was impacted by an
increased mix toward SaaS, a mix toward security services and
increased royalty costs associated with IP licensing agreements
compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income improvement year to
year was primarily driven by operational efficiencies and mix.
Global Business Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change Currency
Global Business Services external revenue $16,595* $16,073* 3.2% 2.3%
Consulting $ 7,705 $ 7,262 6.1% 5.1%
Application Management 7,852 7,821 0.4 (0.5)
Global Process Services 1,037* 990* 4.8 4.7
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
Global Business Services revenue increased compared to 2017 ($ in millions)
driven by strong growth in Consulting, led by key offerings in digital Yr.-to-Yr.
and cloud application, where the business has brought together Percent/
Margin
technology and industry expertise to help clients on their digital For the year ended December 31: 2018* 2017* Change
journey. GPS grew year to year, while Application Management Global Business Services
revenue was flat as reported and declined adjusted for currency
External gross profit $4,448 $4,033 10.3%
compared to 2017. While we continued to help clients move to the
External gross profit
cloud with offerings such as Cloud Migration Factory and cloud
margin 26.8% 25.1% 1.7 pts.
application development, there were continued declines in the
Pre-tax income $1,629 $1,303 25.0%
more traditional application management engagements. Within
Pre-tax margin 9.6% 7.9% 1.7 pts.
GBS, cloud revenue of $4.7 billion grew 20 percent as reported
and 19 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year. * Recast to reflect segment changes.
The year-to-year improvements in margins and pre-tax income
in GBS were the result of the shift to higher-value offerings,
realignment of resources to key skill areas, increased productivity
and utilization as well as a benefit from currency, due to the
company’s global delivery model.

===== PAGE 56 =====
Management Discussion 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Technology Services
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change Currency
Global Technology Services external revenue $29,146* $29,213* (0.2)% (0.8)%
Infrastructure & Cloud Services $22,185* $22,016* 0.8% 0.0%
Technology Support Services 6,961 7,196 (3.3) (3.5)
* Recast to reflect segment changes.
Global Technology Services revenue decreased 0.2 percent as ($ in millions)
reported (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2018 compared Yr.-to-Yr.
to the prior year, with Infrastructure & Cloud Services up 0.8 Percent/
Margin
percent as reported (flat adjusted for currency) offset by a For the year ended December 31: 2018* 2017* Change
decline in Technology Support Services. In Infrastructure & Global Technology Services
Cloud Services, the business focused on prioritizing the portfolio
External total gross profit $10,035 $10,022 0.1%
to deliver high-value solutions to bring productivity to clients and
External total gross profit
allow for expanding workloads, while it exited some lower-value
margin 34.4% 34.3% 0.1 pts.
offerings. Technology Support Services was impacted by the
Pre-tax income $ 1,781 $ 2,618 (32.0)%
hardware product cycle dynamics in 2018 but grew its multi-
vendor services offerings. Within GTS, cloud revenue of $8.0 Pre-tax margin 5.9% 8.8% (2.8) pts.
billion grew 22 percent as reported and 21 percent adjusted for * Recast to reflect segment changes.
currency compared to the prior year.
The 2018 GTS gross profit margin was essentially flat year to
year and reflected benefits from productivity initiatives, including
automation of delivery processes infused with AI and global
workforce optimization. Pre-tax income performance reflected
continued investment to expand go-to-market capabilities and
develop new offerings for the hybrid market.
Systems
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change Currency
Systems external revenue $8,034 $8,194 (2.0)% (2.3)%
Systems Hardware $6,363 $6,494 (2.0)% (2.3)%
IBM Z (5.4) (5.6)
Power Systems 8.8 8.7
Storage Systems (5.5) (5.9)
Operating Systems Software 1,671 1,701 (1.7) (2.4)

===== PAGE 57 =====
56 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems revenue of $8,034 million decreased 2.0 percent year The increase in Global Financing total revenue was driven by
to year as reported (2 percent adjusted for currency) driven by an increase in internal revenue, partially offset by a decrease in
strong IBM Z performance in 2017 and continued price pressures external revenue. Internal revenue grew 9.5 percent driven by
impacting Storage Systems in a competitive environment. Both increases in internal financing (up 17.6 percent) and internal used
hardware platforms were down year to year for the full year, equipment sales (up 6.8 percent). External revenue declined 6.3
as reported and adjusted for currency. This performance was percent due to a decrease in external used equipment sales (down
partially offset by strong growth in Power Systems (which grew 30.8 percent), partially offset by an increase in external financing
as reported and adjusted for currency in 2018) with strong (up 4.9 percent). The increase in Global Financing pre-tax income
performance in POWER9-based systems and Linux throughout was primarily driven by an increase in gross profit and a decrease
the year. Within Systems, cloud revenue of $3.1 billion decreased in total expense.
10 percent as reported and adjusted for currency compared to
the prior year reflecting IBM Z product cycle dynamics. GAAP Reconciliation
The table below provides a reconciliation of our consolidated
($ in millions)
gross profit and gross margin as reported under GAAP to our
Yr.-to-Yr. operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure.
Percent/
Margin Management’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported by
Systems other companies. Refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings”
External Systems Hardware section for management’s rationale for presenting operating
gross profit $2,590 $2,893 (10.5)% earnings information.
External Systems Hardware
($ in millions)
gross profit margin 40.7% 44.6% (3.8)pts.
Acquisition-
External Operating Systems Related Operating
Software gross profit $1,412 $1,469 (3.9)% For the year ended December 31: GAAP Adjustments (non-GAAP)
External Operating Systems 2018
Software gross profit Gross profit $36,936 $372 $37,307
margin 84.5% 86.4% (1.9)pts.
Gross profit margin 46.4% 0.5 pts. 46.9%
External total gross profit $4,002 $4,362 (8.2)%
2017
External total gross
Gross profit $36,943 $449 $37,392
profit margin 49.8% 53.2% (3.4)pts.
Gross profit margin 46.7% 0.6 pts. 47.2%
Pre-tax income $ 904 $1,128 (19.9)%
Pre-tax margin 10.2% 12.6% (2.4)pts.
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
The Systems gross profit margin decrease year to year was
IBM is focused on chapter 2 of clients’ digital reinventions, which
driven by the mix away from IBM Z and margin declines in Power
includes scaling AI and shifting mission-critical workloads to
Systems and Storage Systems. The pre-tax income decline was
the cloud. To address the cloud opportunity, enterprises need
driven by the strong performance in IBM Z in the prior year and the
to be able to move and manage data, services and workflows
continued investment in innovation across the Systems portfolio.
across multiple clouds and on-premises. They also need to be
able to address security concerns, data protection and protocols,
Global Financing
availability and cloud management. This is best addressed with
($ in millions) a hybrid, multi-cloud, open approach, based on a foundation of
Yr.-to-Yr. Linux, with containers and Kubernetes. On July 9, 2019, we closed
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2018 2017 Change the acquisition of Red Hat, which significantly changed the cloud
landscape and will accelerate our high value business model.
Results of Operations
Together, IBM and Red Hat offer the leading hybrid, multi-cloud
External revenue $1,590 $1,696 (6.3)%
platform built on open source technologies.
Internal revenue 1,610 1,471 9.5
Total revenue $3,200 $3,168 1.0% The combination of IBM and Red Hat is already off to a strong
Pre-tax income $1,361 $1,278 6.5% start. In August, we introduced Cloud Paks, cloud-native
software that brings together IBM middleware, AI, management
and security and Red Hat’s OpenShift platform. As we look
forward, the largest hybrid cloud opportunity is in services:
advising clients on architectural choices, moving workloads,
building new applications and managing those applications.
With GBS and GTS expertise in digital reinventions and managing
mission-critical workloads, we are well positioned to help our

===== PAGE 58 =====
Management Discussion 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
clients on this journey. We brought additional new innovations to For full-year 2020, we expect the GAAP effective tax rate to
the market in 2019 including: the financial services public cloud, be approximately 3 to 6 percent, including an estimate for
z15 and high-end storage and we have a leadership position in potential discrete tax events (discretes). We expect the operating
quantum computing. With these innovations, we built momentum (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2020 to be approximately 7 to 9 percent,
for growth in 2020. including an estimate of potential discretes. We expect a
discrete tax benefit in the first quarter of 2020. Together with
At the time of our fourth-quarter earnings report, analysts’ the expected structural actions described above, we anticipate
estimates of our revenue growth were approximately 3 percent that these two items will be approximately neutral to the first-
for 2020, which we stated was reasonable. This includes about quarter and full-year 2020 earnings per share. Discretes by their
a 1 point impact from businesses divested in 2019, and January nature are difficult to estimate and the actual impacts will be
17, 2020 expectations for currency translation. This also includes recorded as the discrete events occur. The rates will change year
an expectation of an improving trend in GTS, predominantly in the to year based on discrete tax events, such as the settlement of
second half of 2020. We also expect to expand GAAP and operating income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring
(non-GAAP) gross margins and pre-tax income will include impacts factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes,
from significant structural actions in 2020, primarily in our GTS state and local taxes and the effects of various global income
business as we shift toward a more asset-based model to create tax strategies. The GAAP effective tax rate could also be affected
a more competitive, flexible structure. by adjustments to the previously recorded charges for U.S. tax
reform attributable to any changes in law, new regulations and
At constant currency, we expect accelerated growth of about guidance, audit adjustments, among others.
0.5 points from the fourth-quarter 2019 revenue growth rates
to first-quarter 2020. At January 17, 2020 spot rates, we expect The Red Hat acquisition was funded through a combination of
currency to be a headwind to first-quarter revenue growth of cash and debt, with the incremental debt issued in the first half of
about 1.0 to 1.5 points, as compared to a headwind of 0.6 points 2019. We will continue with a disciplined financial policy and are
in the fourth quarter of 2019. committed to maintaining strong investment-grade credit ratings.
Since the end of the second quarter of 2019, we reduced our debt
Consistent with the acquisition of a highly profitable software balance by $10.1 billion. We are continuing to target a leverage
business, non-cash purchase accounting adjustments resulted in profile consistent with a mid to high single A credit rating within
the Red Hat acquisition being dilutive to full-year 2019 earnings a couple years, while maintaining our solid and growing dividend.
per share. In an acquisition, U.S. GAAP requires a company We suspended our share repurchase program at the close of the
to record all assets acquired and liabilities assumed at the acquisition to direct our free cash flow towards reducing debt
acquisition date fair value. This includes the acquired deferred levels. The combination of these actions provides us with the
revenue balance. This resulted in a non-cash adjustment of flexibility to invest in the business going forward.
$2.2 billion to the acquired deferred revenue balance and
resulted in a reduction to reported revenue post-closing. The Beginning in the second quarter of 2019 and continuing
level of adjustment reflects the high margin profile of Red Hat’s throughout the year, IBM’s Global Financing business wound
subscription-based business. While there will be continued down the portion of its commercial financing operations
impact in 2020 from the deferred revenue adjustment from the which provides short-term working capital solutions for OEM
Red Hat purchase accounting, it will largely be in the first half and information technology suppliers, distributors and resellers.
lessen throughout the year. This was consistent with our capital allocation strategy and
high-value focus. IBM Global Financing will continue to provide
Overall, we expect GAAP earnings per share from continuing differentiated end-to-end financing solutions, including
operations for 2020 to be at least $10.57. Excluding commercial financing in support of IBM partner relationships.
acquisition-related charges of $1.70 per share, non-operating
retirement-related items of $1.02 per share and tax reform We expect 2020 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost to be
enactment impacts of $0.06 per share, operating (non-GAAP) approximately $2.7 billion, an increase of approximately $600
earnings per share is expected to be at least $13.35. For the million compared to 2019. This estimate reflects current
first quarter of 2020, we expect GAAP earnings per share from pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2019. Within total
continuing operations to be 12 to 13 percent of the full-year retirement-related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan
expectation and operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share to cost is expected to be approximately $1.5 billion, approximately
be approximately 14 to 15 percent of the respective full-year flat versus 2019. Non-operating retirement-related plan cost
expectation. This reflects typical seasonality of IBM’s operations, is expected to be approximately $1.2 billion, an increase of
and the impact of the Red Hat deferred revenue purchase approximately $600 million compared to 2019, primarily driven
accounting adjustment. by lower income from expected return on assets. Contributions
for all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately
We expect free cash flow to be approximately $12.5 billion in $2.3 billion in 2020, an increase of approximately $100 million
2020. This includes contribution from Red Hat combined with compared to 2019.
incremental software and services synergy profits and net
of incremental interest to finance the transaction and other Liquidity and Capital Resources
acquisition-related charges. Free cash flow expectations reflect The company has consistently generated strong cash flow
expected operational profit performance, partially offset by from operations, providing a source of funds ranging between
headwinds in capital expenditures and cash tax. $14.8 billion and $16.7 billion per year over the past three years.
The company provides for additional liquidity through several
sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to

===== PAGE 59 =====
58 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
global funding sources, committed global credit facilities and The major ratings agencies ratings on our debt securities at
other committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. December 31, 2019 were as follows:
The following table provides a summary of the major sources of
liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2017 through 2019. Moody’s
Standard Investors
IBM and IBM Credit Ratings and Poor’s Service
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
Senior long-term debt A A2
($ in billions) Commercial paper A-1 Prime-1
2019 2018 2017
Net cash from
operating activities $14.8 $15.2 $16.7 After closing the Red Hat transaction, Moody’s, as expected,
Cash, restricted cash and downgraded IBM and IBM Credit LLC’s long-term debt rating from
short-term marketable A1 to A2 and improved its outlook to stable. We deleveraged
securities $ 9.0 $12.2 $12.8 during the second half of 2019 and remain committed to a target
Committed global leverage profile consistent with a mid to high single A credit rating
credit facilities $15.3 $15.3 $15.3 within a couple of years.
In July 2017, the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority, which
On July 9, 2019, we closed the acquisition of Red Hat for cash regulates the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR), announced
consideration of $34.8 billion. The transaction was funded that it intends to phase out LIBOR by the end of 2021. Various
through a combination of cash on hand and proceeds from debt central bank committees and working groups continue to discuss
issuances. In order to reduce this debt and return to target replacement of benchmark rates, the process for amending
leverage ratios within a couple of years, we suspended our existing LIBOR-based contracts, and the potential economic
share repurchase program at the time of the Red Hat acquisition impacts of different alternatives. The Alternative Reference Rates
closing. In the second half of 2019, we reduced debt levels by Committee has identified the Secured Overnight Financing Rate
$10.1 billion. Refer to note P, “Borrowings,” for additional details (SOFR) as its preferred alternative rate for USD LIBOR. SOFR is
of financing this transaction. a measure of the cost of borrowing cash overnight, collateralized
by U.S. Treasury securities, and is based on directly observable
The indenture governing our debt securities and our various U.S. Treasury-backed repurchase transactions. We are evaluating
credit facilities each contain significant covenants which the potential impact of the replacement of the LIBOR benchmark
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, interest rate, including risk management, internal operational
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and readiness and monitoring the FASB standard-setting process to
leaseback transactions to 10 percent of IBM’s consolidated net address financial reporting issues that might arise in connection
tangible assets, and restrict our ability to merge or consolidate with transition from LIBOR to a new benchmark rate.
unless certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also
include a covenant on our consolidated net interest expense We prepare our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in
ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash
default provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness flow presentation on page 71 and highlight causes and events
of at least $500 million. underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 45.
For the purpose of running its business, IBM manages, monitors
We are in compliance with all of our significant debt covenants and analyzes cash flows in a different format.
and provide periodic certification to our lenders. The failure to
comply with debt covenants could constitute an event of default Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate
with respect to our debt to which such provisions apply. If certain its operating results, plan share repurchase levels, strategic
events of default were to occur, the principal and interest on investments and assess its ability and need to incur and service
the debt to which such event of default applied would become debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily available
immediately due and payable. for discretionary expenditures. We define free cash flow as net
cash from operating activities less the change in Global Financing
We do not have “ratings trigger” provisions in our debt covenants receivables and net capital expenditures, including the investment
or documentation, which would allow the holders to declare an in software. A key objective of the Global Financing business is to
event of default and seek to accelerate payments thereunder in generate strong returns on equity, and increasing receivables is
the event of a change in credit rating. Our contractual agreements the basis for growth. Accordingly, management considers Global
governing derivative instruments contain standard market clauses Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as
which can trigger the termination of the agreement if IBM’s credit working capital that should be minimized for efficiency. Therefore,
rating were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, management includes presentations of both free cash flow and
2019, the fair value of those instruments that were in a liability net cash from operating activities that exclude the effect of Global
position was $673 million, before any applicable netting, and this Financing receivables. Free cash flow guidance is derived using
position is subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period an estimate of profit, working capital and operational cash flows.
based on the level of the company’s outstanding instruments and Since we view Global Financing receivables as a profit-generating
market conditions. We have no other contractual arrangements investment which we seek to maximize, it is not considered when
that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result in a formulating guidance for free cash flow. As a result, we do not
material adverse effect on our financial position or liquidity. estimate a GAAP Net Cash from Operations expectation metric.

===== PAGE 60 =====
Management Discussion 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in shareholders through dividends and gross share repurchases.
2019, after investing $2.4 billion in capital investments primarily The amount of prospective returns to shareholders in the
in support of the services and cloud-based businesses, we form of dividends and share repurchases will vary based
generated free cash flow of $11.9 billion which was essentially upon several factors including each year’s operating results,
flat compared to 2018. Year to year, there were lower capital capital expenditure requirements, research and development
expenditures, offset by higher cash income tax and interest investments and acquisitions, as well as the factors discussed
payments and lower operating cash flows from businesses below. In order to continue to deleverage, we suspended our
divested in 2019. In 2019, we continued to return value to share repurchase program at the time of closing the Red Hat
shareholders including $5.7 billion in dividends and $1.4 billion acquisition.
in gross common stock repurchases.
IBM’s Board of Directors considers the dividend payment on
Over the past three years, we generated over $36 billion in a quarterly basis. In the second quarter of 2019, the Board of
free cash flow. During that period, we invested over $33 billion Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock
in strategic acquisitions and returned over $27 billion to dividend from $1.57 to $1.62 per share.
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 14.8 $15.2 $16.7
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables 0.5 (0.3) 0.4
Net cash from operating activities,
excluding Global Financing receivables 14.3 15.6 16.3
Capital expenditures, net (2.4) (3.7) (3.3)
Free cash flow (FCF) 11.9 11.9 13.0
Acquisitions (32.6) (0.1) (0.5)
Divestitures 1.1 — (0.2)
Share repurchase (1.4) (4.4) (4.3)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (0.3) (0.2) (0.2)
Dividends (5.7) (5.7) (5.5)
Non-Global Financing debt 22.8 (0.5) 1.1
Other (includes Global Financing receivables
and Global Financing debt) 1.0 (1.6) 0.8
Change in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and
short-term marketable securities $ (3.2) $ (0.6) $ 4.1
FCF as percent of Income from Continuing Operations 126% 136%* 226%*
* 111% in 2018 excluding charges of $2.0 billion and 116% in 2017 excluding the charge of $5.5 billion associated with the
enactment of U.S. tax reform.
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow of approximately $100 million compared to 2019. Financial
dynamics discussed previously include significant changes in market performance could increase the legally mandated
operating results, material changes in geographic sources of minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that require
cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. We are not
funding requirements during periods of severe downturn in the quantifying any further impact from pension funding because it is
capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any not possible to predict future movements in the capital markets
litigation has such an adverse impact will depend on a number or pension plan funding regulations.
of variables, which are more completely described in note R,
“Commitments & Contingencies.” With respect to pension In 2020, we are not legally required to make any contributions
funding, in 2019, we contributed $274 million to our non-U.S. to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
defined benefit plans compared to $363 million in 2018. As
highlighted in the Contractual Obligations table, we expect to Our cash flows are sufficient to fund our current operations and
make legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain obligations, including investing and financing activities such
non-U.S. plans of approximately $1.5 billion in the next five years. as dividends and debt service. When additional requirements
The 2020 contributions are currently expected to be approximately arise, we have several liquidity options available. These options
$300 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related plans may include the ability to borrow additional funds at reasonable
are expected to be approximately $2.3 billion in 2020, an increase interest rates and utilizing our committed global credit facilities.

===== PAGE 61 =====
60 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Payments Due In
Total Contractual
Payment Stream 2020 2021–22 2023–24 After 2024
Long-term debt obligations $62,003 $ 7,474 $16,910 $11,648 $25,971
Interest on long-term debt obligations 16,299 1,703 2,753 2,121 9,722
Finance lease obligations* 204 52 91 32 29
Operating lease obligations* 5,605 1,486 2,126 1,187 806
Purchase obligations 4,952 1,379 1,832 1,530 211
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding
(mandated)** 1,500 300 600 600
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,734 213 471 531 519
Long-term termination benefits 972 214 138 108 512
Tax reserves+ 4,582 236
Other 951 385 218 72 276
Total $98,801 $13,442 $25,139 $17,829 $38,046
* Finance lease obligations are presented on a discounted cash flow basis, whereas operating lease obligations are presented on an
undiscounted cash flow basis.
** As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2024 could not be reasonably estimated.
+ These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. We estimate that approximately $236 million of the liability is expected to be
settled within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as
the timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due
within the next 12 months.
Certain contractual obligations reported in the previous table Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
exclude the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal From time to time, we may enter into off-balance sheet
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Certain arrangements as defined by SEC Financial Reporting Release
noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the previous table as their 67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and
future cash outflows are uncertain. This includes deferred taxes, Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate
derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and other sundry Contractual Obligations.”
items. Certain obligations related to our divestitures are included.
At December 31, 2019, we had no such off-balance sheet
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in
of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) we financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations,
would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or (3) we liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table
must make specified minimum payments even if we do not take above for our contractual obligations, and note R, “Commitments
delivery of the contracted products or services (take-or-pay). If & Contingencies,” for detailed information about our guarantees,
the obligation to purchase goods or services is noncancelable, financial commitments and indemnification arrangements. We do
the entire value of the contract is included in the previous table. not have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated
If the obligation is cancelable, but we would incur a penalty entities or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a
purchase obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified Critical Accounting Estimates
in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they The application of GAAP requires IBM to make estimates and
represent the portion of each contract that is a firm commitment. assumptions about certain items and future events that directly
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contracts that assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider
specify that we will purchase all or a portion of our requirements to be the most critical to our financial statements. An accounting
of a specific product, commodity or service from a supplier or estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or
vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in order to assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment
secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not specify involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of
fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, we the estimate and assumption is material to IBM’s financial condition.
do not consider them to be purchase obligations. Senior management has discussed the development, selection and
disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of IBM’s
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the Board of Directors. Our significant accounting policies are described
effective interest rate at December 31, 2019, plus the interest in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
rate spread associated with that debt, if any.
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that
information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and
provides material information to investors. The amounts used to

===== PAGE 62 =====
Management Discussion 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to In addition to the above, we evaluate other pension assumptions
allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general direction involving demographic factors, such as retirement age and
cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent mortality, and update these assumptions to reflect experience
management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given year
it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as can differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic and
forecasted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment. other factors.
Pension Assumptions For additional information on our pension plans and the
For our defined benefit pension plans, the measurement of the development of these assumptions, see note V, “Retirement-
benefit obligation to plan participants and net periodic pension Related Benefits.”
(income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, including,
among others, estimates of discount rates and expected return Revenue Recognition
on plan assets. Application of GAAP related to the measurement and recognition
of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the Specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard terms
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the and conditions may require significant contract interpretation
net periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected to determine the appropriate accounting, including whether
benefit obligation (PBO). The discount rate assumption for promised goods and services specified in an arrangement are
the IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based defined distinct performance obligations. Other significant judgments
benefit plan, decreased by 100 basis points to 3.10 percent on include determining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the
December 31, 2019. This change will increase pre-tax income principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts should
recognized in 2020 by an estimated $31 million. If the discount be combined and considered part of one arrangement.
rate assumption for the PPP had increased by 100 basis points
on December 31, 2019, pre-tax income recognized in 2020 would Revenue recognition is also impacted by our ability to determine
decrease by an estimated $16 million. Further changes in the when a contract is probable of collection and to estimate variable
discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, in turn, consideration, including, for example, rebates, volume discounts,
may impact our funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. service-level penalties, and performance bonuses. We consider
A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate would various factors when making these judgments, including a review
cause a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the of specific transactions, historical experience and market and
PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.2 billion based upon December 31, economic conditions. Evaluations are conducted each quarter
2019 data. to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If the estimates were
changed by 10 percent in 2019, the impact on net income would
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is used have been immaterial.
in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. Expected
returns on plan assets are calculated based on the market-related Costs to Complete Service Contracts
value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of We enter into numerous service contracts through our services
plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected businesses. During the contractual period, revenue, cost and
return on plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost. profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profitability
The differences between the actual return on plan assets and the of each contract, especially contracts for which we use cost-to-
expected long-term return on plan assets are recognized over five cost measures of progress. If at any time these estimates indicate
years in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the
pension (income)/cost and also as a component of actuarial (gains)/ remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. We
losses, which are recognized over the service lives or life expectancy perform ongoing profitability analyses of these services contracts
of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or updating. Key factors reviewed to estimate the future costs
the value of plan assets, as provided by accounting standards. to complete each contract are future labor costs and product
costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such provisions recorded as a component of other accrued expenses
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan and liabilities were immaterial at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption Income Taxes
would have an estimated decrease or increase, respectively, of We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign
$241 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determining
(income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, the consolidated provision for income taxes.
2019 and assuming no contributions are made in 2020).
During the ordinary course of business, there are many
We may voluntarily make contributions or be required, by law, transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax
to make contributions to our pension plans. Actual results that determination is uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities
differ from the estimates may result in more or less future IBM based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will
funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. be due. These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite our
Impacts of these types of changes on our pension plans in other belief that our tax return positions are supportable, we believe
countries worldwide would vary depending upon the status of that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review by
each respective plan. tax authorities. We believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are

===== PAGE 63 =====
62 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
adequate for all open audit years based on our assessment of not limited to, macroeconomic, industry and market conditions,
many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax as well as other individual factors such as:
law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and
• A loss of key personnel;
may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To
the extent that new information becomes available which causes • A significant adverse shift in the operating environment of
us to change our judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax the reporting unit such as unanticipated competition;
liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax
• A significant pending litigation;
expense in the period in which such determination is made.
• A more likely than not expectation that a reporting unit or a
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold or otherwise
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing disposed of; and
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all
• An adverse action or assessment by a regulator.
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility
We assess these qualitative factors to determine whether it is
of ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. In the event that we
necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill impairment
change our determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets
test. This quantitative test is required only if we conclude that it is
that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with
more likely than not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its
a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in
carrying amount. Given our segment changes and the significant
which such determination is made.
acquisition of Red Hat, we performed the quantitative Step 1 tests
of goodwill impairment for all affected reporting units in 2019. After
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period
performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis
to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement
during the fourth quarter of 2019, only the Systems reporting unit
of income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring
required quantitative review as a result of the qualitative analysis.
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes,
The qualitative assessment indicated a potential impairment
state and local taxes and the effects of various global income
triggering event as a result of the financial performance of the
tax strategies.
Systems reporting unit. The quantitative analysis resulted in no
impairment as the estimated fair value of the Systems reporting
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
unit, which had goodwill of $2.3 billion as of December 31, 2019,
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations
exceeded its carrying amount by approximately 30 percent.
before income taxes, consolidated net income would have
decreased/improved by $102 million in 2019.
Our quantitative impairment testing did not indicate any goodwill
impairment, and all of the other reporting units with goodwill had
Valuation of Assets
a fair value that was substantially in excess of its carrying value.
The application of business combination and impairment
accounting requires the use of significant estimates and
Loss Contingencies
assumptions. The acquisition method of accounting for
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings.
business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value
At least quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter
of assets acquired including separately identifiable intangible
and assess our potential financial exposure. If the potential loss
assets, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in
from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and
the acquiree to properly allocate purchase price consideration.
the amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for
Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill, requires the
the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the
allocation of cash flows to those assets or group of assets and
determination of probability and the determination as to whether an
if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of
exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related
assets. Our estimates are based upon assumptions believed
to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information
to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and
available at the time. As additional information becomes available,
unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s
we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims
assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and
and litigation, and may revise our estimates. These revisions in the
circumstances that may occur.
estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact
on our results of operations and financial position.
Valuation of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables
may not be recoverable. In 2019, we assessed the qualitative risk
port folio on a regular basis in order to assess collectibility and
factors to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair
records adjustments to the allowance for credit losses at least
value of a reporting unit is less than its carrying amount.
quarterly. A description of the methods used by management
to estimate the amount of uncollectible receivables is included
We assess qualitative factors in each of our reporting units that
in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.” Factors that could
carry goodwill including relevant events and circumstances that
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different
affect the fair value of reporting units. Examples include, but are
from the estim ated reserve include significant changes in
the economy, or a sudden change in the economic health of
a significant client that represents a concentration in Global
Financing’s receivables portfolio.

===== PAGE 64 =====
Management Discussion 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s earnings per share growth in 2019. Based on the currency rate
estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global Financing’s movements in 2019, total revenue decreased 3.1 percent as
segment pre-tax income and our income from continuing reported and 1.0 percent at constant currency versus 2018. On
operations before income taxes would be higher or lower by an income from continuing operations before income taxes basis,
an estimated $22 million depending upon whether the actual these translation impacts offset by the net impact of hedging
collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates. activities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing
or sourcing actions) increase of approximately $300 million in 2019
Residual Value on an as-reported basis and an increase of approximately $260
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same mathematical
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates exercise resulted in an increase of approximately $300 million in
can impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as 2018, on both an as-reported basis and operating (non-GAAP)
operating, sales-type or direct financing. Global Financing estimates basis. We view these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact
the future fair value of leased equipment by using historical models, to our as-reported financial results. Considering the operational
analyzing the current market for new and used equipment, and responses mentioned above, movements of exchange rates, and
obtaining forward-looking product information such as marketing the nature and timing of hedging instruments, it is difficult to
plans and technological innovations. Residual value estimates predict future currency impacts on any particular period, but we
are periodically reviewed and “other than temporary” declines in believe it could be substantially less than the theoretical maximum
estimated future residual values are recognized upon identification. given the competitive pressure in the marketplace.
Anticipated increases in future residual values are not recognized
until the equipment is remarketed. For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S.
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary,
Factors that could cause actual results to materially differ from translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations.
the estimates include significant changes in the used-equipment Generally, we manage currency risk in these entities by linking
market brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations prices and contracts to U.S. dollars.
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
During 2018, the three-year cumulative inflation rates in
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than Argentina, using a combination of monthly indices, exceeded the
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s 100 percent threshold for hyperinflation. As a result, effective
segment pre-tax income and our income from continuing July 1, 2018, the company changed the functional currency
operations before income taxes for 2019 would have been lower from local currency to U.S. dollar functional for Argentina with
by an estimated $73 million. If the actual residual value recovery no material impact. In 2019, the Argentinean economy continued
is higher than management’s estimates, the increase in income will to experience high inflation. The ongoing impact is not material
be realized at the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed. given the size of the company’s operations in the country (less
than 1 percent of total 2019 and 2018 revenue, respectively).
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the Market Risk
U.S. dollar affect our financial results and financial position. At In the normal course of business, our financial position is
December 31, 2019, currency changes resulted in assets and routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the market
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into risk associated with interest rate and currency movements on
fewer dollars than at year-end 2018. We use financial hedging outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts
transactions and other foreign currency-based transactions. receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.
During periods of sustained movements in currency, the We regularly assess these risks and have established policies and
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates. For business practices to protect against the adverse effects of these
example, when pricing offerings in the marketplace, we may use and other potential exposures. As a result, we do not anticipate
some of the advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve any material losses from these risks.
our position competitively, and price more aggressively to win the
business, essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage Our debt, in support of the Global Financing business and the
to our customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. geographic breadth of our operations, contains an element of
Consequently, we believe that some of the currency-based changes market risk from changes in interest and currency rates. We
in cost impact the prices charged to clients. We also maintain manage this risk, in part, through the use of a variety of financial
currency hedging programs for cash management purposes which instruments including derivatives, as described in note T,
may temporarily mitigate, but not eliminate, the volatility of currency “Derivative Financial Instruments.”
impacts on our financial results.
To meet disclosure requirements, we perform a sensitivity analysis
We translate revenue, cost and expense in our non-U.S. operations to determine the effects that market risk exposures may have on
at current exchange rates in the reported period. References to the fair values of our debt and other financial instruments.
“adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect adjustments
based upon a simple mathematical formula. However, this The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity
constant currency methodology that we utilize to disclose this analysis are comprised of our cash and cash equivalents,
information does not incorporate any operational actions that marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial
management could take to mitigate fluctuating currency rates. financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long-
Currency movements impacted our year-to-year revenue and term and short-term debt and derivative financial instruments. Our

===== PAGE 65 =====
64 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
derivative financial instruments generally include interest rate Cybersecurity
swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts. While cybersecurity risk can never be completely eliminated,
our approach draws on the depth and breadth of our global
To perform the sensitivity analysis, we assess the risk of loss in fair capabilities, both in terms of our offerings to clients and our
values from the effect of hypothetical changes in interest rates and internal approaches to risk management. We offer commercial
foreign currency exchange rates on market-sensitive instruments. security solutions that deliver capabilities in areas such as
The market values for interest and foreign currency exchange risk identity and access management, data security, application
are computed based on the present value of future cash flows as security, network security and endpoint security. These
affected by the changes in rates that are attributable to the market solutions include pervasive encryption, threat intelligence,
risk being measured. The discount rates used for the present value analytics, cognitive and artificial intelligence, and forensic
computations were selected based on market interest and foreign capabilities that analyze client security events, yielding insights
currency exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2019 and 2018. about attacks, threats, and vulnerabilities facing the client.
The differences in this comparison are the hypothetical gains or We also offer professional consulting and technical services
losses associated with each type of risk. solutions for security from assessment and incident response
to deployment and resource augmentation. In addition, we
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not offer managed and outsourced security solutions from multiple
necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that we security operations centers around the world. Finally, security is
would incur under normal market conditions because, due to embedded in a multitude of our products and offerings through
practical limitations, all variables other than the specific market secure engineering and operations, and by critical functions
risk factor are held constant. In addition, the results of the model (e.g., encryption, access control) in servers, storage, software,
are constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically services, and other solutions.
excluded from the analysis, while the financial instruments
relating to the financing or hedging of those items are included From an enterprise perspective, we implement a multi-faceted
by definition. Excluded items include short-term and long- risk-management approach based on the National Institute of
term receivables from sales-type and direct financing leases, Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework to identify
forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the company’s net and address cybersecurity risks. In addition, we have established
investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, reported policies and procedures that provide the foundation upon which
changes in the values of some of the financial instruments IBM’s infrastructure and data are managed. We regularly assess
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched and adjust our technical controls and methods to identify and
with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those mitigate emerging cybersecurity risks. We use a layered approach
instruments are designed to finance or hedge. with overlapping controls to defend against cybersecurity attacks
and threats on networks, end-user devices, servers, applications,
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2019 and data and cloud solutions. We draw heavily on our own commercial
2018, are as follows: security solutions and services to mitigate cybersecurity risks.
We also have threat intelligence and security monitoring
Interest Rate Risk programs, as well as a global incident response process to
A 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest rates with all other respond to cybersecurity threats and attacks. In addition, we
variables held constant would result in a decrease in the fair value utilize a combination of online training, educational tools, videos
of our financial instruments of $563 million and $422 million and other awareness initiatives to foster a culture of security
at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. A 10 percent awareness and responsibility among our workforce.
increase in the levels of interest rates with all other variables
held constant would result in an increase in the fair value of Employees and Related Workforce
our financial instruments of $546 million and $408 million at
(In thousands)
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Changes in the
For the year ended December 31: 2019
relative sensitivity of the fair value of our financial instrument
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 352.6
portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest
rates are primarily driven by changes in debt maturities, interest Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 9.6
rate profile and amount. Complementary 21.6
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
As a globally integrated enterprise, IBM operates in more than
At December 31, 2019, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against
175 countries and is continuing to shift our business to the
foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would
higher value segments of enterprise IT. We continue to remix
result in a decrease in the fair value of our financial instruments
our skills and people needs to match the best opportunities in
of $616 million as compared to an increase of $697 million
the marketplace.
at December 31, 2018. At December 31, 2019, a 10 percent
stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent
variables held constant, would result in an increase in the fair
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and
value of our financial instruments of $616 million as compared
limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific
to a decrease of $697 million at December 31, 2018.
business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 33 for a discussion of
the financing risks associated with the Global Financing business
and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.

===== PAGE 66 =====
Report of Management 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility Management’s Report on Internal Control
for Financial Information Over Financial Reporting
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
management. The accompanying financial statements have been Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
estimates and judgments as required. purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists,
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes
of responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance
systems and control procedures. An important element of the of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect
control environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded
are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified. as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures
we carefully select and train our employees, develop and of the company are being made only in accordance with
disseminate written policies and procedures, provide appropriate authorizations of management and directors of the company;
communication channels and foster an environment conducive to and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
the effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition
for the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM financial statements.
Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into
numerous languages, are distributed to employees throughout Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
the world, and reemphasized through internal programs to assure financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
that they are understood and followed. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
responsible for recommending to the Board the independent
registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of
year, subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria
meets regularly and privately with the independent registered established in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013)
public accounting firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the
well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, Treadway Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation,
internal control structure and financial reporting matters. management concluded that the company’s internal control
over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2019.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over
financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Virginia M. Rometty
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 25, 2020
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 25, 2020

===== PAGE 67 =====
66 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included
International Business Machines Corporation performing procedures to assess the risks of material
misstatement of the consolidated financial statements, whether
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond
over Financial Reporting to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test
basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included
sheets of International Business Machines Corporation and its evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2019 and estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
2018, and the related consolidated statements of income, of overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements.
comprehensive income, of equity and of cash flows for each of Our audit of internal control over financial reporting included
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2019, including obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial
the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and
financial statements”). We also have audited the Company’s testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also
based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated included performing such other procedures as we considered
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits
Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over
above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position Financial Reporting
of the Company as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process
results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the
years in the period ended December 31, 2019 in conformity with reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States statements for external purposes in accordance with generally
of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures
as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable
Control—Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO. detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable
Change in Accounting Principle assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to
As discussed in Note B to the consolidated financial statements, permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with
the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for leases generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and
in 2019. expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance
with authorizations of management and directors of the company;
Basis for Opinions and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or
The Company’s management is responsible for these timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition
consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the
internal control over financial reporting, and for its assessment financial statements.
of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting,
included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over
Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements.
opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future
and on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting periods are subject to the risk that controls may become
based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree
with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect
to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities Critical Audit Matters
laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities The critical audit matters communicated below are matters
and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB. arising from the current period audit of the consolidated
financial statements that were communicated or required to
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relate to
the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated
the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging,
the consolidated financial statements are free of material subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical
misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the
effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are
in all material respects. not, by communicating the critical audit matters below, providing
separate opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts
or disclosures to which they relate.

===== PAGE 68 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisition of Red Hat, Inc.—Valuation of Intangible these tax liabilities are recognized when, despite management’s
Assets Acquired belief that the tax return positions are supportable, management
As described in Note E to the consolidated financial statements, believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
the Company completed its acquisition of Red Hat, Inc. for review by tax authorities. Management bases its assessment of
total consideration of $35.1 billion during 2019, resulting in the accruals for tax liabilities on many factors, including past
approximately $13.5 billion in intangible assets and $23.1 billion experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment
in goodwill being recorded. The intangible assets were comprised relies on estimates and assumptions, and may involve a series
of client relationships of $7.2 billion, completed technology of of complex judgments about future events. As of December 31,
$4.6 billion, and trademarks of $1.7 billion. Management applied 2019, unrecognized tax benefits were $7.1 billion.
judgment in estimating the fair value of the intangible assets using
a discounted cash flow model, which involved the use of significant The principal considerations for our determination that
estimates and assumptions with respect to revenue growth rates, performing procedures relating to uncertain tax positions is
the customer attrition rate, and discount rates. a critical audit matter are there was significant judgment by
management when estimating the tax liabilities for uncertain tax
The principal considerations for our determination that positions, including applying complex tax laws, and a high degree
performing procedures relating to the valuation of intangible of estimation uncertainty based on potential for significant
assets acquired in connection with the acquisition of Red Hat, adjustments as a result of audits by tax authorities or other forms
Inc. is a critical audit matter are (i) there was a high degree of of tax settlement. This in turn led to a high degree of auditor
auditor judgment and subjectivity in applying procedures relating judgment, effort, and subjectivity in performing procedures to
to the fair value measurement of intangible assets acquired evaluate the timely identification and measurement of uncertain
due to the significant amount of judgment by management tax positions. Also, the evaluation of audit evidence available to
when developing the estimate; (ii) significant audit effort was support the tax liabilities for uncertain tax positions is complex
required in evaluating the significant assumptions relating to the and required significant auditor judgment as the nature of the
estimate, such as revenue growth rates, the customer attrition evidence is often inherently subjective, and the audit effort
rate, and discount rates; and (iii) the audit effort involved the use involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and
of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge to assist in knowledge to assist in evaluating the audit evidence obtained.
performing these procedures and evaluating the audit evidence
obtained from these procedures. Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and
evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and overall opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These
evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating
overall opinion on the consolidated financial statements. These to the identification and recognition of the liability for uncertain
procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating tax positions, and controls addressing completeness of the
to the valuation of intangible assets acquired and controls over the uncertain tax positions, as well as controls over measurement
development of the assumptions, including the revenue growth of the liability. These procedures also included, among others,
rates, the customer attrition rate, and discount rates. These (i) testing the information used in the calculation of the liability
procedures also included, among others, reading the purchase for uncertain tax positions, including intercompany agreements,
agreements, and testing management’s process for estimating the international, federal, and state filing positions, and the related
fair value of intangible assets, using professionals with specialized final tax returns; (ii) testing the calculation of the liability for
skill and knowledge to assist in doing so. Testing management’s uncertain tax positions by jurisdiction, including management’s
process included evaluating the appropriateness of the discounted assessment of the technical merits of tax positions and estimates
cash flow models, testing the completeness and accuracy of data of the amount of tax benefit expected to be sustained; (iii) testing
provided by management, and evaluating the reasonableness the completeness of management’s assessment of both the
of significant assumptions, including revenue growth rates, the identification of uncertain tax positions and possible outcomes
customer attrition rate, and discount rates. When assessing the of each uncertain tax position; and (iv) evaluating the status and
assumptions related to revenue growth rates and the customer results of income tax audits pending in various tax jurisdictions.
attrition rate, we evaluated whether the assumptions used were Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to
reasonable considering the past performance of the acquiree assist in the evaluation of the completeness and measurement
as well as industry data. The discount rates were evaluated by of the Company’s uncertain tax positions, including evaluating
considering the cost of capital of comparable businesses and the reasonableness of management’s assessment of whether
other industry factors. Professionals with specialized skill and tax positions are more-likely-than-not of being sustained and
knowledge were used to assist in evaluating the appropriateness the amount of potential benefit to be realized.
of the Company’s discounted cash flow models.
Income Taxes—Uncertain Tax Positions
As described in Notes A and G to the consolidated financial PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
statements, the Company is subject to income taxes in the New York, New York
United States and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As disclosed February 25, 2020
by management, during the ordinary course of business there
are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax We, or firms that we have ultimately acquired, have served as
determination is uncertain. As a result, the Company recognizes the Company’s auditor since 1923. For the period from 1923 to
tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes 1958, the Company was audited by firms that a predecessor firm
and interest will be due. As further described by management, to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP ultimately acquired.

===== PAGE 69 =====
68 Consolidated Income Statement
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2019 2018 2017
Revenue
Services $47,493 $49,257* $48,652*
Sales 28,252 28,735* 28,772*
Financing 1,402 1,599 1,715
Total revenue C 77,147 79,591 79,139
Cost
Services 32,491 33,687* 33,399*
Sales 7,263 7,835* 7,587*
Financing 904 1,132 1,210
Total cost 40,659 42,655 42,196
Gross profit 36,488 36,936 36,943
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 20,604 19,366 19,680
Research, development and engineering F 5,989 5,379 5,590
Intellectual property and custom development income (648) (1,026) (1,466)
Other (income) and expense (968) 1,152 1,125
Interest expense P&T 1,344 723 615
Total expense and other (income) 26,322 25,594 25,543
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 10,166 11,342 11,400
Provision for income taxes G 731 2,619 5,642
Income from continuing operations 9,435 8,723 5,758
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (4) 5 (5)
Net income $ 9,431 $ 8,728 $ 5,753
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations H $ 10.57 $ 9.51 $ 6.14
Discontinued operations H (0.01) 0.01 0.00
Total H $ 10.56 $ 9.52 $ 6.14
Basic
Continuing operations H $ 10.63 $ 9.56 $ 6.17
Discontinued operations H 0.00 0.01 0.00
Total H $ 10.63 $ 9.57 $ 6.17
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 892,813,376 916,315,714 937,385,625
Basic 887,235,105 912,048,072 932,828,295
* Reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation. Refer to “Basis of Presentation” in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 70 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2019 2018 2017
Net income $ 9,431 $8,728 $5,753
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments S (39) (730) 152
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities S
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 1 (2) 1
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income — — 1
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities 1 (2) 2
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges S
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (689) (136) (58)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 75 449 (363)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges (614) 313 (421)
Retirement-related benefit plans S
Prior service costs/(credits) (73) (182) 0
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (120) (2,517) 682
Curtailments and settlements 41 11 19
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (9) (73) (88)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,843 2,966 2,889
Total retirement-related benefit plans 1,681 204 3,502
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax S 1,029 (215) 3,235
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items
of other comprehensive income S (136) (262) (429)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) S 893 (476) 2,806
Total comprehensive income $10,324 $8,252 $8,559
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 71 =====
70 Consolidated Balance Sheet
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2019 2018
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 8,172 $ 11,379
Restricted cash 141 225
Marketable securities I 696 618
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of
$299 in 2019 and $309 in 2018) 7,870 7,432
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $188 in 2019 and $244 in 2018) K 14,192 22,388
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $33 in 2019 and $38 in 2018) 1,733 743
Inventory J 1,619 1,682
Deferred costs C 1,896 2,300
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 2,101 2,378
Total current assets 38,420 49,146
Property, plant and equipment L 32,028 32,460
Less: Accumulated depreciation L 22,018 21,668
Property, plant and equipment—net L 10,010 10,792
Operating right-of-use assets—net* M 4,996 —
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $33 in 2019 and $48 in 2018) K 8,712 9,148
Prepaid pension assets V 6,865 4,666
Deferred costs C 2,472 2,676
Deferred taxes G 5,182 5,216
Goodwill N 58,222 36,265
Intangible assets—net N 15,235 3,087
Investments and sundry assets O 2,074 2,386
Total assets $ 152,186 $ 123,382
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes G $ 2,839 $ 3,046
Short-term debt I&P 8,797 10,207
Accounts payable 4,896 6,558
Compensation and benefits 3,406 3,310
Deferred income 12,026 11,165
Operating lease liabilities* M 1,380 —
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,357 3,941
Total current liabilities 37,701 38,227
Long-term debt I&P 54,102 35,605
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations V 17,142 17,002
Deferred income 3,851 3,445
Operating lease liabilities* M 3,879 —
Other liabilities Q 14,526 12,174
Total liabilities 131,202 106,452
Commitments and Contingencies R
Equity S
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 55,895 55,151
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2019—2,237,996,975; 2018—2,233,427,058)
Retained earnings 162,954 159,206
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2019—1,350,886,521; 2018—1,340,947,648) (169,413) (168,071)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (28,597) (29,490)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity 20,841 16,796
Noncontrolling interests A 144 134
Total equity 20,985 16,929
Total liabilities and equity $ 152,186 $ 123,382
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on leases.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 72 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 9,431 $ 8,728 $ 5,753
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation 4,209 3,127 3,021
Amortization of intangibles 1,850 1,353 1,520
Stock-based compensation 679 510 534
Deferred taxes (1,527) 853 (931)
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (1,096) 123 14
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) 502 1,006 1,297
Retirement related 301 1,368 1,014
Inventory 67 (127) 18
Other assets/other liabilities 858 (1,819) 4,437
Accounts payable (503) 126 47
Net cash provided by operating activities 14,770 15,247 16,724
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (2,286) (3,395) (3,229)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 537 248 460
Investment in software (621) (569) (544)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (3,693) (7,041) (4,949)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 3,961 6,487 3,910
Non-operating finance receivables—net 6,720 (503) (2,028)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (32,630) (139) (496)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 1,076 — (205)
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities (26,936) (4,913) (7,081)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 31,825 6,891 9,643
Payments to settle debt (12,944) (8,533) (6,816)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net (2,597) 1,341 620
Common stock repurchases (1,361) (4,443) (4,340)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (272) (171) (193)
Financing—other 99 111 175
Cash dividends paid (5,707) (5,666) (5,506)
Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities 9,042 (10,469) (6,418)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (167) (495) 937
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (3,290) (630) 4,161
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at January 1 11,604 12,234 8,073
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at December 31 $ 8,314 $ 11,604 $12,234
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 2,091 $ 1,745 $ 1,597
Interest paid on debt $ 1,685 $ 1,423 $ 1,208
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 73 =====
72 Consolidated Statement of Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2017
Equity, January 1, 2017 $53,935 $152,759 $(159,050) $(29,398) $18,246 $146 $18,392
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting principle* 102 102 102
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 5,753 5,753 5,753
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) 2,806 2,806 2,806
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 8,559 $ 8,559
Cash dividends paid—
common stock ($5.90 per share) (5,506) (5,506) (5,506)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(4,311,998 shares) 631 631 631
Purchases (1,226,080 shares)
and sales (463,083 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans—net 18 (134) (116) (116)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (27,237,179 shares) (4,323) (4,323) (4,323)
Changes in other equity 0 0 0
Changes in noncontrolling interests (15) (15)
Equity, December 31, 2017 $54,566 $153,126 $(163,507) $(26,592) $17,594 $131 $17,725
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on intra-entity transfers of assets.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2018
Equity, January 1, 2018 $54,566 $153,126 $(163,507) $(26,592) $17,594 $131 $17,725
Cumulative effect of change in
accounting principle
Revenue* 580 580 580
Stranded tax effects/other* 2,422 (2,422)
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 8,728 8,728 8,728
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) (476) (476) (476)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 8,252 $ 8,252
Cash dividends paid—
common stock ($6.21 per share) (5,666) (5,666) (5,666)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(3,998,245 shares) 585 585 585
Purchases (1,173,416 shares)
and sales (424,589 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans—net 15 (117) (103) (103)
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (32,949,233 shares) (4,447) (4,447) (4,447)
Changes in other equity 0 0 0 0
Changes in noncontrolling interests 3 3
Equity, December 31, 2018 $55,151 $159,206 $(168,071) $(29,490) $16,796 $134 $16,929
* Reflects the adoption of FASB guidance. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes.”
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 74 =====
Consolidated Statement of Equity 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common Accumulated
Stock and Other Total IBM Non-
Additional Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders ’ Controlling Total
Paid-In Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2019
Equity, January 1, 2019 $55,151 $159,206 $(168,071) $(29,490) $16,796 $134 $16,929
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 9,431 9,431 9,431
Other comprehensive
income/(loss) 893 893 893
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $10,324 $10,324
Cash dividends paid—
common stock ($6.43 per share) (5,707) (5,707) (5,707)
Common stock issued under
employee plans
(4,569,917 shares) 745 745 745
Purchases (2,000,704 shares)
and sales (2,041,347 shares)
of treasury stock under
employee plans—net 30 (11) 19 19
Other treasury shares purchased,
not retired (9,979,516 shares) (1,331) (1,331) (1,331)
Changes in other equity (5) (5) (5)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 10 10
Equity, December 31, 2019 $55,895 $162,954 $(169,413) $(28,597) $20,841 $144 $20,985
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 75 =====
74 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES is reported as described above in the Consolidated Income
Basis of Presentation Statement. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required.
footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation Investments in business entities in which the company does not
(IBM or the company) have been prepared in accordance with have control but has the ability to exercise significant influence
accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of over operating and financial policies, are accounted for using the
America (GAAP). equity method and the company’s proportionate share of income
or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. The accounting
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain policy for other investments in equity securities is described
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded within the “Marketable Securities” section of this note. Equity
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are investments in non-publicly traded entities lacking controlling
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain financial interest or significant influence are primarily measured
prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the at cost, net of impairment, if any. All intercompany transactions
current year presentation. Specifically, revenues and related and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
costs for post-contract support (PCS) provided for perpetual
(one-time charge) software licenses were reclassified from Use of Estimates
Services Revenue to Sales Revenue and Services Cost to Sales The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP
Cost within the Consolidated Income Statement. The company requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
reclassified $2.1 billion within revenue and $0.4 billion within affect amounts that are reported in the Consolidated Financial
cost for each of the years ended December 31, 2018 and Statements and accompanying disclosures. Estimates are made
2017. This reclassification had no impact on total revenue, for the following, among others: revenue, costs to complete
total cost, net income, financial position or cash flows for any service contracts, income taxes, pension assumptions,
periods presented. Other immaterial reclassifications have been valuation of assets including goodwill and intangible assets,
annotated where applicable. loss contingencies, allowance for credit losses and other matters.
These estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of
On July 9, 2019, the company completed the acquisition of all current events, historical experience, actions that the company
the outstanding shares of Red Hat, Inc. (Red Hat). Refer to note may undertake in the future and on various other assumptions
E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” and note N, “Intangible Assets that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances.
Including Goodwill,” for additional information on the impacts Actual results may be different from these estimates.
to the consolidated financial results at and for the year ended
December 31, 2019. Revenue
Effective January 1, 2018, the company adopted the new
In the first quarter of 2019, the company made a number of accounting standard related to the recognition of revenue in
changes to its organizational structure and management system. contracts with customers under the modified retrospective
These changes impacted the company’s reportable segments, but transition method. This method was applied to contracts that
did not impact the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. were not complete as of the date of initial application. The impact
Refer to note D, “Segments,” for additional information on the related to adopting the new standard was not material. Certain
company’s reportable segments. The periods presented in this changes resulting from adopting the new standard, such as
Annual Report are reported on a comparable basis. terminology differences, impacted the company’s description of
its significant accounting policies compared to 2017. For further
The impact of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. tax reform) resulted information regarding the adoption of the new standard, see note
in a charge to tax expense of $0.1 billion, $2.0 billion and $5.5 B, “Accounting Changes,” and note C, “Revenue Recognition.”
billion, for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively. Refer to note G, “Taxes,” for additional information. The company accounts for a contract with a client when it has
written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $25 million, $17 million and $17 parties, including payment terms, are identified, the contract has
million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection.
and 2017, respectively, are included as a reduction within other
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product
or service transfers to a client, in an amount that reflects the
Principles of Consolidation consideration to which the company expects to be entitled
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM in exchange for transferring those products or services. If
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority owned. the consideration promised in a contract includes a variable
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported amount, the company estimates the amount to which it expects
as a component of total equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. to be entitled using either the expected value or most likely
Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest amount method. The company’s contracts may include terms

===== PAGE 76 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
that could cause variability in the transaction price, including, The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes
for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties, assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
and performance bonuses or other forms of contingent revenue. concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions.
The company only includes estimated amounts in the transaction In addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following
price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal are the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements
of cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the with multiple performance obligations and for each major
uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. category of revenue.
The company may not be able to reliably estimate contingent
revenue in certain long-term arrangements due to uncertainties Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
that are not expected to be resolved for a long period of time The company’s global capabilities as a cognitive solutions and
or when the company’s experience with similar types of cloud platform company include services, software, hardware
contracts is limited. The company’s arrangements infrequently and related financing. The company enters into revenue
include contingent revenue. Changes in estimates of variable arrangements that may consist of any combination of these
consideration are included in note C, “Revenue Recognition.” products and services based on the needs of its clients.
The company’s standard billing terms are that payment is due upon The company continues to develop new products and offerings
receipt of invoice, payable within 30 days. Invoices are generally and continuously reinvent its platforms and delivery methods,
issued as control transfers and/or as services are rendered. including through the use of cloud and as-a-Service models.
Additionally, in determining the transaction price, the company These are not separate businesses; they are offerings across
adjusts the promised amount of consideration for the effects of the segments that address market opportunities in analytics,
the time value of money if the billing terms are not standard and data, cloud and security. Revenue from these offerings follows
the timing of payments agreed to by the parties to the contract the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements with
provide the client or the company with a significant benefit multiple performance obligations and for each major category of
of financing, in which case the contract contains a significant revenue, depending on the type of offering, which are comprised
financing component. As a practical expedient, the company of services, hardware and/or software.
does not account for significant financing components if the period
between when the company transfers the promised product or To the extent that a product or service in multiple performance
service to the client and when the client pays for that product or obligation arrangements is subject to other specific accounting
service will be one year or less. Most arrangements that contain a guidance, such as leasing guidance, that product or service is
financing component are financed through the company’s Global accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. For all
Financing business and include explicit financing terms. other products or services in these arrangements, the company
determines if the products or services are distinct and allocates
The company may include subcontractor services or third-party the consideration to each distinct performance obligation on a
vendor equipment or software in certain integrated services relative standalone selling price basis.
arrangements. In these types of arrangements, revenue from
sales of third-party vendor products or services is recorded When products and services are not distinct, the company
net of costs when the company is acting as an agent between determines an appropriate measure of progress based on the
the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is the nature of its overall promise for the single performance obligation.
principal for the transaction. To determine whether the company The revenue policies in the Services, Hardware and/or Software
is an agent or principal, the company considers whether it obtains sections below are then applied to each performance obligation,
control of the products or services before they are transferred as applicable.
to the customer. In making this evaluation, several factors are
considered, most notably whether the company has primary Services
responsibility for fulfillment to the client, as well as inventory The company’s primary services offerings include infrastructure
risk and pricing discretion. and cloud services, including outsourcing, and other managed
services; application management services; global process
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, services (GPS); maintenance and support; and consulting,
resellers and distributors (herein referred to as resellers) when including the design and development of complex IT systems to
the reseller has economic substance apart from the company a client’s specifications (e.g., design and build). Many of these
and the reseller is considered the principal for the transaction services can be delivered entirely or partially through cloud
with the end-user client. or as-a-Service delivery models. The company’s services are
provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract
or as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the
contract terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.

===== PAGE 77 =====
76 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In services arrangements, the company typically satisfies the rise to the revision become known by the company. Refer to note
performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time. In C, “Revenue Recognition,” for the amount of revenue recognized
design and build arrangements, the performance obligation is in the reporting period on a cumulative catch-up basis (i.e.,
satisfied over time either because the client controls the asset from performance obligations satisfied, or partially satisfied, in
as it is created (e.g., when the asset is built at the customer site) previous periods).
or because the company’s performance does not create an asset
with an alternative use and the company has an enforceable right The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its design
to payment plus a reasonable profit for performance completed and build services contracts accounted for using a cost-to-cost
to date. In most other services arrangements, the performance measure of progress in order to determine whether the latest
obligation is satisfied over time because the client simultaneously estimates of revenues, costs and profits require updating. If at any
receives and consumes the benefits provided as the company time these estimates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable,
performs the services. the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is
recorded immediately. For other types of services contracts, any
In outsourcing, other managed services, application management, losses are recorded as incurred.
GPS and other cloud-based services arrangements, the company
determines whether the services performed during the initial In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior
phases of the arrangement, such as setup activities, are distinct. to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred
In most cases, the arrangement is a single performance obligation income of $5,106 million and $5,424 million at December 31,
comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the 2019 and 2018, respectively, is included in the Consolidated
same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days Balance Sheet. In other services contracts, the company
of service). The company applies a measure of progress (typically performs the services prior to billing the client. When the
time-based) to any fixed consideration and allocates variable company performs services prior to billing the client in design
consideration to the distinct periods of service based on usage. As a and build contracts, the right to consideration is typically subject
result, revenue is generally recognized over the period the services to milestone completion or client acceptance and the unbilled
are provided on a usage basis. This results in revenue recognition accounts receivable is classified as a contract asset. At December
that corresponds with the value to the client of the services 31, 2019 and 2018, contract assets for services contracts of $424
transferred to date relative to the remaining services promised. million and $421 million, respectively, are included in prepaid
expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized on an Sheet. The remaining amount of unbilled accounts receivable of
output basis as labor hours are delivered and/or direct expenses $1,071 million and $1,075 million at December 31, 2019 and
are incurred. Revenue from as-a-Service type contracts, 2018, respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable—
such as Infrastructure-as-a-Service, is recognized either on a trade in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
straight-line basis or on a usage basis, depending on the terms of
the arrangement (such as whether the company is standing ready Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs
to perform or whether the contract has usage-based metrics). If the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
an as-a-Service contract includes setup activities, those promises
in the arrangement are evaluated to determine if they are distinct. Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of
Revenue related to maintenance and support services and system servers and storage solutions. The capabilities of these
extended warranty is recognized on a straight-line basis over the products can also be delivered through as-a-Service or cloud
period of performance because the company is standing ready delivery models, such as Storage-as-a-Service. The company
to provide services. also offers installation services for its more complex hardware
products. Hardware offerings are often sold with distinct
In design and build contracts, revenue is recognized based on maintenance services, described in the Services section above.
progress toward completion of the performance obligation using
a cost-to-cost measure of progress. Revenue is recognized based Revenue from hardware sales is recognized when control has
on the labor costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total transferred to the customer which typically occurs when the
estimated labor costs to fulfill the contract. Due to the nature of hardware has been shipped to the client, risk of loss has transferred
the work performed in these arrangements, the estimation of cost to the client and the company has a present right to payment for
at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires the hardware. In limited circumstances when a hardware sale
significant judgment. Key factors reviewed by the company to includes client acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized either
estimate costs to complete each contract are future labor and when client acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance
product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Changes provisions have lapsed, or the company has objective evidence
in original estimates are reflected in revenue on a cumulative that the criteria specified in the client acceptance provisions
catch-up basis in the period in which the circumstances that gave have been satisfied. Revenue from hardware sales-type leases
is recognized at the beginning of the lease term. Revenue from
rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis
over the term of the rental or lease.

===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue from as-a-Service arrangements is recognized either Revenue from PCS is recognized over the contract term on a
on a straight-line basis or on a usage basis as described in the straight-line basis because the company is providing a service
Services section above. Installation services are accounted for of standing ready to provide support, when-and-if needed, and
as distinct performance obligations with revenue recognized is providing unspecified software upgrades on a when-and-if
as the services are performed. Shipping and handling activities available basis over the contract term.
that occur after the client has obtained control of a product are
accounted for as an activity to fulfill the promise to transfer Revenue from software hosting or Software-as-a-Service
the product rather than as an additional promised service arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or
and, therefore, no revenue is deferred and recognized over the on a usage basis as described in the Services section above. In
shipping period. software hosting arrangements, the rights provided to the client
(e.g., ownership of a license, contract termination provisions and
Software the feasibility of the client to operate the software) are considered
The company’s software offerings include cognitive applications, in determining whether the arrangement includes a license. In
which contains many of the company’s strategic areas including arrangements that include a software license, the associated
analytics, data and security; cloud and data platforms, which revenue is recognized in accordance with the software license
contains the company’s distributed middleware and data recognition policy above rather than over time as a service.
platform software, including Red Hat; transaction processing
platforms, which primarily supports mission-critical systems Financing
for clients; and, operating systems software, which provides Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct
operating systems for IBM Z and Power Systems hardware. These financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis
offerings primarily include proprietary software and, in some using the effective interest method. Operating lease income is
cases, open source software, and many can be delivered entirely recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
or partially through as-a-Service or cloud delivery models, while
others are delivered as on-premise software licenses. Standalone Selling Price
The company allocates the transaction price to each performance
Revenue from proprietary perpetual (one-time charge) license obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The
software is recognized at a point in time at the inception of the standalone selling price (SSP) is the price at which the company
arrangement when control transfers to the client, if the software would sell a promised product or service separately to a client.
license is distinct from the PCS offered by the company. In limited In most cases, the company is able to establish SSP based on
circumstances, when the software requires continuous updates the observable prices of products or services sold separately
to provide the intended functionality, the software license and in comparable circumstances to similar clients. The company
PCS are not distinct and revenue for the single performance typically establishes SSP ranges for its products and services
obligation is recognized over time as the PCS is provided. This is which are reassessed on a periodic basis or when facts and
only applicable to certain security software perpetual licenses circumstances change.
offered by the company.
In certain instances, the company may not be able to establish a
Revenue from proprietary term license software is recognized SSP range based on observable prices and the company estimates
at a point in time for the committed term of the contract (which SSP. The company estimates SSP by considering multiple factors
is typically one month due to client termination rights), unless including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including
consideration depends on client usage, in which case revenue geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning,
is recognized when the usage occurs. Clients may contract competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing
to convert their existing IBM term license software into practices. Additionally, in certain circumstances, the company
perpetual license software plus PCS. When proprietary term may estimate SSP for a product or service by applying the residual
license software is converted to perpetual license software, approach. This approach is most commonly used when certain
the consideration becomes fixed with no cancellability and, perpetual software licenses are only sold bundled with one year
therefore, revenue for the perpetual license is recognized upon of PCS and a price has not been established for the software.
conversion, consistent with the accounting for other perpetual Estimating SSP is a formal process that includes review and
licenses, as described above. PCS revenue is recognized as approval by the company’s management.
described below.
Services Costs
The company also has open source software offerings. Since Recurring operating costs for services contracts are recognized
open source software is offered under an open source licensing as incurred. For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs
model and therefore, the license is available for free, the of external hardware and software accounted for under the
standalone selling price is zero. As such, when the license is cost-to-cost measure of progress are deferred and recognized
sold with PCS or other products and services, no consideration based on the labor costs incurred to date (i.e., the measure of
is allocated to the license when it is a distinct performance progress), as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs
obligation and therefore no revenue is recognized when control of to fulfill the contract as control transfers over time for these
the license transfers to the client. Revenue is recognized over the performance obligations. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs
PCS period. In certain cases, open source software is bundled (i.e., setup costs) incurred in the initial phases of outsourcing
with proprietary software and, if the open source software is contracts and other cloud-based services contracts, including
not considered distinct, the software bundle (e.g., Cloud Pak) is Software-as-a-Service arrangements, are capitalized when
accounted for under a proprietary software model. the costs relate directly to the contract, the costs generate or

===== PAGE 79 =====
78 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
enhance resources of the company that will be used in satisfying Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
the performance obligation in the future, and the costs are Incremental costs of obtaining a contract (e.g., sales commissions)
expected to be recovered. These costs consist of transition and are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the
setup costs related to the installation of systems and processes expected customer relationship period if the company expects
and other deferred fulfillment costs, including, for example, to recover those costs. Prior to January 1, 2018, the company
prepaid assets used in services contracts (i.e., prepaid software expensed these costs as incurred. The expected customer
or prepaid maintenance). Capitalized costs are amortized on a relationship period is determined based on the average customer
straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which relationship period, including expected renewals, for each offering
includes anticipated contract renewals or extensions, consistent type and ranges from three to six years. Expected renewal periods
with the transfer to the client of the services to which the asset are only included in the expected customer relationship period if
relates. Additionally, fixed assets associated with these contracts commission amounts paid upon renewal are not commensurate
are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the with amounts paid on the initial contract. Incremental costs of
expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, obtaining a contract include only those costs the company incurs
then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life to obtain a contract that it would not have incurred if the contract
of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in had not been obtained. The company has determined that certain
excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing commissions programs meet the requirements to be capitalized.
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line Some commission programs are not subject to capitalization as
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of the commission expense is paid and recognized as the related
benefit. The company performs periodic reviews to assess the revenue is recognized. Additionally, as a practical expedient, the
recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup costs. If company expenses costs to obtain a contract as incurred if the
the carrying amount is deemed not recoverable, an impairment amortization period would have been a year or less. These costs
loss is recognized. Refer to note C, “Revenue Recognition,” for are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
the amount of deferred costs to fulfill a contract at December 31,
2019 and 2018. Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products
In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, that generally range up to three years, with the majority being
the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse either one or three years. Any cost of standard warranties is
the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. The
unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets company estimates its standard warranty costs to the product
utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs based on historical warranty claim experience and estimates
incurred by the company to transition the services. of future spending, and applies this estimate to the revenue
stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs
Software Costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized in the current
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is
of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining
research, development and engineering expense; costs that obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the
are incurred to produce the finished product after technological balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when
feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs
asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including
basis over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded extended warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
in software cost within cost of sales. The company performs
periodic reviews to ensure that unamortized program costs Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded as
remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-line
service licensed programs are charged to software cost within basis over the delivery period because the company is providing
cost of sales as incurred. a service of standing ready to provide services over such term.
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to Refer to note R, “Commitments & Contingencies,” for additional
purchase or develop internal-use software. Internal-use software information.
programs also include software used by the company to deliver
Software-as-a-Service when the client does not receive a license Shipping and Handling
to the software and the company has no substantive plans to Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred
market the software externally. Capitalized costs are amortized and included in cost in the Consolidated Income Statement.
on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up to three years
and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense
or cost of sales, depending on whether the software is used by
the company in revenue generating transactions. Additionally, the
company may capitalize certain types of implementation costs
and amortize them over the term of the arrangement when the
company is a customer in a cloud-computing arrangement.

===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Expense and Other Income product and its derivative works under its own brand and remits
Selling, General and Administrative royalty to the company on those sales, which are recorded as
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged royalty-based fees. Depending on the nature of the transaction,
to income as incurred, except for certain sales commissions, an IP partnership would be accounted for as a divestiture if
which are capitalized and amortized as of January 1, 2018. For the company concludes the transaction meets the definition
further information regarding capitalizing sales commissions, see of a business. Income from royalty-based fee arrangements is
“Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract” above. Expenses recognized at the later of when the subsequent sale or usage
of promoting and selling products and services are classified as occurs or the performance obligation to which some or all of
selling expense and, in addition to sales commissions, include the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied (or partially
such items as compensation, advertising and travel. General and satisfied). The company also enters into cross-licensing
administrative expense includes such items as compensation, arrangements of patents, and income from these arrangements
legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and is recognized when control transfers to the customer. In addition,
office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense the company earns income from certain custom development
includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit projects with strategic technology partners and specific clients.
losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually obligated The company records the income from these projects over time
payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of as the company satisfies the performance obligation if the fee is
business, acquisition costs related to business combinations, nonrefundable and is not dependent upon the ultimate success
amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental of the project.
remediation costs.
Other (Income) and Expense
Advertising and Promotional Expense Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as than from Global Financing external transactions), gains and
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from
are recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain
the period in which the related advertising and promotional real estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, which losses, gains and losses from the sale of businesses, other than
includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,647 reported as discontinued operations, and amounts related to
million, $1,466 million and $1,445 million in 2019, 2018 and accretion of asset retirement obligations. Other (income) and
2017, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the expense also includes certain components of retirement-related
Consolidated Income Statement. costs, including interest costs, expected return on plan assets,
amortization of prior service costs/(credits), curtailments and
Research, Development and Engineering settlements and other net periodic pension/post-retirement
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are benefit costs.
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has Business Combinations and
been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest
intellectual property (IP) including internally developed in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values.
patents, trade secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over the fair
transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifiable
others are transaction-based sales/other transfers. Income intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate goodwill
from licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of the are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and
license term if the nature of the company’s promise is to provide the company and the acquired assembled workforce, neither
a right to use the company’s intellectual property as it exists of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset.
at that point in time (i.e., the license is functional intellectual Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to applicable
property) and control has transferred to the client. Income is reporting units based on expected revenues or expected cash
recognized over time if the nature of the company’s promise is flows. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized
to provide a right to access the company’s intellectual property over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology
throughout the license period (i.e., the license is symbolic is recorded in cost, and amortization of all other intangible
intellectual property), such as a trademark license. Licensing assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs,
arrangements include IP partnerships whereby a business including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation and pre-close
partner licenses source code from the company and becomes and other costs, are typically expensed in the periods in which
responsible for developing, maintaining and enhancing the the costs are incurred and are recorded in SG&A expense. The
product. The company retains its customers and go-to-market results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the
capability and any royalty cost due to the partner is recognized Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
in cost of sales. The IP partner has the rights to market the

===== PAGE 81 =====
80 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Impairment Defined Benefit Pension and
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans
carrying amount may not be recoverable. The impairment test and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
is based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the asset benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
is written down to fair value based on either discounted cash The funded status is measured as the difference between the
flows or appraised values. Goodwill is tested for impairment at fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at December
least annually, in the fourth quarter and whenever changes in 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension plans,
circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. The goodwill the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO),
impairment test is performed at the reporting unit level, which is which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected
generally at the level of or one level below an operating segment. to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already
rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the
Depreciation and Amortization nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO),
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. which represents the actuarial present value of postretirement
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The
follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 fair value of plan assets represents the current market value of
years; land improvements, 20 years; production, engineering, assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit
office and other equipment, 2 to 20 years; and information of participants, which are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded
technology equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit
are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or obligation, are aggregated and recorded as a prepaid pension
the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit
obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, are aggregated
As noted within the “Software Costs” section of this note, and recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement
capitalized software costs are amortized on a straight-line basis benefit obligation equal to this excess.
over periods ranging up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are
amortized over periods between 1 and 20 years. The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-
retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present
Environmental value of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis.
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup This obligation is recorded in compensation and benefits in the
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will Consolidated Balance Sheet.
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit
liabilities. cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement
and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on
Asset Retirement Obligations plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations (gains)/losses previously recognized as a component of other
associated with the retirement of long-lived assets and the comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) and amortization of the net
liability is initially recorded at fair value. The related asset transition asset remaining in accumulated other comprehensive
retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the carrying income/(loss) (AOCI). The service cost component of net benefit
amount of the related assets by the same amount as the cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated
liability. Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated Income Statement (unless eligible for capitalization) based on
over the useful lives of the related assets. Subsequent to initial the employees’ respective functions. The other components
recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in of net benefit cost are presented separately from service cost
the ARO liability resulting from the passage of time in interest within other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income
expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the Statement. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for additional
original expected cash flows to the related assets. information on the presentation change relating to pension costs
beginning on January 1, 2018.
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are recognized
as a component of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of
Comprehensive Income as they arise. Those (gains)/losses
and prior service costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the
recognition and amortization provisions of applicable accounting
guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between
actual experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in
actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent
the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service granted
in plan amendments.

===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/ Income Taxes
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved Income tax expense is based on reported income before income
by the company’s management. These valuations reflect the taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such differences between asset and liability amounts that are
as compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that
assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected are recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes
return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation
crediting rates and mortality rates. allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the
amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing
Defined Contribution Plans the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating
recorded when the employee renders service to the company. The results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility
charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated of ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. When the company
Income Statement based on the employees’ respective functions. changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets
that can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with
Stock-Based Compensation a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock- which such determination is made.
based awards granted to employees. The company measures
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the The company recognizes additional tax liabilities when the
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a company believes that certain positions may not be fully
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee sustained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax
requisite service period. The company grants its employees positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is
Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement.
Stock Units (RRSUs); Performance Share Units (PSUs); and The noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other
periodically grants stock options. RSUs are stock awards granted liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. To the extent that
to employees that entitle the holder to shares of common stock new information becomes available which causes the company
as the award vests, typically over a one- to five-year period. PSUs to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax
are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately received liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax
by the employee depends on the company’s performance against expense in the period in which such determination is made.
specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for
Over the performance period, the number of shares that will be potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense.
issued is adjusted based upon the probability of achievement of
performance targets. The ultimate number of shares issued and U.S. tax reform introduced Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income
the related compensation cost recognized as expense will be (GILTI), which subjects a U.S. shareholder to current tax on
based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to the income earned by certain foreign subsidiaries. Beginning in 2018,
specified targets. Dividend equivalents are not paid on the stock the company elected to include GILTI in measuring deferred taxes.
awards described above. The fair value of the awards is determined
and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price, Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents where applicable Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local
and for PSUs assumes that performance targets will be achieved. functional currency are translated to U.S. dollars at year-end
The company estimates the fair value of stock options using a exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in OCI.
Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost Income and expense items are translated at weighted-average
is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Income rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
Statement based on the employees’ respective functions.
Inventory, property, plant and equipment—net and other
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on and branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the
the amount of compensation cost recognized and the relevant approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired
statutory tax rates. The differences between the deferred tax the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated
assets recognized for financial reporting purposes and the actual in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end
tax deduction reported on the income tax return are recorded exchange rates with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other
as a benefit or expense to the provision for income taxes in the (income) and expense. Income and expense items are translated at
Consolidated Income Statement. the weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year.
These translation gains and losses are included in net income for
the period in which exchange rates change.

===== PAGE 83 =====
82 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Derivative Financial Instruments Fair Value Measurement
The company uses derivative financial instruments primarily Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell
to manage foreign currency and interest rate risk, and to a an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
lesser extent, equity and credit risk. The company does not between market participants at the measurement date. The
use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative company classifies certain assets and liabilities based on the
purposes. Derivatives that qualify for hedge accounting can be following fair value hierarchy:
designated as either cash flow hedges, net investment hedges,
• Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for
or fair value hedges. The company may enter into derivative
identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the
contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks, even when
measurement date;
hedge accounting does not apply, or the company elects not to
apply hedge accounting. • Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within
Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet directly or indirectly; and
at fair value on a gross basis as either assets or liabilities and
• Level 3—Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
classified as current or noncurrent based upon whether the
maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market
prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies
Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as a cash
such items as Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair
flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI and
value is based upon internally developed models that use current
subsequently reclassified into the same income statement line
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such
as the hedged exposure when the underlying hedged item is
as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally
recognized in earnings. Effectiveness for net investment hedging
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input
derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. Changes in the
or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
fair value of highly effective net investment hedging derivatives
and other non-derivative financial instruments designated as net
The determination of fair value considers various factors
investment hedges are recorded as foreign currency translation
including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying
adjustments in AOCI. Changes in the fair value of the portion of a
the financial instruments. For derivatives and debt securities,
net investment hedging derivative excluded from the assessment
the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount
of effectiveness are recorded in interest expense and cost of
rates commensurate with the duration of the instrument.
financing. Changes in the fair value of interest rate derivatives
designated as a fair value hedge and the offsetting changes in
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the
the fair value of the underlying hedged exposure are recorded in
company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the
interest expense and cost of financing. Changes in the fair value
“base valuations” calculated using the methodologies described
of derivatives not designated as hedges are reported in earnings
below for several parameters that market participants would
primarily in other (income) and expense. See note T, “Derivative
consider in determining fair value:
Financial Instruments,” for further information.
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial
The cash flows associated with derivatives designated as fair instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
value and cash flow hedges are reported in cash flows from counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market
operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s
and derivatives not designated as hedges are reported in cash
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair
flows from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of
value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in
Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as hedges
developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but
of foreign currency denominated debt directly associated with
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed in
the settlement of the principal are reported in payments to settle
the credit default swap market.
debt in cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows.
Certain assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis can be subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements.
Financial Instruments
These assets include available-for-sale debt securities that are
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the
deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. In the event of
company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based
an other-than-temporary impairment of a debt security, fair value
on market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date.
is measured using a model described above.
See note I, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for further information.
All methods of assessing fair value result in a general approximation
Certain nonfinancial assets such as property, plant and
of value, and such value may never actually be realized.
equipment, land, goodwill and intangible assets are also subject
to nonrecurring fair value measurements if they are deemed to be
impaired. The impairment models used for nonfinancial assets
depend on the type of asset. There were no material impairments
of nonfinancial assets for the years ended December 31, 2019,
2018 and 2017.

===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Equivalents agreements. Accounts receivable sales arrangements are utilized
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or in the normal course of business as part of the company’s cash
less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents. and liquidity management. Facilities primarily in the U.S., Canada
and several countries in Europe enable the company to sell certain
Marketable Securities accounts receivable, without recourse, to third parties in order to
Effective January 1, 2018, with the adoption of the new FASB manage credit, collection, concentration and currency risk.
guidance on recognition, measurement, presentation and
disclosure of financial instruments, the company measures equity These transactions are accounted for as a reduction in receivables
investments at fair value with changes recognized in net income. and are considered sold when accounting criteria for a sale is
met. The proceeds from these arrangements are reflected as cash
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement
that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the of Cash Flows.
balance sheet date. Long-term debt securities and alliance equity
securities are included in investments and sundry assets. Debt The gross amounts factored (the gross proceeds) under these
securities are considered available for sale and are reported at programs (primarily relating to notes and accounts receivable—
fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable trade) for the year ended December 31, 2019 were $2.1 billion
taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses on available-for-sale compared to $2.2 billion for the year ended December 31, 2018.
debt securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Within the accounts receivables sold and derecognized from
Consolidated Income Statement. Realized gains and losses are the Consolidated Balance Sheet, $0.5 billion and $0.9 billion
calculated based on the specific identification method. remained uncollected from customers at December 31, 2019
and 2018, respectively. The fees and the net gains and losses
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in associated with the transfer of receivables were not material for
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration any of the periods presented.
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the Financing Receivables
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an financing leases, commercial financing receivables and client
anticipated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines loan and installment payment receivables (loans). Leases are
in fair value from amortized cost for available-for-sale debt accounted for in accordance with lease accounting standards.
securities that the company intends to sell or would more likely Loan receivables, which are generally unsecured, are primarily
than not be required to sell before the expected recovery of the for software and services. Loans are financial assets which are
amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and expense recorded at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.
in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securities that the Commercial financing receivables are carried at amortized cost,
company has no intent to sell and believes that it more likely than which approximates fair value. These receivables are for working
not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, only the credit capital financing to suppliers, distributors and resellers of IBM
loss component of the impairment is recognized in other (income) and OEM IT products and services.
and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized in OCI.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Inventory Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable
the lower of average cost or net realizable value. estimate of probable credit losses on the value of customer
receivables is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade and Contract Assets losses. An allowance for contract assets, if needed, and uncollectible
The company classifies the right to consideration in exchange for trade receivables is estimated based on a combination of write-off
products or services transferred to a client as either a receivable history, aging analysis and any specific, known troubled accounts.
or a contract asset. A receivable is a right to consideration that
is unconditional as compared to a contract asset which is a right The company determines its allowances for credit losses on
to consideration that is conditional upon factors other than the financing receivables based on two portfolio segments: lease
passage of time. The majority of the company’s contract assets receivables and loan receivables. The company further segments
represent unbilled amounts related to design and build services the portfolio into three classes: Americas, Europe/Middle East/
contracts when the cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific.
is utilized, revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to
the client, and the right to consideration is subject to milestone When calculating the allowances, the company considers its ability
completion or client acceptance. Contract assets are generally to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment
classified as current and are recorded on a net basis with and by considering the current fair market value of any other
deferred income (i.e., contract liabilities) at the contract level. collateral. The value of the equipment is the net realizable value.
The allowance for credit losses for sales-type and direct financing
Factored Receivables leases, installment payment plan receivables and customer
The company enters into various factoring agreements with loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the lease
third-party financial institutions to sell certain of its receivables or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that
(includes notes and accounts receivable—trade, financing the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are
receivables and other accounts receivables) under nonrecourse applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows:

===== PAGE 85 =====
84 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing Leases
receivables considered at risk quarterly, and performs an The company conducts business as both a lessee and a lessor. In
analysis based upon current information available about the its ordinary course of business, the company enters into leases
client, such as financial statements, news reports, published as a lessee for property, plant and equipment. The company is
credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as also the lessor of certain equipment, mainly through its Global
well as the current economic environment, collateral net of Financing segment.
repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans that
are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the fair When procuring goods or services, or upon entering into a
value of the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this contract with its clients, the company determines whether an
information, the company determines the expected cash flow for arrangement contains a lease at its inception. As part of that
the receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential loss evaluation, the company considers whether there is an implicitly
and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss or explicitly identified asset in the arrangement and whether the
is probable, the company records a specific reserve. company, as the lessee, or the client, if the company is the lessor,
has the right to control the use of that asset.
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been individually Effective January 1, 2019, when the company is the lessee, all
evaluated and specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based leases with a term of more than 12 months are recognized as
upon credit rating, probability of default, term, characteristics right-of-use (ROU) assets and associated lease liabilities in the
(lease/loan) and loss history. Factors that could result in actual Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease liabilities are measured at
receivable losses that are materially different from the estimated the lease commencement date and determined using the present
reserve include significant changes in the economy, or a sudden value of the lease payments not yet paid and the company’s
change in the economic health of a significant client in the incremental borrowing rate, which approximates the rate at which
company’s receivables portfolio. the company would borrow on a secured basis in the country
where the lease was executed. The interest rate implicit in the
Other Credit-Related Policies lease is generally not determinable in transactions where the
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when company is the lessee. The ROU asset equals the lease liability
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from adjusted for any initial direct costs (IDCs), prepaid rent and lease
the original billing date. incentives. The company’s variable lease payments generally
relate to payments tied to various indexes, non-lease components
Non-Accrual—Non-accrual assets include those receivables and payments above a contractual minimum fixed amount.
(impaired loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves
and other accounts for which it is likely that the company will Operating leases are included in operating right-of-use assets—
be unable to collect all amounts due according to original terms net, current operating lease liabilities and operating lease
of the lease or loan agreement. Interest income recognition liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Finance leases are
is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections are included in property, plant and equipment, short-term debt and
first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. Any long-term debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease
cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is term includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it
recognized as interest income. Receivables may be removed is reasonably certain that the company will exercise that option.
from non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in
client circumstances, such as a sustained history of payments. The company made a policy election to not recognize leases with a
lease term of 12 months or less in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Impaired Loans—The company evaluates all financing receivables
considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment on a quarterly For all asset classes, the company has elected the lessee
basis. The company considers any receivable with an individually practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components
evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of (e.g., maintenance services) and account for the combined unit as
impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status as a single lease component. A significant portion of the company’s
appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services lease portfolio is real estate, which are mainly accounted for as
and are unsecured. These receivables are subjected to credit operating leases, and are primarily used for corporate offices
analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, when appropriate, and data centers. The average term of the real estate leases
actions are taken to mitigate risks in these agreements which is approximately five years. The company also has equipment
include covenants to protect against credit deterioration during leases, such as IT equipment and vehicles, which have lease
the life of the obligation. terms that range from two to five years. For certain of these
operating and finance leases, the company applies a portfolio
Write-Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance approach to account for the lease assets and lease liabilities.
in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible.
Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to The company typically enters into leases as an alternative means
the extent that the customer is no longer in operation and/or, of realizing value from equipment that it would otherwise sell.
there is no reasonable expectation of additional collections Assets under lease include new and used IBM equipment and
or repossession. certain OEM products. IBM equipment generally consists of IBM
Z, Power Systems and Storage Systems products.

===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Lease payments due to IBM are typically fixed and paid in equal value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing
installments over the lease term. The majority of the company’s the current market for new and used equipment and obtaining
leases do not contain variable payments that are dependent forward-looking product information such as marketing plans
on an index or a rate. Variable lease payments that do not and technology innovations.
depend on an index or a rate (e.g., property taxes), that are paid
directly by the company and are reimbursed by the client, are The company optimizes the recovery of residual values by
recorded as revenue, along with the related cost, in the period extending lease arrangements with, or selling leased equipment
in which collection of these payments is probable. Payments to existing clients. The company has historically managed
that are made directly by the client to a third party, including residual value risk both through insight into its own product
certain property taxes and insurance, are not considered part cycles and monitoring of OEM IT product announcements. The
of variable payments and therefore are not recorded by the company periodically reassesses the realizable value of its
company. The company has made a policy election to exclude lease residual values. Anticipated decreases in specific future
from consideration in contracts all collections from sales and residual values that are considered to be other-than-temporary
other similar taxes. are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded
as an adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type
The company’s payment terms for leases are typically and direct financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded
unconditional. Therefore, in an instance when the client requests net investment and is recognized as a loss charged to finance
to terminate the lease prior to the end of the lease term, the client income in the period in which the estimate is changed, as well
would typically be required to pay the remaining lease payments as an adjustment to unearned income to reduce future-period
in full. At the end of the lease term, the company allows the client financing income.
to either return the equipment, purchase the equipment at the
then-current fair market value or at a pre-stated purchase price Operating Leases
or renew the lease based on mutually agreed upon terms. Equipment provided to clients under an operating lease is carried
at cost within property, plant and equipment in the Consolidated
When lease arrangements include multiple performance Balance Sheet and depreciated over the lease term using the
obligations, the company allocates the consideration in the straight-line method, generally ranging from one to four years.
contract between the lease components and the non-lease The depreciable basis is the original cost of the equipment less
components on a relative standalone selling price basis. the estimated residual value of the equipment at the end of the
lease term.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
For sales-type or direct financing lease, the carrying amount of At commencement of an operating lease, IDCs are deferred. As
the asset is derecognized from inventory and a net investment in lease payments are made, the company records sales revenue
the lease is recorded. For a sales-type lease, the net investment over the lease term. IDCs are amortized over the lease term on
in the lease is measured at commencement date as the sum the same basis as lease income is recorded.
of the lease receivable and the estimated residual value of
the equipment less unearned income and allowance for credit Assets under operating leases are tested for impairment
losses. Any selling profit or loss arising from a sales-type lease whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
is recorded at lease commencement. Selling profit or loss is carrying amount may not be recoverable. The impairment test is
presented on a gross basis when the company enters into a lease based on undiscounted cash flows, and, if impaired, the asset is
to realize value from a product that it would otherwise sell in written down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows
its ordinary course of business, whereas in transactions where or appraised values.
the company enters into a lease for the purpose of generating
revenue by providing financing, the selling profit or loss is Common Stock
presented on a net basis. Under a sales-type lease, initial direct Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock
costs are expensed at lease commencement. Over the term of as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation.
the lease, the company recognizes finance income on the net Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When
investment in the lease and any variable lease payments, which treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded
are not included in the net investment in the lease. using a weighted-average basis.
For a direct financing lease, the net investment in the lease Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
is measured similarly to a sales-type lease, however, the net Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class
investment in the lease is reduced by any selling profit. In a method, which determines EPS for each class of common
direct financing lease, the selling profit and initial direct costs stock and participating securities according to dividends and
are deferred at commencement and recognized over the lease dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights in
term. The company rarely enters into direct financing leases. undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed
by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of
The estimated residual value represents the estimated fair common shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of
value of the equipment under lease at the end of the lease. common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-average
Estimating residual value is a risk unique to financing activities, number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive
and management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to potential common shares outstanding during the period using the
accurately project future equipment values. The company has treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares include
insight into product plans and cycles for both the IBM and OEM outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and stock options.
IT products under lease. The company estimates the future fair

===== PAGE 87 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES Standards Implemented
New Standards to be Implemented Disclosure Requirements Changes for Fair Value
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes Measurements and Defined Benefit Plans
Standard/Description—Issuance date: December 2019. This Standard/Description—Issuance date: August 2018. This
guidance simplifies various aspects of income tax accounting guidance changes the disclosure requirements for fair value
by removing certain exceptions to the general principle of the measurements and defined benefit plans.
guidance and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to
improve consistency in application. Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance is
effective for each of the topics on January 1, 2020 and December
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance is 31, 2020, respectively, with early adoption of certain provisions
effective January 1, 2021 and early adoption is permitted. permitted. The company adopted the provision in the fair value
guidance that removed the Level 1/Level 2 transfer disclosures
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters— in the third quarter of 2018 and the remaining provisions of the
The company is evaluating the impact of the guidance and guidance are not applicable. The company adopted changes
adoption date. to the disclosure requirements for defined benefit plans in the
fourth quarter of 2019.
Simplifying the Test for Goodwill Impairment
Standard/Description—Issuance date: January 2017. This Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
guidance simplifies the goodwill impairment test by removing Step As the guidance is a change to disclosures only, it did not have a
2. It also requires disclosure of any reporting units that have zero or material impact in the consolidated financial results.
negative carrying amounts if they have goodwill allocated to them.
Leases
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance was Standard/Description—Issuance date: February 2016, with
effective January 1, 2020 and early adoption was permitted. The amendments in 2018 and 2019. This guidance requires lessees
company adopted the guidance on a prospective basis as of the to recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities for most leases in
effective date. the Consolidated Balance Sheet. For lessors, it also eliminates
the use of third-party residual value guarantee (RVG) insurance
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters— in the lease classification test, and overall aligns with revenue
The guidance is not expected to have a material impact in the recognition guidance. Due to changes in lease termination
consolidated financial results. guidance, when equipment is returned to the company prior to the
end of the lease term, the carrying amounts of lease receivables
Financial Instruments—Credit Losses will be reclassified to loan receivables. The guidance also
Standard/Description—Issuance date: June 2016, with requires qualitative and quantitative disclosures to assess the
amendments in 2018 and 2019. This changes guidance for credit amount, timing and uncertainty of cash flows arising from leases.
impairment based on an expected loss model rather than an
incurred loss model. It requires the consideration of all available Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The company
relevant information when estimating expected credit losses, adopted the guidance on its effective date of January 1, 2019,
including past events, current conditions and forecasts and using the transition option whereby prior comparative periods
their implications for expected credit losses. It also expands the were not retrospectively presented in the Consolidated Financial
scope of financial instruments subject to impairment, including Statements. The company elected the package of practical
off-balance sheet commitments and residual value. expedients not to reassess prior conclusions related to contracts
containing leases, lease classification and initial direct costs and
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance the lessee practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease
was effective January 1, 2020 with one-year early adoption components for all asset classes. The company made a policy
permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of the effective election to not recognize ROU assets and lease liabilities for
date, using the transition option whereby prior comparative short-term leases for all asset classes.
periods will not be retrospectively presented in the Consolidated
Financial Statements. Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
The guidance had a material impact on the Consolidated Balance
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters— Sheet as of the effective date. As a lessee, at adoption, the
The company has completed its changes to policy, processes, company recognized operating and financing ROU assets of $4.8
systems and controls. This included the assessment of data billion and $0.2 billion, respectively, and operating and financing
availability and presentation necessary to meet the disclosure lease liabilities of $5.1 billion and $0.2 billion, respectively.
requirements of the guidance beginning in the first quarter of The transition adjustment recognized in retained earnings on
2020. At January 1, 2020, an increase in the allowance for credit January 1, 2019 was not material. The removal of third-party RVG
losses of approximately $15 million and $35 million was recorded insurance in the lease classification test did not have a material
for accounts receivable—trade and financing receivables, impact in the consolidated financial results. At December 31,
respectively. The company also recorded an allowance for 2019, lease receivables of $386 million were reclassified to loan
credit losses of approximately $30 million in other liabilities for receivables. Refer to note M, “Leases,” for additional information,
its off-balance sheet commitments. Additionally, net deferred including further discussion on the impact of adoption.
taxes were reduced by $15 million in the Consolidated Balance
Sheet, resulting in a cumulative-effect net decrease to retained
earnings of $65 million.

===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cloud Computing Implementation Costs Cost, SG&A expense and RD&E expense in the Consolidated
Standard/Description—Issuance date: August 2018. This Income Statement, unless eligible for capitalization. The other
guidance relates to a customer’s accounting for implementation components of net benefit cost are presented separately
costs incurred in cloud-computing arrangements that are from service cost within other (income) and expense in the
hosted by a vendor. Certain types of implementation costs Consolidated Income Statement.
should be capitalized and amortized over the term of the hosting
arrangement. Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance
was effective January 1, 2018 with early adoption permitted.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance The company adopted the guidance as of the effective date. This
is effective January 1, 2020 and early adoption is permitted. presentation change was applied retrospectively upon adoption.
The company adopted the guidance on January 1, 2019 on a
prospective basis. Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
The guidance is primarily a change in financial statement
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters— presentation and did not have a material impact in the
The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated consolidated financial results.
financial results.
Financial Instruments—Recognition and Measurement
Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from AOCI Standard/Description—Issuance date: January 2016. This
Standard/Description—Issuance date: February 2018. In guidance addresses aspects of recognition, measurement,
accordance with its accounting policy, the company releases presentation and disclosure of financial instruments. It requires
income tax effects from AOCI once the reason the tax effects certain equity investments to be measured at fair value with
were established cease to exist (e.g., when available-for-sale changes recognized in net income. The amendment also
debt securities are sold or if a pension plan is liquidated). This simplifies the impairment test of equity investments that lack
guidance allows for the reclassification of stranded tax effects readily determinable fair value.
as a result of the change in tax rates from U.S. tax reform to be
recorded upon adoption of the guidance rather than at the actual Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance was
cessation date. effective January 1, 2018 and early adoption was not permitted
except for limited provisions. The company adopted the guidance
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance on the effective date.
was effective January 1, 2019 with early adoption permitted.
The company adopted the guidance effective January 1, 2018 Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
and elected not to reclassify prior periods. The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated
financial results.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
At adoption on January 1, 2018, $2.4 billion was reclassified Revenue Recognition—Contracts with Customers
from AOCI to retained earnings, primarily comprised of amounts Standard/Description—Issuance date: May 2014 with
relating to retirement-related benefit plans. amendments in 2015 and 2016. Revenue recognition depicts the
transfer of promised goods or services to customers in an amount
Hedge Accounting that reflects the consideration to which the entity expects to be
Standard/Description—Issuance date: August 2017. This entitled in exchange for those goods or services. The guidance
guidance simplifies the application of hedge accounting in also requires specific disclosures relating to revenue recognition.
certain areas, better portrays the economic results of an entity’s
risk management activities in its financial statements and Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The company
makes targeted improvements to presentation and disclosure adopted the guidance on its effective date of January 1, 2018
requirements. using the modified retrospective transition method.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The guidance Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters—
was effective January 1, 2019 with early adoption permitted. At adoption, $557 million was reclassified from notes and
The company adopted the guidance as of January 1, 2018. accounts receivable—trade and deferred income-current
to prepaid expenses and other current assets to establish
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters— the opening balance for net contract assets. In-scope sales
The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated commission costs previously recorded in the Consolidated
financial results. Income Statement were capitalized in deferred costs in the
amount of $737 million. Deferred income of $29 million was
Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic recorded for certain software licenses that will be recognized
Postretirement Benefit Cost over time versus at point in time under previous guidance.
Standard/Description—Issuance date: March 2017. This Additionally, net deferred taxes were reduced by $184 million
guidance impacts the presentation of net periodic pension and in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, resulting in a cumulative-
postretirement benefit costs (net benefit cost). The service cost effect net increase to retained earnings of $524 million. In the
component of net benefit cost continues to be presented within fourth quarter of 2018, the company recognized an additional

===== PAGE 89 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
impact to net deferred taxes and retained earnings of $56 NOTE C. REVENUE RECOGNITION
million, resulting in a total net increase to retained earnings of Disaggregation of Revenue
$580 million. The decrease to net deferred taxes was the result The following tables provide details of revenue by major
of the company’s election to include GILTI in measuring deferred products/services offerings and by geography.
taxes. The revenue guidance did not have a material impact in
the company’s consolidated financial results. Refer to note C, Revenue by Major Products/Service Offerings
“Revenue Recognition,” for additional information.
($ in millions)
Share-Based Payments For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018
Standard/Description—Issuance date: March 2016. This Cognitive Applications $ 5,765 $ 5,633*
guidance changed the accounting for share-based payment Cloud & Data Platforms 9,499 8,603*
transactions, including the income tax consequences, Transaction Processing Platforms 7,936 7,974*
classification of awards as either equity or liabilities and Total Cloud & Cognitive Software $23,200 $22,209*
classification in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Consulting $ 7,993 $ 7,705
Additional guidance was issued in May 2017 and June 2018,
Application Management 7,646 7,852
which relates to the accounting for modifications of share-based
payment awards and accounting for share-based payments Global Process Services 995 1,037*
issued to non-employees, respectively. Total Global Business Services $16,634 $16,595*
Infrastructure & Cloud Services $20,736 $22,185*
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations—The initial Technology Support Services 6,625 6,961
guidance was effective and adopted by the company on January
Total Global Technology Services $27,361 $29,146*
1, 2017. The company adopted the guidance for modifications in
Systems Hardware $ 5,918 $ 6,363
the second quarter of 2017, and guidance for non-employees’
Operating Systems Software 1,686 1,671
payments in the second quarter of 2018.
Total Systems $ 7,604 $ 8,034
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Global Financing** $ 1,400 $ 1,590
Matters—The initial guidance did not have a material impact Other $ 948 $ 2,018*
on the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The company continues to Total Revenue $77,147 $79,591
estimate forfeitures in conjunction with measuring stock-based
compensation cost. The guidance also requires cash payments * Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
on behalf of employees for shares directly withheld for taxes to be ** Contains lease and loan/working capital financing arrangements which
are not subject to the guidance on revenue from contracts with
presented as financing outflows in the Consolidated Statement of
customers.
Cash Flows. The guidance for modifications and non-employees’
payments had no impact in the consolidated financial results. Revenue by Geography
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018
Americas $36,274 $36,994
Europe/Middle East/Africa 24,443 25,491
Asia Pacific 16,430 17,106
Total $77,147 $79,591
Remaining Performance Obligations
The remaining performance obligation (RPO) disclosure
provides the aggregate amount of the transaction price yet
to be recognized as of the end of the reporting period and an
explanation as to when the company expects to recognize these
amounts in revenue. It is intended to be a statement of overall
work under contract that has not yet been performed and does
not include contracts in which the customer is not committed,
such as certain as-a-Service, governmental, term software
license and services offerings. The customer is not considered
committed when they are able to terminate for convenience
without payment of a substantive penalty. The disclosure
includes estimates of variable consideration, except when the
variable consideration is a sales-based or usage-based royalty
promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property.
Additionally, as a practical expedient, the company does not

===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
include contracts that have an original duration of one year or The amount of revenue recognized during the year ended
less. RPO estimates are subject to change and are affected by December 31, 2019 that was included within the deferred income
several factors, including terminations, changes in the scope of balance at December 31, 2018 was $9.5 billion and primarily
contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustments for revenue that related to services and software.
has not materialized and adjustments for currency.
Deferred Costs
At December 31, 2019, the aggregate amount of the transaction
($ in millions)
price allocated to RPO related to customer contracts that
At December 31: 2019 2018
are unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied was $126 billion.
Capitalized costs to obtain a contract $ 609 $ 717
Approximately 60 percent of the amount was expected to be
recognized as revenue in the subsequent two years, approximately Deferred costs to fulfill a contract
35 percent in the subsequent three to five years and the balance Deferred setup costs 1,939 2,085
(mostly Infrastructure & Cloud Services) thereafter. Other deferred fulfillment costs 1,820 2,173
Total deferred costs (1) $4,368 $4,975
Revenue Recognized for Performance Obligations
Satisfied (or Partially Satisfied) in Prior Periods (1) Of the total deferred costs, $1,896 million was current and $2,472
million was noncurrent at December 31, 2019 and $2,300 million was
For the year ended December 31, 2019, revenue was reduced
current and $2,676 million was noncurrent at December 31, 2018.
by $50 million for performance obligations satisfied (or partially
satisfied) in previous periods mainly due to changes in estimates The amount of total deferred costs amortized during the year
on contracts with cost-to-cost measures of progress. Refer to note ended December 31, 2019 was $3,836 million and there were no
A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information on material impairment losses incurred. Refer to note A, “Significant
these contracts and estimates of costs to complete. Accounting Policies,” for additional information on deferred costs
to fulfill a contract and capitalized costs of obtaining a contract.
Reconciliation of Contract Balances
The following table provides information about notes and
accounts receivable—trade, contract assets and deferred NOTE D. SEGMENTS
income balances. In the first quarter of 2019, the company made a number
of changes to its organizational structure and management
($ in millions) system that brought cloud and cognitive software under one
organization to more effectively address evolving client needs
At December 31: 2019 2018
and to prepare for the acquisition of Red Hat. With these changes,
Notes and accounts receivable—trade
(net of allowances of $299 in 2019 the company revised its reportable segments, but did not impact
and $309 in 2018) $ 7,870 $ 7,432 its Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contract assets(1) 492 470
The segments represent components of the company for which
Deferred income (current) 12,026 11,165
separate financial information is available that is utilized on a
Deferred income (noncurrent) 3,851 3,445
regular basis by the chief operating decision maker (the chief
(1) Included within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the executive officer) in determining how to allocate resources
Consolidated Balance Sheet. and evaluate performance. The segments are determined
based on several factors, including client base, homogeneity of
products, technology, delivery channels and similar economic
characteristics.

===== PAGE 91 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s segments are as follows:
2018 Segments Changes (+/-) 2019 Segments
Cognitive Solutions + Integration Software Cloud & Cognitive Software
+ Security Services
- Divested Select Software*
+ Red Hat (post closing)
Global Business Services - Divested Mortgage Servicing* Global Business Services
Technology Services & Cloud Platforms - Security Services Global Technology Services
- Integration Software
Systems Systems
Global Financing Global Financing
Other + Divested Mortgage Servicing* Other**
+ Divested Select Software*
* IBM completed the sale of its mortgage servicing business on February 28, 2019, and completed the sales of select software products (for all
countries) and marketing and platform commerce offerings (in the U.S.) on June 30, 2019. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for
additional information.
**These divested businesses are reported in Other, as it allows for a better representation of the ongoing performance of the reportable segments.
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re sources and Billing and
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based
market-based transfer price. Systems that are used by Global on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount. When a clear
Technology Services in outsourcing arrangements are primarily and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are
sourced internally from the Systems segment, and software allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s
is primarily sourced internally through the Cloud & Cognitive management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based
Software and Systems segments. For providing IT services that are on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared
used internally, Global Technology Services and Global Business expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to
Services recover cost, as well as a reasonable fee, that is intended the segments. These expenses are associated with the elimination
to reflect the arm’s-length value of providing the services. They of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.
enter into arm’s-length loans at prices equivalent to market rates
with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of equipment and The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations
software used in services engagements. All internal transaction of the company’s segments consistent with the management and
prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate. measurement system utilized within the company and have been
recast for the prior-year periods due to the company’s January
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations 2019 segment changes. Performance measurement is based
to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a on pre-tax income from continuing operations. These results
result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the are used, in part, by the chief operating decision maker, both in
segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to,
marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting, each of the segments.

===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Cloud & Global Global
Cognitive Business Technology Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Software Services Services Systems Financing Segments
2019
External revenue $23,200 $16,634 $27,361 $7,604 $1,400 $76,199
Internal revenue 2,827 278 1,157 726 1,232 6,220
Total revenue $26,027 $16,911 $28,518 $8,330 $2,632 $82,419
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 7,952 $ 1,666 $ 1,645 $ 701 $1,055 $13,019
Revenue year-to-year change 2.5% (0.1)% (5.0)% (5.9)% (17.8)% (2.3)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change (10.5)% 2.2% (7.6)% (22.4)% (22.5)% (10.6)%
Pre-tax income margin 30.6% 9.9% 5.8% 8.4% 40.1% 15.8%
2018
External revenue $22,209 * $16,595* $29,146 * $8,034 $1,590 $77,573*
Internal revenue 3,190* 326 872* 815 1,610 6,813*
Total revenue $25,399 * $16,921* $30,018 * $8,848 $3,200 $84,386*
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 8,882* $ 1,629* $ 1,781* $ 904 $1,361 $14,557*
Revenue year-to-year change 2.0%* 2.9%* 0.5%* (1.1)% 1.0% 1.3%*
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 10.1%* 25.0%* (32.0)%* (19.9)% 6.5% 1.1%*
Pre-tax income margin 35.0%* 9.6%* 5.9%* 10.2% 42.5% 17.3%*
2017
External revenue $21,751 * $16,073 * $29,213* $8,194 $1,696 $76,927 *
Internal revenue 3,159* 363 657 750 1,471 6,401*
Total revenue $24,910 * $16,436 * $29,870* $8,945 $3,168 $83,329 *
Pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 8,068* $ 1,303* $ 2,618* $1,128 $1,278 $14,396*
Revenue year-to-year change 2.0%* (1.9)%* (3.6)%* 5.7% (9.3)% (0.9)%*
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 7.3%* (18.4)%* (13.2)%* 21.9% (22.8)% (2.2)%*
Pre-tax income margin 32.4%* 7.9%* 8.8%* 12.6% 40.3% 17.3%*
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
($ in millions) For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 Pre-tax income from
Revenue continuing operations
Total reportable segments $82,419 $84,386 * $83,329 * Total reportable segments $13,019 $14,557* $14,396 *
Other—divested businesses 786 1,810* 2,041* Amortization of acquired
Other revenue 162 207 171 intangible assets (1,298) (809) (945)
Elimination of internal Acquisition-related charges (423) (16) (52)
transactions (6,220) (6,813)* (6,401)* Non-operating retirement-
related (costs)/income (615) (1,572) (1,341)
Total IBM consolidated
revenue $77,147 $79,591 $79,139 Elimination of internal
transactions (290) (725)* (742)*
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
Other—divested businesses 390 292* 468*
Unallocated corporate
amounts (617) (385) (385)
Total pre-tax income from
continuing operations $10,166 $11,342 $11,400
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.

===== PAGE 93 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Immaterial Items To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equipment,
Investment in Equity Alliances and several segments may share leased or owned plant, property and
Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses) equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the to each user segment. This is consistent with the company’s
segments did not have a material effect on the financial position management system and is reflected accordingly in the table
or the financial results of the segments. below. In those cases, there will not be a precise correlation
between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
Segment Assets and Other Items
Cloud & Cognitive Software assets are mainly goodwill, acquired Depreciation expense and capital expenditures that are reported
intangible assets and accounts receivable. Global Business by each segment also are consistent with the landlord ownership
Services assets are primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. basis of asset assignment.
Global Technology Services assets are primarily goodwill, plant,
property and equipment, including the assets associated with the Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest
outsourcing business, accounts receivable and acquired intangible expense reflect the interest income and interest expense
assets. Systems assets are primarily goodwill, manufacturing associated with the Global Financing business, including the
inventory, and plant, property and equipment. Global Financing intercompany financing activities discussed on page 33, as well
assets are primarily financing receivables, cash and marketable as the income from investment in cash and marketable securities.
securities, and fixed assets under operating leases.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Cloud & Global Global
Cognitive Business Technology Global Total
For the year ended December 31: Software Services Services Systems Financing Segments
2019
Assets $58,453 $10,039 $22,436 $4,590 $29,568 $125,087
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 1,107 149 2,601 350 186 4,392
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 515 48 1,575 305 57 2,501
Interest income — — — — 1,490 1,490
Interest expense — — — — 512 512
2018
Assets $28,713* $ 8,360* $17,624* $4,030 $41,320 $100,047*
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 1,058* 100* 2,359* 315 229 4,063*
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 469* 57* 2,569* 241 274 3,610*
Interest income — — — — 1,647 1,647
Interest expense — — — — 515 515
2017
Assets $29,650* $ 8,647* $17,577* $3,898 $41,096 $100,868*
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 1,185* 99* 2,209* 341 267 4,101*
Capital expenditures/investments
in intangibles 467* 46* 2,193* 189 364 3,259*
Interest income — — — — 1,527 1,527
Interest expense — — — — 381 381
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
** Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of intangible assets.

===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported Revenue by Classes of Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar
($ in millions)
classes of products or services within the company’s reportable
At December 31: 2019 2018 2017
segments. Client solutions often include IBM software and
Assets
systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution
Total reportable segments $125,087 $100,047* $100,868* requires it. For each of the segments that include services,
Elimination of internal Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other
transactions (4,317) (7,143) (6,272) product-related services are included as services. For each of
Other—divested businesses 1,894 2,575* 2,285* these segments, software includes product license charges and
Unallocated amounts ongoing subscriptions.
Cash and marketable
securities 7,308 10,393 10,162 ($ in millions)
Notes and accounts For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
receivable 3,298 1,597 2,554 Cloud & Cognitive Software*
Deferred tax assets 4,995 5,089 4,746 Software $18,712 $17,970* * $17,681 **
Plant, other property Services 4,321 4,082** 3,920**
and equipment 2,334 2,463 2,659 Systems 166 156 150
Operating right-of-use Global Business Services*
assets** 3,530 — —
Services $16,363 $16,238* * $15,728 **
Pension assets 6,865 4,666 4,643
Software 156 151** 179**
Other 1,194 3,695 3,712
Systems 115 206 165
Total IBM consolidated
Global Technology Services*
assets $152,186 $123,382 $125,356
Services $20,768 $22,222* * $21,913 **
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation. Maintenance 5,183 5,484 5,783
** Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on leases in 2019.
Systems 1,072 1,069 1,207
Software 338 371** 310**
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s Systems
total revenue in 2019, 2018 or 2017. Servers $ 3,746 $ 3,996 $ 3,993
Storage 1,920 2,114 2,243
Geographic Information Software 1,528 1,499** 1,520**
The following provides information for those countries that are
Services 410 425** 438**
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Global Financing
Revenue* Financing $ 1,120 $ 1,223 $ 1,167
($ in millions) Used equipment sales 281 366 530
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 * Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
United States $28,395 $29,078 $29,759 ** Reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation. Refer to “Basis of
Japan 8,681 8,489 8,239 Presentation” in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for
additional information.
Other countries 40,071 42,024 41,141
Total IBM consolidated
revenue $77,147 $79,591 $79,139 NOTE E. ACQUISITIONS & DIVESTITURES
Acquisitions
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
The company accounts for business combinations using the
acquisition method, and accordingly, the identifiable assets
Plant and Other Property—Net
acquired, the liabilities assumed and any noncontrolling
($ in millions) interest in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair
At December 31: 2019 2018 2017 values. Significant judgments and use of estimates are required
United States $4,485 $ 4,585 $ 4,670 when performing valuations. For example, the company uses
judgments when estimating the fair value of intangible assets
Other countries 5,294 5,774 5,985
using a discounted cash flow model, which involves the use of
Total $9,778 $10,359 $10,655
significant estimates and assumptions with respect to revenue
growth rates, the customer attrition rate and discount rates.
Operating Right-of-Use Assets—Net*
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions was paid
($ in millions)
primarily in cash. All acquisitions, except otherwise stated were
At December 31: 2019 2018 2017
for 100 percent of the acquired business and are reported in the
United States $1,386 $— $—
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, net of acquired cash and
Japan 659 — — cash equivalents.
Other countries 2,951 — —
Total $4,996 $— $—
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on leases in 2019.

===== PAGE 95 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2019 The goodwill generated is primarily attributable to the assembled
In 2019, the company completed one acquisition at an aggregate workforce of Red Hat and the increased synergies expected to
cost of $35 billion. be achieved from the integration of Red Hat products into the
company’s various integrated solutions neither of which qualify
Red Hat—On July 9, 2019, the company completed the acquisition as an amortizable intangible asset.
of all of the outstanding shares of Red Hat. Red Hat’s portfolio
of open-source and cloud technologies combined with IBM’s The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified
innovative hybrid cloud technology and industry expertise are amortizable intangible assets acquired was 10.9 years. These
delivering the hybrid multi-cloud capabilities required to address identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line
the next chapter of cloud implementations. basis over their useful lives, which approximates the pattern that
the assets’ economic benefits are expected to be consumed over
On the acquisition date, Red Hat shareholders received $190 per time. The following table presents the goodwill allocated to the
share in cash, representing a total equity value of approximately segments as of December 31, 2019.
$34 billion. The company funded the transaction through a
combination of cash on hand and proceeds from debt issuances. ($ in billions)
Refer to note P, “Borrowings,” for additional details on the Goodwill
financing of the transaction. Segment Allocated*
Cloud & Cognitive Software $18.5
The following table reflects the breakdown of total consideration: Global Technology Services 3.1
Global Business Services 1.1
($ in millions)
Systems 0.4
Total Consideration
Total $23.1
Cash paid for outstanding Red Hat
common stock $33,769 * It is expected that approximately seven percent of the goodwill will be
deductible for tax purposes.
Cash paid for Red Hat equity awards 24
Cash paid to settle warrants 1,008 The valuation of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is
Cash consideration $34,801 subject to revision. If additional information becomes available,
Fair value of stock-based the company may further revise the purchase price allocation
compensation awards attributable as soon as practical, but no later than one year from Red Hat’s
to pre-combination services 174 acquisition date. Any such revisions or changes may be material.
Stock issued to holders of vested The primary area of the purchase price allocation that is subject
performance share units 45 to revision relates to certain tax matters.
Settlement of pre-existing relationships 60
Total consideration $35,080 The company recognized acquisition-related costs, such as
legal and advisory fees, of $189 million within SG&A in the
The following table reflects the purchase price and the resulting Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended December
purchase price allocation as of December 31, 2019. The net 31, 2019. This included $55 million of amortized costs related
purchase price adjustments recorded in the fourth-quarter 2019 to bridge term loan facility fees.
were related to deferred tax assets and liabilities.
In addition, the company recognized compensation expense
($ in millions) related to employee retention plans for the period beginning
Amortization Allocated on the acquisition date through December 31, 2019 in the
Life (in Years) Amount Consolidated Income Statement as follows:
Current assets* $ 3,186
Property, plant and equipment/ ($ in millions)
noncurrent assets 939 Compensation
Line Item Expense*
Intangible assets
Cost $ 20
Goodwill N/A 23,125
Selling, general and administrative expense 124
Client relationships 10 7,215
Research, development and
Completed technology 9 4,571
engineering expense 86
Trademarks 20 1,686
Total $230
Total assets acquired $40,722
* The remaining compensation expense of approximately $185 million
Current liabilities** 1,378
associated with the retention plans will be recognized over the
Noncurrent liabilities 4,265 remaining requisite service periods, which range from six months to
Total liabilities assumed $ 5,642 three years from the acquisition date.
Total purchase price $35,080
* Includes $2.2 billion of cash and cash equivalents.
** Includes $485 million of short-term debt related to the convertible
notes acquired from Red Hat that were recognized at their fair value on
the acquisition date, which was fully settled as of October 1, 2019.
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The acquisition of Red Hat settled a pre-existing vendor/ 2018
customer relationship in which the company had historically In 2018, the company completed two acquisitions at an aggregate
paid in advance for purchases of Red Hat products. Because cost of $49 million. One acquisition was completed by the Cloud
the terms of the agreements were determined to approximate & Cognitive Software segment and one acquisition by the Global
fair value at the acquisition date, the company did not recognize Business Services segment. These acquisitions did not have a
any gain or loss separately from the acquisition, and $60 million material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
was transferred on the acquisition date as a part of the fair value
consideration. 2017
In 2017, the company completed five acquisitions for an
The Consolidated Income Statement includes revenue and a aggregate cost of $134 million.
pre-tax loss attributable to Red Hat since the date of acquisition
for the year ended December 31, 2019 of $945 million and $1,658 The Global Technology Services segment completed acquisitions
million, respectively. The pre-tax loss was primarily driven by of three businesses: in the first quarter, Agile 3 Solutions,
the deferred revenue fair value adjustment, retention expenses, LLC, a privately held business; in the third quarter, the cloud
intangible asset amortization and deal fees. The pre-tax loss and managed hosting services business from a large U.S.
excludes interest expense. telecommunications company, and Cloudigo Ltd., a privately held
business. The Cloud & Cognitive Software segment completed
The table below presents the supplemental consolidated financial the acquisition of one privately held business: in the second
results of the company on an unaudited pro forma basis, as if the quarter, XCC Web Content & Custom Apps Extension from
acquisition had been consummated on January 1, 2018 through TIMETOACT Software & Consulting GmbH. Global Business
the periods shown below. The primary adjustments reflected Services completed the acquisition of one privately held
in the pro forma results relate to: (1) the debt used to fund the business: in the fourth quarter, Vivant Digital.
acquisition, (2) changes driven by acquisition accounting, including
amortization of intangible assets and the deferred revenue fair The following table reflects the purchase price related to these
value adjustment, (3) employee retention plans, (4) elimination acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
of intercompany transactions between IBM and Red Hat, and (5) December 31, 2017.
the presentation of acquisition-related costs. Acquisition-related
costs are non-recurring in nature and the pro forma net income ($ in millions)
amounts shown below include $374 million of these costs. Amortization Total
Life (in Years) Acquisitions
The unaudited pro forma financial information presented below Current assets $ 18
does not purport to represent the actual results of operations Fixed assets/noncurrent assets 69
that IBM and Red Hat would have achieved had the companies Intangible assets
been combined during the periods presented and is not intended
Goodwill N/A 16
to project the future results of operations that the combined
Completed technology 5 9
company may achieve after the acquisition. Historical fiscal
Client relationships 5–7 64
periods are not aligned under this presentation. The unaudited
pro forma financial information does not reflect any potential Patents/trademarks 1–5 1
cost savings, operating efficiencies, long-term debt pay down Total assets acquired $177
estimates, suspension of IBM’s share repurchase program, Current liabilities (9)
financial synergies or other strategic benefits that may be Noncurrent liabilities (34)
realized as a result of the acquisition and also does not reflect
Total liabilities assumed $ (43 )
any restructuring costs to achieve those benefits.
Total purchase price $134
(Unaudited) N/A—Not applicable
($ in millions)
The overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 intangible assets acquired was 6.6 years. These identified
Revenue $79,628 $81,360 intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their
Net income $ 9,723 $ 5,702 useful lives. Goodwill of $13 million and $3 million was assigned
to the Global Technology Services segment and the Cloud &
Cognitive Software segment, respectively. It was expected that
approximately 50 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for
tax purposes.

===== PAGE 97 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Divestitures IBM Risk Analytics and Regulatory Offerings—On September 24,
2019 2019, IBM and SS&C Technologies Holdings, Inc. (SS&C) entered
Select IBM Software Products—On December 6, 2018, IBM into a definitive agreement in which SS&C would acquire
and HCL Technologies Limited (HCL) announced a definitive certain Algorithmics and related assets from IBM. The content
agreement, in which HCL would acquire select standalone Cloud is reported in the Cloud & Cognitive Software segment. The
& Cognitive Software products for $1,775 million, inclusive of transaction closed in the fourth quarter of 2019. The company
$150 million of contingent consideration. The transaction recognized an immaterial pre-tax gain on the sale for the year
included commercial software, intellectual property and services ended December 31, 2019.
offerings. In addition, the transaction includes transition services
for IT and other services. IBM Sales Performance Management Offerings—On November 20,
2019, IBM and Varicent Parent Holdings Corporation (Varicent)
The transaction closed on June 30, 2019. The company received entered into a definitive agreement in which Varicent would
cash of $812 million at closing and $40 million of the contingent acquire certain sales performance management assets from
consideration in the third quarter of 2019. The company expects IBM. The content is reported in the Cloud & Cognitive Software
to receive an additional $813 million (net of any additional segment. The initial closing of certain countries was completed on
contingent consideration) within 12 months of closing. The December 31, 2019. The company expects a subsequent closing
outstanding contingent consideration is expected to be earned for the remaining countries to occur within the first half of 2020.
within 24 months of the closing. IBM will remit payment to HCL The company received a net cash payment of $230 million and
predominantly for servicing certain customer contracts until such recognized a pre-tax gain on the sale of $136 million for the year
contracts are terminated or entitlements are assumed by HCL. ended December 31, 2019. The amount of the pre-tax gain for the
Cash of $174 million was remitted in the fourth quarter of 2019 remaining countries will not be determinable until the valuation
related to deferred revenue that existed prior to closing. IBM of the final balance sheet transferred is completed, however, it is
expects to remit an additional $325 million of cash to HCL by the not expected to be material.
end of 2021. The company recognized pre-tax gains on the sale
of $556 million at closing and $72 million in the third quarter of In addition to the above, the company completed three
2019. The total pre-tax gain on the transaction for the year ended divestitures reported in the Global Financing segment, the Global
December 31, 2019 was $626 million. The total gain on sale may Business Services segment and the Other—divested businesses.
change in the future due to contingent consideration or changes The financial terms related to each of these transactions were
in other transaction estimates, however, material changes are not material.
not expected.
The pre-tax gain recognized on the divestitures above was
Select IBM Marketing Platform and Commerce Offerings—On recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
April 4, 2019, IBM and Centerbridge Partners, L.P. (Centerbridge) Income Statement.
announced a definitive agreement, in which Centerbridge would
acquire select marketing platform and commerce offerings from 2018 and 2017
IBM. The transaction included commercial software and services The company had no divestitures in 2018. The company
offerings. In addition, the company is providing Centerbridge with completed five divestitures in 2017, four of which were reported
transition services including IT, supply chain management, and in the Cloud & Cognitive Software segment and one was a
other services. Upon closing, Centerbridge announced that this research-related divestiture. The financial terms related to these
business would be re-branded under the name Acoustic. The transactions were not material. Overall, the company recognized
closing completed for the U.S. on June 30, 2019. The company a pre-tax gain of $31 million related to these transactions in 2017.
expects a subsequent closing for the remaining countries to
occur within 12 months of the U.S. closing. The timing of the
NOTE F. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING
subsequent closing is subject to change as more information
RD&E expense was $5,989 million in 2019, $5,379 million in
becomes available. The company received a net cash payment
2018 and $5,590 million in 2017.
of $240 million at the U.S. closing and expects to receive an
additional $150 million within 36 months of the U.S. closing.
The company incurred total expense of $5,657 million, $5,027
million and $5,170 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively,
The company recognized an immaterial pre-tax gain on the
for scientific research and the application of scientific advances
sale on June 30, 2019. The amount of the pre-tax gain for the
to the development of new and improved products and their uses,
remaining countries will not be determinable until the valuation
as well as services and their application. Within these amounts,
of the final balance sheet transferred is completed, however, it
software-related expense was $3,541 million, $3,050 million and
is not expected to be material.
$3,145 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
The above two divested businesses are reported in Other—
Expense for product-related engineering was $334 million,
divested businesses. Refer to note D, “Segments” for additional
$352 million and $420 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017,
information.
respectively.

===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE G. TAXES A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the
company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was
($ in millions)
as follows:
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
Income from continuing
operations before For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
income taxes Statutory rate 21% 21% 35%
U.S. operations $ (315) $ 627 $ 560 Enactment of U.S. tax reform 1 18 48
Non-U.S. operations 10,481 10,715 10,840 Tax differential on
foreign income (11) (9)* (26)
Total income from
continuing operations Intra-entity transfers 0 0 (5)
before income taxes $10,166 $11,342 $11,400 Domestic incentives (2) (3)* (2)
State and local (1) (1) 1
The income from continuing operations provision for income
Other (1) (3) (2)
taxes by geographic operations was as follows:
Effective rate 7% 23% 49%
($ in millions) * Reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
U.S. operations $ (408) $1,199 $2,923
Non-U.S. operations 1,139 1,420 2,719 The significant components reflected within the tax rate
reconciliation labeled “Tax differential on foreign income”
Total continuing operations
provision for income taxes $ 731 $2,619 $5,642 include the effects of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates
other than the U.S. statutory rate, foreign export incentives, U.S.
The components of the income from continuing operations taxes on foreign income and any net impacts of intercompany
provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction were as follows: transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or
changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated
($ in millions) with each of these items.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
On December 22, 2017, the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act was
U.S. federal
enacted. U.S. tax reform introduced many changes, including
Current $ 331 $ (342) $2,388
lowering the U.S. corporate tax rate to 21 percent, changes in
Deferred (839) 1,377 77
incentives, provisions to prevent U.S. base erosion and significant
$ (508) $1,035 $2,465 changes in the taxation of international income, including
U.S. state and local provisions which allow for the repatriation of foreign earnings
Current $ (85) $ 127 $ 55 without U.S. tax. The enactment of U.S. tax reform resulted in
Deferred (82) (292) 28 charges to tax expense of $0.1 billion, $2.0 billion and $5.5
billion for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017,
$ (167) $ (165) $ 83
respectively. The charge in 2017 was the result of the one-time
Non-U.S.
U.S. transition tax and any foreign tax costs on undistributed
Current $1,829 $2,135 $3,891
foreign earnings, as well as the remeasurement of deferred tax
Deferred (423) (386) (797) balances to the new U.S. federal tax rate. In 2018, the charge was
$1,406 $1,749 $3,094 primarily attributable to the company’s election to include GILTI
Total continuing operations in measuring deferred taxes, plus refinements to the one-time
provision for income taxes $ 731 $2,619 $5,642 U.S. transition tax and foreign tax costs on undistributed foreign
Discontinued operations earnings. The charge in 2019 was related to additional tax reform
provision for/(benefit from) guidance issued by the U.S. Treasury in January 2019.
income taxes (1) 2 (3)
Provision for social security,
real estate, personal property
and other taxes 3,304 3,322 3,434
Total taxes included
in net income $4,034 $5,943 $9,073

===== PAGE 99 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The 2019 continuing operations effective tax rate decreased 15.9 For financial reporting purposes, the company had foreign and
points from 2018 driven by: a decrease in charges related to U.S. domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which was $504
tax reform (16.5 points) and a charge in 2018 from intercompany million, including a tax only capital loss in a subsidiary, as well
payments (3.4 points). These benefits were partially offset by a as foreign and domestic credit carryforwards of $1,591 million.
lower benefit year to year from audit activity (4.4 points). Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least
two years and the majority are available for 10 years or more.
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and
liabilities did not have a material impact on the company’s 2019 The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2019, 2018 and
effective tax rate. 2017 were $608 million, $915 million and $1,004 million,
respectively. The amounts principally apply to certain foreign
Deferred Tax Assets and domestic loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of
management, it is more likely than not that these assets will not
($ in millions)
be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to
At December 31: 2019 2018
these carryforwards are realized in the future, the reduction in
Retirement benefits $ 3,766 $3,620
the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense.
Leases* 1,729 103**
Share-based and other compensation 637 636 The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31,
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 1,259 964 2019 increased by $387 million in 2019 to $7,146 million.
Deferred income 600 674 A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of
unrecognized tax benefits was as follows:
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 836 903
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 298 348
($ in millions)
Depreciation 253 231
2019 2018 2017
Accruals 368 336
Balance at January 1 $6,759 $ 7,031 $3,740
Intangible assets 592 620
Additions based on tax
Capitalized research and development 722 — positions related to the
Other 1,438 1,398 current year 816 394 3,029
Gross deferred tax assets 12,498 9,833 Additions for tax positions
of prior years 779 1,201 803
Less: valuation allowance 608 915
Reductions for tax positions
Net deferred tax assets $11,890 $8,918
of prior years (including
impacts due to a lapse of
Deferred Tax Liabilities
statute) (922) (1,686) (367)
($ in millions) Settlements (286) (181) (174)
At December 31: 2019 2018 Balance at December 31 $7,146 $ 6,759 $7,031
Goodwill and intangible assets+ $ 3,111 $1,200
GILTI deferred taxes 1,908 1,927
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current
Leases and right-of-use assets* 2,216 580
and prior years were primarily attributable to U.S. federal and
Depreciation 728 719 state tax matters, as well as non-U.S. tax matters, including
Retirement benefits 1,002 455 transfer pricing, credits and incentives. The settlements and
Software development costs+ 1,075 292 reductions to unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions of prior
Deferred transition costs 233 233 years were primarily attributable to U.S. federal and state tax
matters, non-U.S. audits and impacts due to lapse of statute of
Undistributed foreign earnings 725 981
limitations.
Other 940 1,011
Gross deferred tax liabilities $11,938 $7,398 The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2019 of
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on leases. $7,146 million can be reduced by $584 million associated with
** Previously included in Other. timing adjustments, U.S. tax credits, potential transfer pricing
+ The increase in the balance was primarily due to the adjustments and state income taxes. The net amount of $6,562
acquisition of Red Hat. million, if recognized, would favorably affect the company’s
effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2018 and
2017 were $6,041 million and $6,064 million, respectively.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are
included in income tax expense. During the year ended
December 31, 2019, the company recognized $13 million in
interest expense and penalties; in 2018, the company recognized
a net benefit of $14 million in interest expense and penalties;
and, in 2017, the company recognized $174 million in interest
expense and penalties. The company had $819 million for the
payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2019,
and had $680 million accrued at December 31, 2018.

===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been provided for any
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential
decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is associated The company is involved in a number of income tax-related
with the anticipated resolution of various U.S. state and non-U.S. matters in India challenging tax assessments issued by the
audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits India Tax Authorities. As of December 31, 2019, the company
at December 31, 2019 could be reduced by $236 million. had recorded $729 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A
significant portion of this balance represents cash tax deposits
The company’s U.S. income tax returns for 2013 and 2014 paid over time to protect the company’s right to appeal various
continue to be examined by the IRS with specific focus on certain income tax assessments made by the India Tax Authorities.
cross-border transactions in 2013. Although the IRS could Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the
propose additional adjustments related to these transactions, company believes that adequate amounts of tax, interest and
the company believes it is adequately reserved on these matters. penalties have been provided for any adjustments that are
In the third quarter of 2018, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service expected to result for these years.
commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for
2015 and 2016. The company anticipates that this audit will be Within consolidated retained earnings at December 31, 2019 were
completed in 2021. With respect to major U.S. state and foreign undistributed after-tax earnings from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries
taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer subject that were not indefinitely reinvested. At December 31, 2019,
to tax examinations for years prior to 2014. The company is no the company had a deferred tax liability of $725 million for the
longer subject to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax estimated taxes associated with the repatriation of these earnings.
return for years prior to 2013. The open years contain matters Undistributed earnings of approximately $650 million and other
that could be subject to differing interpretations of applicable tax outside basis differences in foreign subsidiaries were indefinitely
laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/or timing of reinvested in foreign operations. Quantification of the deferred tax
income, deductions and tax credits. Although the outcome of tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings and
audits is always uncertain, the company believes that adequate outside basis differences was not practicable.
NOTE H. EARNINGS PER SHARE
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share
calculations are based
Basic 887,235,105 912,048,072 932,828,295
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 4,199,440 2,786,316 3,094,373
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 1,378,831 1,481,326 1,462,957
Assuming dilution 892,813,376 916,315,714 937,385,625
Income from continuing operations $9,435 $8,723 $5,758
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (4) 5 (5)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $9,431 $8,728 $5,753
Income from continuing operations $9,435 $8,723 $5,758
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares 0 (6) (2)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings
per share is calculated $9,435 $8,718 $5,756
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which basic
and diluted earnings per share is calculated (4) 5 (5 )
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $9,431 $8,722 $5,752
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $10.57 $ 9.51 $ 6.14
Discontinued operations (0.01) 0.01 0.00
Total $10.56 $ 9.52 $ 6.14
Basic
Continuing operations $10.63 $ 9.56 $ 6.17
Discontinued operations 0.00 0.01 0.00
Total $10.63 $ 9.57 $ 6.17

===== PAGE 101 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 855,679 common exercise price of the options was greater than the average market
shares in 2019, 576,776 common shares in 2018 and 209,294 price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the
common shares in 2017 were outstanding, but were not included effect would have been antidilutive.
in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the
NOTE I. FINANCIAL ASSETS & LIABILITIES
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following table presents the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring
basis at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
($ in millions) 2019 2018
Fair Value
At December 31: Hierarchy Level Assets(7) Liabilities(8) Assets(7) Liabilities(8)
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit (4) 2 $4,392 $ — $7,679 $ —
Money market funds 1 427 — 25 —
Total cash equivalents $4,819 $ — $7,704 $ —
Equity investments (2) 1 0 — 0 —
Debt securities—current (3) (4) 2 696 — 618 —
Debt securities—noncurrent (2) (4) 2 65 — — —
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments (5)
Interest rate contracts 2 56 — 220 80
Foreign exchange contracts 2 175 635 483 239
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments
Foreign exchange contracts 2 10 33 26 13
Equity contracts (6) 1,2 1 4 2 51
Total $5,823 $673 $9,053 $383
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(3) I ncluded within marketable securities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(4) Available-for-sale debt securities with carrying values that approximate fair value. The contractual maturities are substantially one year or less.
(5) E xcludes $7,324 million and $6,261 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, of debt designated as hedging instruments that are
reported at carrying value.
(6) L evel 1 includes immaterial amounts related to equity futures contracts.
(7) T he gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets
in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2019 were $149 million and $94 million, respectively, and at December 31, 2018 were
$385 million and $347 million, respectively.
(8) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet at December 31, 2019 were $167 million and $506 million, respectively, and at December 31, 2018 were $177 million and
$206 million, respectively.

===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value NOTE J. INVENTORY
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
($ in millions)
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are
At December 31: 2019 2018
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value.
Finished goods $ 220 $ 266
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt
(excluding the current portion of long-term debt and including Work in process and raw materials 1,399 1,415
short-term finance lease liabilities) are financial liabilities with Total $1,619 $1,682
carrying values that approximate fair value. If measured at fair
value in the financial statements, these financial instruments
would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy, except NOTE K. FINANCING RECEIVABLES
for short-term debt which would be classified as Level 2. Financing receivables primarily consist of client loan and installment
payment receivables (loans), investment in sales-type and direct
Loans and Long-Term Receivables financing leases, and commercial financing receivables. Client
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using current loan and installment payment receivables (loans) are provided
interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware, software
credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December and services. Payment terms on these financing arrangements
31, 2019 and 2018, the difference between the carrying amount are generally for terms up to seven years. Client loans and
and estimated fair value for loans and long-term receivables was installment payment financing contracts are priced independently
immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, at competitive market rates. Investment in sales-type and direct
these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the financing leases relates principally to the company’s Systems
fair value hierarchy. products and are for terms ranging generally from two to six years.
Commercial financing receivables relate primarily to inventory and
Long-Term Debt accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted and OEM products. Payment terms for inventory and accounts
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
an active market. For other long-term debt (including long-term
finance lease liabilities) for which a quoted market price is not Beginning in the second quarter of 2019 and continuing throughout
available, an expected present value technique that uses rates the year, the company wound down the portion of its commercial
currently available to the company for debt with similar terms and financing operations which provides short-term working capital
remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value. The carrying solutions for OEM information technology suppliers, distributors
amount of long-term debt was $54,102 million and $35,605 and resellers, which has resulted in a significant reduction of
million, and the estimated fair value was $58,431 million and commercial financing receivables. This wind down is consistent
$36,599 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. with IBM’s capital allocation strategy and high-value focus. IBM
If measured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term Global Financing will continue to provide differentiated end-to-end
debt (including the current portion) would be classified as Level financing solutions, including commercial financing in support of
2 in the fair value hierarchy. IBM partner relationships.
A summary of the components of the company’s financing receivables is presented as follows:
($ in millions)
Client Loan and
Investment in Installment
Sales-Type and Commercial Payment
Direct Financing Financing Receivables/
At December 31, 2019: Leases Receivables (Loans) Total
Financing receivables, gross $6,077 $3,836 $13,592 $23,504
Unearned income (509) (4) (570) (1,083)
Recorded investment $5,567 $3,831 $13,022 $22,421
Allowance for credit losses (72) (11) (138) (221)
Unguaranteed residual value 652 — — 652
Guaranteed residual value 53 — — 53
Total financing receivables, net $6,199 $3,820 $12,884 $22,904
Current portion $2,334 $3,820 $ 8,037 $14,192
Noncurrent portion $3,865 $ — $ 4,847 $ 8,712

===== PAGE 103 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Client Loan and
Investment in Installment
Sales-Type and Commercial Payment
Direct Financing Financing Receivables/
At December 31, 2018: Leases Receivables (Loans) Total
Financing receivables, gross $6,846 $11,889 $13,614 $32,348
Unearned income (526) (37) (632) (1,195)
Recorded investment $6,320 $11,852 $12,981 $31,153
Allowance for credit losses (99) (13) (179) (292)
Unguaranteed residual value 589 — — 589
Guaranteed residual value 85 — — 85
Total financing receivables, net $6,895 $11,838 $12,802 $31,536
Current portion $2,834 $11,838 $ 7,716 $22,388
Noncurrent portion $4,061 $ — $ 5,086 $ 9,148
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
collateral for nonrecourse borrowings. Financing receivables The following tables present the recorded investment by
pledged as collateral for borrowings were $1,062 million and portfolio segment and by class, excluding commercial financing
$710 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. receivables and other miscellaneous financing receivables at
These borrowings are included in note P, “Borrowings.” December 31, 2019 and 2018. Commercial financing receivables
are excluded from the presentation of financing receivables
The company did not have any financing receivables held for sale by portfolio segment, as they are short term in nature and
as of December 31, 2019 and 2018. the current estimated risk of loss and resulting impact to the
company’s financing results are not material.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2019: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Recorded investment:
Lease receivables $ 3,419 $1,186 $ 963 $ 5,567
Loan receivables 6,726 3,901 2,395 13,022
Ending balance $10,144 $5,087 $3,359 $18,590
Recorded investment, collectively evaluated for impairment $10,032 $5,040 $3,326 $18,399
Recorded investment, individually evaluated for impairment $ 112 $ 47 $ 32 $ 191
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2019
Lease receivables $ 53 $ 22 $ 24 $ 99
Loan receivables 105 43 32 179
Total $ 158 $ 65 $ 56 $ 279
Write-offs (42) (3) (18) (63)
Recoveries 1 0 1 2
Provision 5 (7) (3) (5)
Other* (1) 0 (1) (2)
Ending balance at December 31, 2019 $ 120 $ 54 $ 36 $ 210
Lease receivables $ 33 $ 23 $ 16 $ 72
Loan receivables $ 88 $ 31 $ 20 $ 138
Related allowance, collectively evaluated for impairment $ 25 $ 11 $ 4 $ 39
Related allowance, individually evaluated for impairment $ 96 $ 43 $ 32 $ 171
* Primarily represents translation adjustments.

===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Write-offs of lease receivables and loan receivables were The average recorded investment of impaired leases and loans for
$16 million and $47 million, respectively, for the year ended Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific was $138 million, $49 million
December 31, 2019. Provisions for credit losses recorded for and $45 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31,
lease receivables and loan receivables were a release of $6 2019. Both interest income recognized, and interest income
million and an addition of $2 million, respectively, for the year recognized on a cash basis on impaired leases and loans were
ended December 31, 2019. immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2019.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2018: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Recorded investment:
Lease receivables $ 3,827 $1,341 $1,152 $ 6,320
Loan receivables 6,817 3,675 2,489 12,981
Ending balance $10,644 $5,016 $3,641 $19,301
Recorded investment, collectively evaluated for impairment $10,498 $4,964 $3,590 $19,052
Recorded investment, individually evaluated for impairment $ 146 $ 52 $ 51 $ 249
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2018
Lease receivables $ 63 $ 9 $ 31 $ 103
Loan receivables 108 52 51 211
Total $ 172 $ 61 $ 82 $ 314
Write-offs (10) (2) (23) (35)
Recoveries 0 0 2 2
Provision 7 9 0 16
Other* (11) (3) (4) (19)
Ending balance at December 31, 2018 $ 158 $ 65 $ 56 $ 279
Lease receivables $ 53 $ 22 $ 24 $ 99
Loan receivables $ 105 $ 43 $ 32 $ 179
Related allowance, collectively evaluated for impairment $ 39 $ 16 $ 5 $ 59
Related allowance, individually evaluated for impairment $ 119 $ 49 $ 51 $ 219
* Primarily represents translation adjustments.
Write-offs of lease receivables and loan receivables were When determining the allowances, financing receivables are
$15 million and $20 million, respectively, for the year ended evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For the
December 31, 2018. Provisions for credit losses recorded for company’s policy on determining allowances for credit losses,
lease receivables and loan receivables were $14 million and refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
$2 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The average recorded investment of impaired leases and loans for
Americas, EMEA and Asia Pacific was $138 million, $55 million
and $73 million, respectively, for the year ended December 31,
2018. Both interest income recognized, and interest income
recognized on a cash basis on impaired leases and loans were
immaterial for the year ended December 31, 2018.

===== PAGE 105 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Past Due Financing Receivables
The company considers a client’s financing receivable balance past due when any installment is aged over 90 days. The following tables
present summary information about the recorded investment in lease and loan financing receivables, including recorded investments
aged over 90 days and still accruing, billed invoices aged over 90 days and recorded investment not accruing.
($ in millions)
Recorded Billed
Total Recorded Investment Invoices >90 Recorded
Recorded Investment >90 Days and Days and Investment Not
At December 31, 2019: Investment >90 Days (1) Accruing (1) Accruing Accruing (2)
Americas $ 3,419 $187 $147 $11 $ 41
EMEA 1,186 28 13 2 17
Asia Pacific 963 19 7 1 11
Total lease receivables $ 5,567 $234 $168 $14 $ 69
Americas $ 6,726 $127 $ 71 $11 $ 72
EMEA 3,901 77 8 3 72
Asia Pacific 2,395 26 6 2 21
Total loan receivables $13,022 $231 $ 85 $15 $166
Total $18,590 $465 $253 $29 $235
($ in millions)
Recorded Billed
Total Recorded Investment Invoices >90 Recorded
Recorded Investment >90 Days and Days and Investment Not
At December 31, 2018: Investment >90 Days (1) Accruing (1) Accruing Accruing (3)
Americas $ 3,827 $310 $256 $19 $ 57
EMEA 1,341 25 9 1 16
Asia Pacific 1,152 49 27 3 24
Total lease receivables $ 6,320 $385 $292 $24 $ 97
Americas $ 6,817 $259 $166 $24 $ 99
EMEA 3,675 98 25 3 73
Asia Pacific 2,489 40 11 1 31
Total loan receivables $12,981 $397 $202 $29 $203
Total $19,301 $782 $494 $52 $300
(1) At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for financing receivables aged greater than 90 days.
(2) Of the recorded investment not accruing, $191 million is individually evaluated for impairment with a related allowance of $171 million.
(3) O f the recorded investment not accruing, $249 million is individually evaluated for impairment with a related allowance of $219 million.
Credit Quality Indicators The following tables present the recorded investment net
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based of allowance for credit losses for each class of receivables,
on rating agency data, publicly available information and by credit quality indicator, at December 31, 2019 and 2018.
information provided by customers, are reviewed periodically Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to
based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others are considered
numerical rating system that maps to Moody’s Investors Service non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators do not reflect
credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information mitigation actions that the company takes to transfer credit risk
provided by Moody’s, where available, as one of many inputs in to third parties.
its determination of customer credit ratings.

===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Lease Receivables Loan Receivables
At December 31, 2019: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa—Aa3 $ 465 $ 54 $ 43 $1,028 $ 193 $ 189
A1—A3 750 181 454 1,186 395 892
Baa1—Baa3 955 409 147 1,882 1,527 619
Ba1—Ba2 746 326 154 1,513 921 388
Ba3—B1 215 140 101 471 564 205
B2—B3 242 50 47 522 253 72
Caa—D 13 2 2 36 18 10
Total $3,385 $1,162 $947 $6,638 $3,871 $2,376
($ in millions)
Lease Receivables Loan Receivables
At December 31, 2018: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
Credit rating
Aaa—Aa3 $ 593 $ 45 $ 85 $1,055 $ 125 $ 185
A1—A3 678 158 413 1,206 436 901
Baa1—Baa3 892 417 297 1,587 1,148 648
Ba1—Ba2 852 426 191 1,516 1,175 417
Ba3—B1 433 171 84 770 472 184
B2—B3 299 90 50 531 249 109
Caa—D 26 10 7 47 28 15
Total $3,774 $1,319 $1,128 $6,712 $3,633 $2,457
Troubled Debt Restructurings NOTE M. LEASES
The company did not have any significant troubled debt Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. The following tables presents the various components of lease
costs:
NOTE L. PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
($ in millions) For the year ended December 31: 2019
At December 31: 2019 2018 Finance lease cost $ 30
Land and land improvements $ 365 $ 448 Operating lease cost 1,645
Buildings and building and Short-term lease cost 38
leasehold improvements 9,364 9,640
Variable lease cost 534
Information technology equipment 18,054 17,468
Sublease income (24)
Production, engineering,
Total lease cost $2,223
office and other equipment 3,721 4,081
Plant and other property—gross 31,504 31,636
Less: Accumulated depreciation 21,726 21,276 The company recorded net gains on sale and leaseback transactions
Plant and other property—net 9,778 10,359 of $41 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Rental machines 523 824
Less: Accumulated depreciation 292 392
Rental machines—net 232 433
Total—net $10,010 $10,792

===== PAGE 107 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents supplemental information relating The following table presents the weighted-average lease term
to the cash flows arising from lease transactions. Cash payments and discount rate for finance and operating leases.
related to variable lease costs and short-term leases are not
included in the measurement of operating and finance lease
At December 31: 2019
liabilities, and, as such, are excluded from the amounts below.
Finance leases
($ in millions) Weighted-average remaining lease term 4.8 yrs.
For the year ended December 31: 2019 Weighted-average discount rate 1.62 %
Cash paid for amounts included in the Operating leases
measurement of lease liabilities Weighted-average remaining lease term 5.4 yrs.
Operating cash outflows from finance leases $ 8 Weighted-average discount rate 3.03 %
Financing cash outflows from finance leases 22
Operating cash outflows from operating leases 1,541
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new finance
lease liabilities 209*
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new operating
lease liabilities 6,481*
* Includes opening balance additions as a result of the adoption of the
new lease guidance effective January 1, 2019. The post adoption
addition of leases for the year ended December 31, 2019 was $1,679
million for operating leases and immaterial for finance leases.
The following table presents a maturity analysis of expected undiscounted cash flows for operating and finance leases on an annual
basis for the next five years and thereafter.
Imputed
($ in millions) 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Thereafter Interest* Total**
Finance leases $ 62 $ 59 $ 48 $ 31 $ 12 $ 46 $ (54) $ 204
Operating leases 1,486 1,198 928 673 514 806 (346) 5,259
* Imputed interest represents the difference between undiscounted cash flows and discounted cash flows.
** The company entered into lease agreements for certain facilities and equipment with payments totaling approximately $181 million that h ave not yet
commenced as of December 31, 2019, and therefore are not included in this table.

===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2019, the total amount of finance leases adoption. Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventory
recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for ROU assets and fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, were
in property, plant and equipment was $187 million and lease $1,944 million and $1,821 million for the years ended December
liabilities in short-term debt and long-term debt was $52 million 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
and $151 million, respectively.
The following table, which was included in the company’s 2018
Prior to the adoption of the new lease guidance on January 1, Annual Report, depicts gross minimum rental commitments
2019, ROU assets and lease liabilities for operating leases were under noncancelable leases, amounts related to vacant space
not recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The company associated with workforce transformation, sublease income
elected the practical expedient to not provide comparable commitments and capital lease commitments.
presentation in the Consolidated Balance Sheet for periods prior to
Beyond
($ in millions) 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2023
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments
(including vacant space below) $1,581 $1,233 $914 $640 $445 $815
Vacant space 29 23 14 9 5 8
Sublease income commitments 11 7 5 4 4 2
Capital lease commitments 3 3 3 3 2 28
The difference between the company’s total lease commitments Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
as reported at December 31, 2018 compared to the January 1, The following table presents amounts included in the Consolidated
2019 ROU asset balance in the Consolidated Balance Sheet is Income Statement related to lessor activity:
primarily due to the required use of a discount factor (imputed
interest) under the new lease guidance and certain amounts that ($ in millions)
are not included in the ROU assets under the new lease guidance For the year ended December 31: 2019
(e.g. tenant incentives and vacant space). Lease income—sales-type and direct
financing leases
Sales-type lease selling price $1,509
Less: Carrying value of underlying assets
excluding unguaranteed residual value 591
Gross profit 918
Interest income on lease receivables 303
Total sales-type and direct financing
lease income $1,221
Lease income—operating leases 324
Variable lease income 56
Total lease income $1,601

===== PAGE 109 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases Operating Leases
At December 31, 2019, the unguaranteed residual value of The following table presents a maturity analysis of the undiscounted
sales-type and direct financing leases was $652 million. For lease payments due to IBM on operating leases over the next five
further information on the company’s net investment in leases, years and thereafter, at December 31, 2019:
including guaranteed and unguaranteed residual values, refer to
note K, “Financing Receivables.” ($ in millions)
Total
For the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, impairment 2020 $145
of residual values was immaterial.
2021 35
2022 4
The following table presents a maturity analysis of the lease
2023 0
payments due to IBM on sales-type and direct financing leases over
the next five years and thereafter, as well as a reconciliation of the 2024 0
undiscounted cash flows to the financing receivables recognized in Thereafter —
the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2019: Total undiscounted cash flows $184
($ in millions) There were no material impairment losses incurred for equipment
Total provided to clients under an operating lease for the year ended
2020 $2,632 December 31, 2019.
2021 1,921
At December 31, 2019, the unguaranteed residual value of
2022 1,053
operating leases was $81 million.
2023 382
2024 82
Thereafter 7
Total undiscounted cash flows $6,077
Present value of lease payments
(recognized as financing receivables) 5,567*
Difference between undiscounted cash flows
and discounted cash flows $ (509 )
* The present value of the lease payments will not equal the financing
receivables balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, due to
certain items including IDCs, allowance for credit losses and residual
values, which are included in the financing receivables balances, but
are not included in the future lease payments.

===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE N. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL The net carrying amount of intangible assets increased $12,147
Intangible Assets million during the year ended December 31, 2019, primarily
The following table presents the company’s intangible asset due to the acquisition of Red Hat and additions resulting
balances by major asset class. from capitalized software, partially offset by intangible asset
amortization. Intangible assets of $13,472 million generated
($ in millions) from the acquisition of Red Hat were allocated to the segments
Gross Net as follows:
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
At December 31, 2019:* Amount Amortization Amount
($ in millions)
Intangible asset class
Intangible
Capitalized software $ 1,749 $ (743) $ 1,006 Assets
Segment Allocated*
Client relationships 8,921 (1,433) 7,488
Cloud & Cognitive Software $10,729
Completed technology 6,261 (1,400) 4,861
Global Technology Services 1,819
Patents/trademarks 2,301 (445) 1,856
Global Business Services 617
Other** 56 (31) 24
Systems 306
Total $19,287 $(4,052) $15,235
Total $13,472
* For additional information on the acquisition of Red Hat, refer to note E,
($ in millions) “Acquisitions & Divestitures.”
Gross Net
Carrying Accumulated Carrying
There was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2019
At December 31, 2018: Amount Amortization Amount
and 2018. The aggregate intangible amortization expense
Intangible asset class
was $1,850 million and $1,353 million for the years ended
Capitalized software $1,568 $ (629) $ 939
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. In addition, in 2019
Client relationships 2,068 (1,123) 945
and 2018, respectively, the company retired $946 million and
Completed technology 2,156 (1,296) 860 $1,469 million of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting
Patents/trademarks 641 (330) 311 both the gross carrying amount and accumulated amortization
Other** 56 (23) 32 by this amount. In 2019, the company divested select intangible
Total $6,489 $(3,402) $3,087 assets with a gross carrying amount of $335 million and $260
million of accumulated amortization.
* Amounts as of December 31, 2019 include a decrease of $42 million in
net intangible asset balances due to foreign currency translation.
The future amortization expense relating to intangible assets
There was no foreign currency impact on net intangible assets for the
year ended December 31, 2018. currently recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet is
** Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and estimated to be the following at December 31, 2019:
nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.
($ in millions)
Capitalized Acquired
Software Intangibles Total
2020 $529 $1,855 $2,384
2021 352 1,747 2,099
2022 123 1,684 1,808
2023 1 1,371 1,372
2024 0 1,322 1,322
Thereafter — 6,250 6,250

===== PAGE 111 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2019 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments** 2019
Cloud & Cognitive Software $24,594 $18,399 $ 133 $ (131) $41 $43,037
Global Business Services 4,711 1,059 1 (1) 5 5,775
Global Technology Services 3,988 3,119 — — 34 7,141
Systems 1,847 525 (110) — 7 2,270
Other—divested businesses 1,126 — — (1,126) — —
Total $36,265 $23,102 $ 24 $(1,257) $87 $58,222
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Balance Purchase Translation Balance
January 1, Goodwill Price and Other December 31,
Segment 2018 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments** 2018
Cloud & Cognitive Software* $24,973 $ 9 $ 0 $(1) $(388) $24,594
Global Business Services* 4,782 24 (3) — (92) 4,711
Global Technology Services* 4,044 — 0 — (56) 3,988
Systems 1,862 — 0 — (15) 1,847
Other—divested businesses* 1,127 1 0 0 (2) 1,126
Total $36,788 $34 $(3) $(1) $(553 ) $36,265
* Recast to conform to 2019 presentation.
** Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
Goodwill additions recorded during 2019 were related to the NOTE P. BORROWINGS
acquisition of Red Hat in the third quarter of 2019. For additional Short-Term Debt
information on this transaction and related purchase price
($ in millions)
adjustments, refer to note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures.”
At December 31: 2019 2018
Commercial paper $ 304 $ 2,995
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during 2019
or 2018 and the company has no accumulated impairment losses. Short-term loans 971 161
Long-term debt—current maturities 7,522 7,051
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2019 and 2018 were Total $8,797 $10,207
related to acquisitions that were still subject to the measurement
period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition
date or when information becomes available. Net purchase price The weighted-average interest rate for commercial paper at
adjustments recorded in 2019 and 2018 were not material. December 31, 2019 and 2018 was 1.6 percent and 2.5 percent,
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term
loans were 6.1 percent and 4.3 percent at December 31, 2019
NOTE O. INVESTMENTS & SUNDRY ASSETS and 2018, respectively.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2019 2018
Derivatives—noncurrent $ 94 $ 347
Alliance investments
Equity method 184 192
Non-equity method 38 34
Long-term deposits 242 268
Other receivables 276 359
Employee benefit-related 253 263
Prepaid income taxes 664 626
Other assets 321 296
Total $2,074 $2,386

===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2019 2018*
U.S. dollar debt (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2019):**
3.0% 2019 $ — $ 5,465
2.3% 2020 4,326 4,344
2.5% 2021 8,498 5,529
2.6% 2022 6,289 3,529
3.3% 2023 2,388 2,428
3.3% 2024 5,045 2,037
6.7% 2025 636 600
3.3% 2026 4,350 1,350
4.7% 2027 969 969
6.5% 2028 313 313
3.5% 2029 3,250 —
5.9% 2032 600 600
8.0% 2038 83 83
4.5% 2039 2,745 745
4.0% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.0% 2045 27 27
4.7% 2046 650 650
4.3% 2049 3,000 —
7.1% 2096 316 316
$44,594 $30,091
Other currencies (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2019, in
parentheses):**
Euro (1.3%) 2020–2031 $14,306 $10,011
Pound sterling (2.7%) 2020–2022 1,390 1,338
Japanese yen (0.3%) 2022–2026 1,339 1,325
Other (6.1%) 2020–2022 375 390
$62,003 $43,155
Finance lease obligations (2.0%) 2020–2030 204 41
$62,207 $43,196
Less: net unamortized discount 881 802
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 142 76
Add: fair value adjustment+ 440 337
$61,624 $42,656
Less: current maturities 7,522 7,051
Total $54,102 $35,605
* Reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation.
** Includes notes, debentures, bank loans and secured borrowings.
+ The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as an amount equal to the
sum of the debt’s carrying value and a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to
movements in benchmark interest rates.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its and leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s
various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, ability to merge or consolidate unless certain conditions are met.
limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s

===== PAGE 113 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less basis points, $1.5 billion of 2-year fixed rate notes with a 2.8
than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect percent coupon, $2.75 billion of 3-year fixed rate notes with a
to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million. 2.85 percent coupon, $3.0 billion of 5-year fixed rate notes with
a 3.0 percent coupon, $3.0 billion of 7-year fixed rate notes with
The company is in compliance with all of its significant debt a 3.3 percent coupon, $3.25 billion of 10-year fixed rate notes
covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. with a 3.5 percent coupon, $2.0 billion of 20-year fixed rate
The failure to comply with its debt covenants could constitute an notes with a 4.15 percent coupon and $3.0 billion of 30-year
event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions fixed rate notes with a 4.25 percent coupon. The proceeds from
apply. If certain events of default were to occur, the principal and these debt issuances were primarily used for the acquisition of
interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would Red Hat. For additional information on this transaction, see note
become immediately due and payable. E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures.”
On May 15, 2019, the company issued an aggregate of $20 billion Additionally, the long-term debt table above includes Euro bonds
of indebtedness in the following eight tranches: $1.5 billion of that were issued in the first quarter of 2019 to partially finance
2-year floating rate notes priced at 3 month LIBOR plus 40 the acquisition of Red Hat upon closing.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2019 2018
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
For the year ended December 31: Amount Interest Rate Amount Interest Rate
Fixed-rate debt $52,169 2.9% $28,770 2.7%
Floating-rate debt* 9,455 2.2% 13,886 3.0%
Total $61,624 $42,656
* Includes $2,975 million in 2019 and $7,563 million in 2018 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into
floating-rate debt. Refer to note T, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
Pre-swap annual contractual obligations of long-term debt Interest on Debt
outstanding at December 31, 2019, are as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017
($ in millions)
Cost of financing $ 608 $ 757 $ 658
Total
Interest expense 1,344 723 615
2020 $ 7,526
Interest capitalized 5 3 5
2021 9,826
Total interest paid
2022 7,175
and accrued $1,957 $1,482 $1,278
2023 5,374
2024 6,305
Thereafter 26,000 Refer to the related discussion in note D, “Segments,” for total
interest expense of the Global Financing segment. Refer to note T,
Total $62,207
“Derivative Financial Instruments,” for a discussion of the use
of foreign currency denominated debt designated as a hedge of
net investment, as well as a discussion of the use of currency
and interest rate swaps in the company’s debt risk management
program.

===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Lines of Credit NOTE Q. OTHER LIABILITIES
On July 18, 2019, the company extended the maturity date of its
existing $10.25 billion Five-Year Credit Agreement by a period of ($ in millions)
one year. In addition, the company and IBM Credit LLC extended At December 31: 2019 2018
the maturity date of their existing $2.5 billion Three-Year Credit Income tax reserves $ 5,118 $ 4,195
Agreement by a period of one year. Finally, the company and
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,521 1,380
IBM Credit LLC entered into a new $2.5 billion, 364-Day Credit
Disability benefits 478 507
Agreement to replace the maturing $2.5 billion, 364-Day Credit
Derivative liabilities 506 206
Agreement. The new maturity dates for the Five-Year and
Three-Year Credit Agreements are July 20, 2024 and July Workforce reductions 725 736
20, 2022, respectively. Each of the facility sizes remained Deferred taxes* 5,230 3,696
unchanged. The total expense recorded by the company Other taxes payable 42 40
related to the Five-Year Credit Agreement was $7.4 million in Environmental accruals 254 244
2019, $6.7 million in 2018 and $6.1 million in 2017. The total
Warranty accruals 45 76
expense recorded by the company related to the 364-Day and
Asset retirement obligations 94 111
Three-Year Credit Agreements was $2.3 million in 2019, $2.1
Acquisition related 9 13
million in 2018 and $2.8 million in 2017. The Five-Year Credit
Agreement permits the company and its subsidiary borrowers Divestiture related 65 173
to borrow up to $10.25 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings Other 439 796
of the subsidiary borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the Total $14,526 $12,174
company. The company may also, upon the agreement of either
* The increase in the balance at December 31, 2019 was primarily
existing lenders, or of additional banks not currently party to the
related to the acquisition of Red Hat.
Five-Year Credit Agreement, increase the commitments under the
Credit Agreement up to an additional $1.75 billion. The 364-Day
In response to changing business needs, the company
Credit Agreement and the Three-Year Credit Agreement allow
periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve
the company and IBM Credit (each a “Borrower”) to borrow up to
productivity, cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The
an aggregate of $5 billion on a revolving basis. Neither Borrower
noncurrent contractually obligated future payments associated
is a guarantor or co-obligor of the other Borrower under the
with these activities are reflected in the workforce reductions
364-Day and Three-Year Credit Agreements. Subject to certain
caption in the previous table. The noncurrent liabilities are
conditions stated in the Five-Year, 364-Day and Three-Year
workforce accruals related to terminated employees who are
Credit Agreements (the “Credit Agreements”), the Borrowers
no longer working for the company who were granted annual
may borrow, prepay and re-borrow amounts under the Credit
payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries.
Agreements at any time during the term of such agreements.
Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these
Funds borrowed may be used for the general corporate purposes
required payments will continue until the former employee begins
of the Borrowers.
receiving pension benefits or passes away. The total amounts
accrued for workforce reductions, including amounts classified
Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agreements
as current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet were $950 million
will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further
and $941 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
described in the Credit Agreements. The Credit Agreements
contain customary representations and warranties, covenants,
The company employs extensive internal environmental
events of default, and indemnification provisions. The company
protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The
believes that circumstances that might give rise to breach
company also participates in environmental assessments and
of these covenants or an event of default, as specified in the
cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities,
Credit Agreements, are remote. The company also has other
previously owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s
committed lines of credit in some of the geographies which are
maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be
not significant in the aggregate. Interest rates and other terms
estimated and no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO
of borrowing under these lines of credit vary from country to
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The
country, depending on local market conditions.
total amounts accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities,
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated
As of December 31, 2019, there were no borrowings by the
Balance Sheet, that do not reflect actual or anticipated insurance
company, or its subsidiaries, under these credit facilities.
recoveries, were $270 million and $255 million at December 31,
2019 and 2018, respectively. Estimated environmental costs

===== PAGE 115 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
are not expected to materially affect the consolidated financial It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of
position or consolidated results of the company’s operations in future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
future periods. However, estimates of future costs are subject conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique
to change due to protracted cleanup periods and changing facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
environmental remediation regulations. Historically, payments made by the company under these
agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s
As of December 31, 2019, the company was unable to estimate business, financial condition or results of operations.
the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial
primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that commitments. The maximum potential future payment under
is not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished these financial guarantees was $20 million and $26 million at
and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The fair value of the
remediate only if it performed major renovations of certain guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet was
existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have immaterial.
indeterminate settlement dates, the company could not develop
a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will Changes in the company’s warranty liability for standard
continue to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses and
future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet
sufficient additional information becomes available. The total and in deferred income for extended warranty contracts, are
amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified presented in the following tables:
as current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet were $150 million
and $146 million at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
NOTE R. COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES 2019 2018
Commitments Balance at January 1 $ 118 $ 152
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities
Current period accruals 111 121
include unused amounts of $1.8 billion and $7.4 billion at
Accrual adjustments to reflect
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. A portion of these
experience (1) (32)
amounts was available to the company’s business partners
Charges incurred (115) (123)
to support their working capital needs. The decrease reflects
Balance at December 31 $ 113 $ 118
the company’s wind-down of its OEM IT commercial financing
operations. In addition, the company has committed to provide
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
future financing to its clients in connection with client purchase
agreements for $6.3 billion and $4.4 billion at December 31, ($ in millions)
2019 and 2018, respectively. 2019 2018
Balance at January 1 $ 533 $ 566
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor
Revenue deferred for new extended
to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of warranty contracts 198 220
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a
Amortization of deferred revenue (253) (240)
description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
Other* (2) (13)
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant Balance at December 31 $ 477 $ 533
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with Current portion $ 227 $ 271
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in Noncurrent portion $ 250 $ 262
the context of contracts entered into by the company, under
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
which the company customarily agrees to hold the other party
harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations
Contingencies
and covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold,
As a company with a substantial employee population and with
certain IP rights, specified environmental matters, third-party
clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as
performance of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain
plaintiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands,
income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by
suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise
the company is conditioned on the other party making a claim
from time to time in the ordinary course of its business. The
pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract,
company is a leader in the information technology industry
the procedures of which typically allow the company to challenge
and, as such, has been and will continue to be subject to claims
the other party’s claims. While typically indemnification
challenging its IP rights and associated products and offerings,
provisions do not include a contractual maximum on the
including claims of copyright and patent infringement and
company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these
violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of
company enforces its own IP against infringement, through
claim, and in some instances, the company may have recourse
license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical
against third parties for certain payments made by the company.

===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide of information important to the matters. The company reviews
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly,
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and and decisions are made with respect to recording or adjusting
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses or range
other benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, of losses (individually or in the aggregate), to reflect the impact
product liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural and
and environmental matters. These actions may be commenced substantive rulings, reviews by counsel and other information
by a number of different parties, including competitors, clients, pertinent to a particular matter.
current or former employees, government and regulatory
agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined
which the company does business. Some of the actions to which in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably
the company is party may involve particularly complex technical have a material effect on the company’s business, financial
issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a
laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise. number of variables, including: the timing and amount of such
losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies;
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, the significance of the impact any such losses, damages or
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements;
has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably and the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such that may give rise to additional factors. While the company
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 will continue to defend itself vigorously, it is possible that the
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. company’s business, financial condition, results of operations
or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by the
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the resolution of one or more of these matters.
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood
of material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters
company also discloses matters based on its consideration of involving the company.
other matters and qualitative factors, including the experience
of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 in
employee relations considerations. state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM).
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition,
time that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for interference with contract and breach of contract with regard to
example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of
of the company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to code to Linux and the company has asserted counterclaims. On
the remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection,
discussed in this note, except as specifically discussed herein, and all proceedings in this case were stayed. The court in another
the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010.
possible losses or range of losses, including losses in excess The jury found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare
of amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated
suits, investigations and proceedings are inherently uncertain, to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and
and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these Sequent for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30,
matters. It is the company’s experience that damage amounts 2011, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district
claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to court’s ruling and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In June
possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful indicators 2013, the Federal Court in Utah granted SCO’s motion to reopen
of the company’s potential liability. Further, the company is the SCO v. IBM case. In February 2016, the Federal Court ruled in
unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of other favor of IBM on all of SCO’s remaining claims, and SCO appealed.
factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and On October 30, 2017, the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed
proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status the dismissal of all but one of SCO’s remaining claims, which was
of the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel remanded to the Federal Court in Utah.

===== PAGE 117 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On March 9, 2017, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s litigation matters. The total potential amount related to all these
Department of Labor and Industry sued IBM in Pennsylvania matters for all applicable years is approximately $925 million.
state court regarding a 2006 contract for the development of The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that
a custom software system to manage the Commonwealth’s this amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability.
unemployment insurance benefits programs. The matter is
pending in a Pennsylvania court.
NOTE S. EQUITY ACTIVITY
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000
In December 2017, CIS General Insurance Limited (CISGIL) sued
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
IBM UK regarding a contract entered into by IBM UK and CISGIL
887,110,455 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2019,
in 2015 to implement and operate an IT insurance platform. The
and 150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share
contract was terminated by IBM UK in July 2017 for non-payment
par value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2019.
by CISGIL. CISGIL alleges wrongful termination, breach of contract
and breach of warranty. The matter is pending in the London High
Stock Repurchases
Court with trial beginning in January 2020.
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM
common stock. The company repurchased 9,979,516 common
In May 2015, a putative class action was commenced in the
shares at a cost of $1,331 million, 32,949,233 common shares at
United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
a cost of $4,447 million, and 27,237,179 common shares at a cost
related to the company’s October 2014 announcement that it
of $4,323 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. These
was divesting its global commercial semiconductor technology
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of
business, alleging violations of the Employee Retirement
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares
Income Security Act (ERISA). Management’s Retirement
may differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions.
Plans Committee and three current or former IBM executives
At December 31, 2019, $2,008 million of Board common stock
are named as defendants. On September 29, 2017, the Court
repurchase authorization was available. The company suspended
granted the defendants’ motion to dismiss the first amended
its share repurchase program effective with the close of the Red
complaint. On December 10, 2018, the Second Circuit Court of
Hat acquisition on July 9, 2019, in order to focus on reducing debt
Appeals reversed the District Court order. On January 14, 2020,
related to the acquisition.
the Supreme Court of the United States vacated the decision and
remanded the case to the Second Circuit.
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings
part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under
purchase plan: 4,569,917 shares in 2019, 3,998,245 shares
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation
in 2018, and 4,311,998 shares in 2017. The company issued
and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws
2,041,347 treasury shares in 2019, 424,589 treasury shares in
similar to CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible
2018 and 463,083 treasury shares in 2017, as a result of restricted
parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of
stock unit releases and exercises of stock options by employees of
fault or ownership of sites. The company is also conducting
certain acquired businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as
environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at or
part of the company’s stock-based compensation plans, 2,000,704
in the vicinity of several current or former operating sites globally
common shares at a cost of $272 million, 1,173,416 common
pursuant to permits, administrative orders or agreements with
shares at a cost of $171 million, and 1,226,080 common shares
country, state or local environmental agencies, and is involved
at a cost of $193 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively,
in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or former
were remitted by employees to the company in order to satisfy
operating sites.
minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. These amounts
are included in the treasury stock balance in the Consolidated
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and
Balance Sheet and the Consolidated Statement of Equity.
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with
many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company
is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities
regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income tax

===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2019: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (39) $ 29 $ (10)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 1 $ 0 $ 1
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 1 $ 0 $ 1
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (689) $ 167 $ (522)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (68) 17 (50)
Cost of sales (51) 15 (37)
Cost of financing 89 (22) 67
SG&A expense (53) 14 (39)
Other (income) and expense (39) 10 (29)
Interest expense 197 (50) 148
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (614) $ 151 $ (463)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (73) $ 10 $ (63)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (120) 52 (68)
Curtailments and settlements 41 (12) 29
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (9) 5 (4)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,843 (371) 1,471
Total retirement-related benefit plans $1,681 $(316) $1,365
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $1,029 $(136) $ 893
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.

===== PAGE 119 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2018: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (730) $(172) $ (902)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (2) $ 1 $ (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (2) $ 1 $ (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (136 ) $ 43 $ (93)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (30) 8 (22)
Cost of sales (8) 3 (5)
Cost of financing 75 (19) 56
SG&A expense 0 0 0
Other (income) and expense 341 (86) 255
Interest expense 71 (18) 53
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 313 $ (69) $ 244
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (182) $ 31 $ (151)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (2,517) 576 (1,941)
Curtailments and settlements 11 (2) 9
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (73) 5 (68)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,966 (632) 2,334
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 204 $ (21) $ 184
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (215) $(262) $ (476)
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.

===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2017: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 152 $ 617 $ 769
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 1 $ (1) $ 0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense 1 0 1
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 2 $ (1) $ 1
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (58 ) $ 0 $ (58)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (70) 27 (43)
Cost of sales (3) 1 (3)
Cost of financing 23 (9) 14
SG&A expense (11) 3 (9)
Other (income) and expense (324) 124 (199)
Interest expense 22 (8) 13
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (421) $ 137 $ (284)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 682 (201) 481
Curtailments and settlements 19 (5) 14
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (88) 29 (58)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,889 (1,006) 1,883
Total retirement-related benefit plans $3,502 $(1,182) $2,320
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $3,235 $ (429) $2,806
(1) These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for
additional information.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Net Change Gains/(Losses ) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses ) Currency Retirement- on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Related For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments* Benefit Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2016 $ 319 $(3,603) $(26,116) $ 2 $(29,398)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (58) 769 495 0 1,206
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (226) 0 1,825 1 1,599
Total change for the period (284) 769 2,320 1 2,806
December 31, 2017 35 (2,834) (23,796) 3 (26,592)
Cumulative effect of a change in accounting principle** 5 46 (2,471) (2) (2,422)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (93) (902) (2,092) (1) (3,089)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income 337 — 2,276 — 2,612
Total change for the period 244 (902) 184 (1) (476)
December 31, 2018 284 (3,690) (26,083) 0 (29,490)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (522) (10) (131) 1 (663)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income 59 — 1,496 — 1,556
Total change for the period (463) (10) 1,365 1 893
December 31, 2019 $(179) $(3,700) $(24,718) $ 0 $(28,597)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
** Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on stranded tax effects, hedging and financial instruments. Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for
additional information.

===== PAGE 121 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE T. DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt
is a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use instruments
the normal course of business, the company is exposed to the such as forward starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on
impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, the interest payments related to the forecasted debt issuances.
and to a lesser extent equity and commodity price changes and On May 15, 2019, the company issued an aggregate of $20
client credit risk. The company limits these risks by following billion of indebtedness (see note P, “Borrowings,” for additional
established risk management policies and procedures, including information). Following the receipt of the net proceeds from this
the use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt offering, the company terminated $5.5 billion of forward
debt in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For starting interest-rate swaps. These instruments were designated
interest rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align and accounted for as cash flow hedges for a portion of this issuance
rate movements between the interest rates associated with the and hedged exposure to the variability in future cash flows over
company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest rates a maximum of 30 years. These swaps were the only instruments
associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to outstanding under this program at December 31, 2018, and there
manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, were no instruments outstanding at December 31, 2019.
derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility
arising from foreign exchange rate fluctuations. In connection with cash flow hedges of forecasted interest
payments related to the company’s borrowings, the company
In the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the company does not offset recorded net losses of $192 million and net losses of $35 million
derivative assets against liabilities in master netting arrangements (before taxes) at December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, in
nor does it offset receivables or payables recognized upon AOCI. The company estimates that $18 million (before taxes)
payment or receipt of cash collateral against the fair values of the of the deferred net losses on derivatives in AOCI at December
related derivative instruments. The amount recognized in other 31, 2019 will be reclassified to net income within the next 12
receivables for the right to reclaim cash collateral was $26 million months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the
at December 31, 2019 and no amount was recognized at December underlying anticipated transactions.
31, 2018. No amount was recognized in accounts payable for the
obligation to return cash collateral at December 31, 2019 and Foreign Exchange Risk
$70 million was recognized at December 31, 2018. The company Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries
restricts the use of cash collateral received to rehypothecation, (Net Investment)
and therefore reports it in restricted cash in the Consolidated A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated
Balance Sheet. No amount was rehypothecated at December debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in
31, 2019 and 2018. Additionally, if derivative exposures covered foreign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’
by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in
Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2019 and 2018, the the functional currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect
total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been to the U.S. dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps
reduced by $194 million and $267 million, respectively. and foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk management
purpose. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the total notional
In its hedging programs, the company may use forward contracts, amount of derivative instruments designated as net investment
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps, hedges was $7.9 billion and $6.4 billion, respectively. At
equity swaps, and options depending upon the underlying exposure. December 31, 2019 and 2018, the weighted-average remaining
The company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments. maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.1 years and
0.2 years, respectively.
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized
by underlying risk, follows. Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional
Interest Rate Risk currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings payments for royalties and goods and services among the
The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the company. In
its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective anticipation of these foreign currency cash flows and in view of
financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively
underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce employs foreign exchange forward contracts to manage its
overall interest cost, the company may use interest-rate swaps currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as
to convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which the
debt (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future
debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the
December 31, 2019 and 2018, the total notional amount of the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash
company’s interest-rate swaps was $3.0 billion and $7.6 billion, flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was
respectively. The weighted-average remaining maturity of these $9.7 billion and $9.8 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2019
instruments at December 31, 2019 and 2018 was approximately and 2018, the weighted-average remaining maturity of these
2.2 years and 3.5 years, respectively. These interest-rate instruments was approximately 0.8 years at both periods.
contracts were accounted for as fair value hedges. The company
did not have any cash flow hedges relating to this program
outstanding at December 31, 2019 and 2018.

===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, in connection with cash Equity Risk Management
flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad
company recorded net gains of $145 million and net gains of market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
$342 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. The company certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of
estimates that $72 million (before taxes) of deferred net gains these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2019 will be reclassified expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Although not
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions. including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the
exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign indices or the total return on the company’s common stock, and are
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. At December 31,
currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in 2019 and 2018, the total notional amount of derivative instruments
the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are in economic hedges of these compensation obligations was $1.3
accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
over which the company has hedged its exposure to the variability
in future cash flows is approximately 12 years. At December 31, Cumulative Basis Adjustments for Fair Value Hedges
2019 and 2018, the total notional amount of cross-currency At December 31, 2019 and 2018, the following amounts were
swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet related to cumulative
denominated debt was $8.2 billion and $6.5 billion, respectively. basis adjustments for fair value hedges:
At December 31, 2019 and 2018, in connection with cash ($ in millions)
flow hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the At December 31: 2019 2018
company recorded net losses of $185 million and net gains of Short-term debt
$75 million (before taxes), respectively, in AOCI. The company
Carrying amount of the hedged item $ — $(1,878)
estimates that $166 million (before taxes) of deferred net gains
Cumulative hedging adjustments
on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2019 will be reclassified
included in the carrying amount—
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting assets/(liabilities) — (4)(1)
economic impact against the underlying exposure.
Long-term debt
Carrying amount of the hedged item (3,411) (6,004)
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency
Cumulative hedging adjustments
Asset/Liability Management
included in the carrying amount—
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the
assets/(liabilities) (440)(2) (333)(2)
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In (1) Includes ($6) million of hedging adjustments on discontinued hedging
addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts relationships at December 31, 2018.
to economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency (2) Includes ($404) million and ($213) million of hedging adjustments on
discontinued hedging relationships at December 31, 2019 and 2018,
exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency
respectively.
assets and liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap
contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the fair
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the
values of these contracts and of the underlying hedged exposures
Consolidated Income Statement
are generally offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and
The total amounts of income and expense line items presented
expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. At December
in the Consolidated Income Statement in which the effects of
31, 2019 and 2018, the total notional amount of derivative
fair value hedges, cash flow hedges, net investment hedges and
instruments in economic hedges of foreign currency exposure
derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are recorded
was $7.1 billion and $5.2 billion, respectively.
and the total effect of hedge activity on these income and
expense line items are as follows:
($ in millions)
Gains/(Losses) of
Total Total Hedge Activity
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2019 2018
Cost of services $32,491 $33,687 * $ 68 $ 30
Cost of sales 7,263 7,835* 51 8
Cost of financing 904 1,132 (42) (6)
SG&A expense 20,604 19,366 267 (116)
Other (income) and expense (968) 1,152 (15) (434)
Interest expense 1,344 723 (93) (6)
* Reclassified to conform to 2019 presentation.

===== PAGE 123 =====
122 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement
Attributable to Risk
Consolidated Recognized on Derivatives Being Hedged (2)
Income Statement
For the year ended December 31: Line Item 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (1)
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $ 44 $ (61) $ 1 $ (32) $ 97 $ 74
Interest expense 98 (58) 1 (71) 92 69
Derivative instruments not designated
as hedging instruments
Other (income )
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (53) (93) 16 N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 214 (116) 135 N/A N/A N/A
Total $302 $(327) $153 $(103) $189 $144
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement and Other Comprehensive Income
Amounts Excluded from
Recognized in OCI Consolidated Reclassified from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
For the year ended Income Statement
December 31: 2019 2018 2017 Line Item 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Derivative instruments
in cash flow hedges
Interest rate
contracts $(168) $ (35)$ — Cost of financing $ (3) $ — $ — $ — $ — $ —
Interest expense (8) — — — — —
Foreign exchange
contracts (521) (101) (58) Cost of services 68 30 70 — — —
Cost of sales 51 8 3 — — —
Cost of financing (86) (75) (23) — — —
SG&A expense 53 0 11 — — —
Other (income)
and expense 39 (341) 324 — — 1
Interest expense (190) (71) (22) — — —
Instruments in net
investment hedges (4)
Foreign exchange
contracts (95) 686 (1,607) Cost of financing — — — 35 33 23
Interest expense — — — 77 31 21
Total $(784) $ 549 $(1,665) $ (75) $(449) $363 $112 $64 $45
Gain or loss amounts and presentation for 2017 are not conformed to the new hedge accounting guidance that the company adopted in 2018.
Refer to note B, “Accounting Changes,” for further information.
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for
coupon payments required under these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(3) T he company’s policy is to recognize all fair value changes in amounts excluded from effectiveness testing in net income each period.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
N/A—Not applicable
For the years ending December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, there associated with an underlying exposure that did not or was not
were no material gains or losses excluded from the assessment expected to occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any
of hedge effectiveness (for fair value or cash flow hedges), or anticipated in the normal course of business.

===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE U. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION Incentive Awards
The following table presents total stock-based compensation Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees
cost included in income from continuing operations. under the terms of the company’s long-term performance
plans (the Plans). The Plans are administered by the Executive
($ in millions) Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 Board of Directors. Awards available under the Plans principally
Cost $ 100 $ 82 $ 91 include restricted stock units, performance share units, stock
options or any combination thereof.
Selling, general and
administrative 453 361 384
There were 273 million shares originally authorized to be
Research, development
and engineering 126 67 59 awarded under the company’s existing Plans and 66 million
shares granted under previous plans that, if and when those
Pre-tax stock-based
compensation cost 679 510 534 awards were cancelled, could be reissued under the existing
Plans. At December 31, 2019, 94 million unused shares were
Income tax benefits (155) (116) (131)
available to be granted.
Net stock-based
compensation cost $ 524 $ 393 $ 403
Stock Awards
Stock awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock Units
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), or
awards at December 31, 2019 was $1.2 billion and is expected to Performance Share Units (PSUs).
be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately
2.5 years. The following table summarizes RSU and PSU activity under the
Plans during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
Capitalized stock-based compensation cost was not material at
December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
RSUs PSUs
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
Grant Price Number of Units Grant Price Number of Units
Balance at January 1, 2017 $147 8,899,092 $155 2,874,758
Awards granted 137 3,540,949 137 824,875
Awards released 153 (3,032,531) 175 (293,236)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 147 (852,247) 170 (757,084)*
Balance at December 31, 2017 $141 8,555,263 $144 2,649,313**
Awards granted 121 4,806,790 130 909,140
Awards released 148 (2,579,962) 152 (666,244)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 139 (979,387) 147 (472,514)*
Balance at December 31, 2018 $130 9,802,704 $136 2,419,695**
Awards granted 119 5,650,861 117 1,395,534
Awards released 136 (3,145,016) 140 (846,672)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 128 (981,921) 131 (112,107)*
Balance at December 31, 2019 $123 11,326,628 $126 2,856,450**
* Includes adjustments of (8,544), (328,120) and (623,245) PSUs for 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively, because final performance metrics
were above or below specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares
issued will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.

===== PAGE 125 =====
124 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The total fair value of RSUs and PSUs granted and vested during Acquisitions
the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 were as In connection with the acquisition of Red Hat, the company
follows: issued and assumed 6.4 million stock awards with a fair value
of $845 million. A share conversion ratio of 1.35 was applied
($ in millions) to convert Red Hat’s outstanding equity awards for Red Hat’s
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 common stock into IBM stock awards. At December 31, 2019,
RSUs there were 4.6 million of these stock awards outstanding with a
weighted-average grant price of $140 per share.
Granted $674 $583 $484
Vested 428 381 463
In connection with various other acquisition transactions,
PSUs
there was an additional 0.1 million stock options outstanding
Granted $164 $118 $113 at December 31, 2019, as a result of the company’s conversion
Vested 118 101 51 of stock-based awards previously granted by acquired entities.
The weighted-average exercise price of these awards was $43
per share.
As of December 31, 2019, there was $1.1 billion of unrecognized
compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs, which will be
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
recognized on a straight-line basis over the remaining weighted-
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock
average contractual term of approximately 2.5 years.
Purchase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to
purchase shares of IBM common stock at a 5 percent discount
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the tax
off the average market price on the day of purchase through
benefits realized by the company for the years ended December
payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensation.
31, 2019, 2018 and 2017 were $131 million, $117 million and
Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by
$180 million, respectively.
the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for semi-annual
offering periods during which shares may be purchased and
Stock Options
continues as long as shares remain available under the ESPP,
In 2016, the company made one grant of 1.5 million premium-
unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors.
priced stock options. The option award was granted with a
Individual ESPP participants are restricted from purchasing more
three-year cliff vesting period and a 10-year contractual term.
than $25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000
The award’s cost of $12 million was recognized ratably over the
shares in an offering period.
three-year vesting period. As of December 31, 2019, these options
were vested with a weighted-average exercise price of $140 per
Employees purchased approximately 1.0 million shares under
share and had a remaining weighted-average contractual life of
the ESPP during each year ended December 31, 2019, 2018
approximately 6.1 years. The options were exercisable within a
and 2017. Cash dividends declared and paid by the company on
range of $129 to $154. The total intrinsic value of these vested
its common stock also include cash dividends on the company
options as of December 31, 2019 was $1.9 million.
stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are paid on full
and fractional shares and can be reinvested. The company
The company has not granted options since 2016. No stock
stock purchased through the ESPP is considered outstanding
options were exercised, forfeited or canceled during the years
and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares for
ended December 31, 2019 and 2018. The total intrinsic value
purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
of options exercised during the year ended December 31, 2017
was $7 million. In connection with this exercise, $11 million in
Approximately 18.8 million shares were available for purchase
cash was received from employees and the company realized a
under the ESPP at December 31, 2019.
tax benefit of $2 million.
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily
with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with
treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2019
and 2018 were approximately 1,351 million and 1,341 million
shares, respectively.

===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 125
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE V. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors the following retirement-related plans/benefits:
Plan Eligibility Funding Benefit Calculation Other
U.S. Defined Qualified Personal U.S. regular, full- Company contributes Vary based on the Benefit accruals
Benefit (DB) Pension Plan time and part-time to irrevocable trust fund, participant: ceased December 31,
Pension Plans (PPP) employees hired held for sole benefit Five-year, final pay formula 2007
prior to January 1, of participants and
based on salary, years of
2005 beneficiaries
service, mortality and other
participant-specific factors
Excess Personal Unfunded, provides Cash balance formula
Pension Plan benefits in excess of based on percentage of
(PPP) IRS limitations for employees’ annual salary,
qualified plans as well as an interest
crediting rate
Supplemental Eligible U.S. Unfunded Based on average earnings,
Executive executives years of service and age at
Retention Plan termination of employment
(Retention Plan)
U.S. Defined 401(k) Plus U.S. regular, All contributions are Dollar-for-dollar match, Employees generally
Contribution full-time and part- made in cash and generally 5 or 6 percent of receive contributions
(DC) Plans (1) time employees invested in accordance eligible compensation and after one year of
with participants’ automatic matching of 1, service
investment elections 2 or 4 percent of eligible
compensation, depending on
date of hire
Excess 401(k) U.S. employees Unfunded, non- Company match and Employees generally
Plus whose eligible qualified amounts automatic contributions receive contributions
compensation is deferred are record- (at the same rate under after one year of
expected to exceed keeping (notional) 401(k) Plus Plan) on eligible service. Amounts
IRS compensation accounts and are not compensation deferred and deferred into the Plan,
limit for qualified held in trust for the on compensation earned including company
plans participants, but may be in excess of the IRC pay contributions, are
invested in accordance limit. The percentage varies recorded as liabilities
with participants’ depending on eligibility and
investment elections years of service
(under the 401 (k)
Plus Plan options)
U.S. Nonpension Medical and dental Company contributes Varies based on plan design Since January 1,
Nonpension Postretirement benefits for eligible to irrevocable trust formulas and eligibility 2004, new hires
Postretirement Plan U.S. retirees and fund, held for the sole requirements are not eligible for
Benefit Plan eligible dependents, benefit of participants these benefits
as well as life and beneficiaries
insurance for eligible
U.S. retirees
Non-U.S. Plans DB or DC Eligible regular Company deposits Based either on years of In certain countries,
employees in certain funds under various service and the employee’s benefit accruals
non-U.S. subsidiaries fiduciary-type compensation (generally have ceased and/or
or branches arrangements, during a fixed number of have been closed to
purchases annuities years immediately before new hires as of
under group contracts retirement) or on annual various dates
or provides reserves credits
for these plans
Nonpension Medical and dental Primarily unfunded Varies based on plan design Most non-U.S.
Postretirement benefits for eligible except for a few select formulas and eligibility retirees are covered
Plan non-U.S. retirees and countries where the requirements by country by local government
eligible dependents, company contributes to sponsored and
as well as life irrevocable trust funds, administered
insurance for certain held for the sole benefit programs
eligible non-U.S. of participants and
retirees beneficiaries
(1) Matching and automatic contributions are made once at the end of the year for employees that are employed as of December 15 of the plan year.
Contributions may be made for certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15.

===== PAGE 127 =====
126 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the
Consolidated Income Statement.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Defined benefit pension plans $(153) $ 542 $ 237 $ 955 $1,284 $1,315 $ 803 $1,827 $1,552
Retention Plan 11 17 16 — — — 11 17 16
Total defined benefit pension
plans (income)/cost $(142) $ 559 $ 253 $ 955 $1,284 $1,315 $ 813 $1,843 $1,568
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and
non-U.S. plans $ 588 $ 588 $ 616 $ 427 $ 412 $ 404 $1,015 $1,000 $1,020
Excess 401(k) 26 24 26 — — — 26 24 26
Total defined contribution
plans cost $ 613 $ 612 $ 643 $ 427 $ 412 $ 404 $1,040 $1,024 $1,046
Nonpension postretirement
benefit plans cost $ 154 $ 147 $ 180 $ 65 $ 51 $ 62 $ 219 $ 198 $ 242
Total retirement-related
benefits net periodic cost $ 624 $1,319 $1,076 $1,448 $1,747 $1,781 $2,072 $3,066 $2,857
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement
benefit plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $48,471 $46,145 $51,784 $48,213 $ 3,313 $ 2,069
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,473 $ 1,395 $ — $ — $ (1,473) $ (1,395)
Retention Plan 288 273 — — (288) (273)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 3,857 3,912 3 29 (3,854) (3,882)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 5,618 $ 5,579 $ 3 $ 29 $ (5,615) $ (5,550)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans** $18,371 $17,379 $21,921 $19,975 $ 3,550 $ 2,597
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 19 0 21 0 2 0
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $18,390 $17,379 $21,942 $19,975 $ 3,552 $ 2,597
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans** $23,222 $22,139 $18,398 $16,783 $ (4,824) $ (5,356)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans 6,731 6,252 — — (6,731) (6,252)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 828 704 44 65 (785) (640)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $30,782 $29,095 $18,442 $16,848 $(12,340) $(12,248)
Total overfunded plans $66,861 $63,524 $73,726 $68,190 $ 6,865 $ 4,666
Total underfunded plans $36,399 $34,675 $18,445 $16,877 $(17,955) $(17,798)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as
compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
** Non-U.S. qualified plans represent plans funded outside of the U.S. Non-U.S. nonqualified plans are unfunded.

===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 127
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2019, the company’s qualified defined benefit excluding defined contribution plans. The defined benefit
pension plans worldwide were 102 percent funded compared to pension plans under U.S. Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the
the benefit obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 107 percent Excess PPP and the Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension
funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s plans and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under
defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 93 percent funded. non-U.S. Plans consists of all plans sponsored by the company’s
subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. Nonpension Postretirement
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information Benefit Plan.
The following tables through page 129 represent financial
information for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
The following tables present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the
Consolidated Income Statement, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 370 $ 413 $ 410
Interest cost (1) 1,882 1,719 1,913 847 830 837
Expected return on plan assets (1) (2,599) (2,701) (3,014) (1,588) (1,342) (1,325)
Amortization of transition assets (1) — — — 0 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (1) 16 16 16 (23) (83) (97)
Recognized actuarial losses (1) 559 1,525 1,337 1,249 1,401 1,507
Curtailments and settlements (1) — — — 41 11 19
Multi-employer plans — — — 32 38 40
Other costs/(credits) (2) — — — 28 16 (76)
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ (142) $ 559 $ 253 $ 955 $ 1,284 $ 1,315
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Service cost $ 10 $ 13 $ 14 $ 5 $ 5 $ 6
Interest cost (1) 145 132 154 55 45 57
Expected return on plan assets (1) — 0 0 (5) (6) (7)
Amortization of transition assets (1) — — — — 0 0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (1) (2) (7) (7) 0 0 0
Recognized actuarial losses (1) 1 10 20 10 6 7
Curtailments and settlements (1) — — — 0 0 0
Total net periodic cost $154 $147 $180 $65 $51 $62
(1) These components of net periodic pension costs are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
(2) The non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans amount in 2017 includes a gain of $91 million related to IBM UK pension litigation.
For the U.S. Qualified PPP, beginning in 2019, substantially all participants are considered inactive. The amortization period of
unrecognized actuarial losses was changed to the average remaining life expectancy of inactive plan participants, which was 18 years
as of December 31, 2018. As a result, there was a reduction to 2019 amortization expense of approximately $900 million. There was
no impact to the funded status, retiree benefit payments or funding requirements.

===== PAGE 129 =====
128 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
excluding DC plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $47,812 $52,444 $45,770 $49,111 $ 3,912 $ 4,184 $ 705 $ 732
Service cost — — 370 413 10 13 5 5
Interest cost 1,882 1,719 847 830 145 132 55 45
Plan participants’ contributions — — 23 25 57 59 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (32) (27) — 0 0 0
Actuarial losses/(gains) 4,040 (2,743) 3,467 (240) 148 (71) 141 43
Benefits paid from trust (3,378) (3,484) (1,902) (1,976) (389) (383) (6) (7)
Direct benefit payments (124) (124) (403) (390) (6) (22) (27) (31)
Foreign exchange impact — — 134 (2,012) — — (1) (86)
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — 50 34 (21) — (23) 3
Benefit obligation at December 31 $50,232 $47,812 $48,324 $45,770 $ 3,857 $ 3,912 $ 848 $ 705
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $48,213 $52,694 $36,758 $40,798 $ 29 $ 18 $ 65 $ 70
Actual return on plan assets 6,949 (997) 4,896 (610) 1 1 7 12
Employer contributions — — 243 325 304 335 — 0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (25) (22) — 0 — 0
Plan participants’ contributions — — 23 25 57 59 — 0
Benefits paid from trust (3,378) (3,484) (1,902) (1,976) (389) (383) (6) (7)
Foreign exchange impact — — 333 (1,754) — — (1) (10)
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other — — (7) (28) — 0 0 0
Fair value of plan assets
at December 31 $51,784 $48,213 $40,319 $36,758 $ 3 $ 29 $ 65 $ 65
Funded status at December 31 $ 1,551 $ 401 $ (8,005) $ (9,012) $(3,854) $(3,882) $(783) $(640)
Accumulated benefit obligation* $50,232 $47,812 $47,645 $45,161 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 129
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018
Prepaid pension assets $ 3,313 $ 2,069 $ 3,550 $ 2,597 $ 0 $ 0 $ 2 $ 0
Current liabilities—
compensation and benefits (120) (120) (313) (302) (346) (340) (33) (36)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement
and nonpension postretirement
benefit obligations (1,641) (1,548) (11,242) (11,306) (3,507) (3,542) (752) (605)
Funded status—net $ 1,551 $ 401 $ (8,005) $ (9,012) $(3,854) $(3,882) $(783) $(640)
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in
OCI and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the
retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018 2019 2018
Net loss at January 1 $17,476 $18,045 $18,452 $18,275 $405 $486 $172 $145
Current period loss/(gain) (309) 956 109 1,590 147 (72) 125 33
Curtailments and settlements — — (41) (11) — — 0 0
Amortization of net loss included in
net periodic (income)/cost (559) (1,525) (1,249) (1,401) (1) (10) (10) (6)
Net loss at December 31 $16,608 $17,476 $17,272 $18,452 $551 $405 $287 $172
Prior service costs/(credits)
at January 1 $ 57 $ 74 $ 172 $ (90) $ 52 $ 45 $ 4 $ 3
Current period prior service
costs/(credits) — — 102 181 (21) — (8) 1
Curtailments, settlements
and other — — — 0 — — — 0
Amortization of prior service
(costs)/credits included in
net periodic (income)/cost (16) (16) 23 83 2 7 0 0
Prior service costs/(credits)
at December 31 $ 41 $ 57 $ 297 $ 172 $ 34 $ 52 $ (4) $ 4
Transition (assets)/liabilities
at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition
assets/(liabilities) included in
net periodic (income)/cost — — 0 — — — — 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities
at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in
accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss)* $16,648 $17,533 $17,569 $18,624 $585 $457 $283 $176
* Refer to note S, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.

===== PAGE 131 =====
130 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On October 26, 2018, the High Court in London in the case of Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Lloyds Pension Group Trustees Limited v Lloyds Bank PLC, Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net
confirmed that the UK defined benefit pension plans are required periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
to equalize pension benefits to take into account unequal use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years
guaranteed minimum pension benefits accrued during the period of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant
1990-1997. As a result of this court decision, IBM recorded an of which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on
increase of $125 million to the PBO for the IBM UK defined plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting
benefit plan, which represents approximately 1 percent of the rates and mortality rates. The company evaluates these
UK PBO. This amount was recorded as prior service cost in OCI assumptions, at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as
for the year ended December 31, 2018. necessary.
The following tables present the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations
for retirement-related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Weighted-average assumptions used
to measure net periodic (income)/cost
for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 4.10% 3.40% 3.80% 1.85% 1.76% 1.80%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets 5.25% 5.25% 5.75% 4.38% 3.62% 3.77%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.18% 2.41% 2.45%
Interest crediting rate 3.60% 2.30% 1.60% 0.30% 0.30% 0.59%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 3.10% 4.10% 3.40% 1.19% 1.85% 1.76%
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 2.60% 2.18% 2.41%
Interest crediting rate 2.70% 3.60% 2.30% 0.28% 0.30% 0.30%
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2019 2018 2017 2019 2018 2017
Weighted-average assumptions used
to measure net periodic cost for the
year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.90% 3.30% 3.60% 7.48% 7.28% 8.26%
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 8.64% 8.91% 10.47%
Interest crediting rate 3.60% 2.30% 1.60% N/A N/A N/A
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
benefit obligations at December 31
Discount rate 2.80% 3.90% 3.30% 4.98% 7.48% 7.28%
Interest crediting rate 2.70% 3.60% 2.30% N/A N/A N/A
N/A—Not applicable

===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 131
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Item Description of Assumptions
Discount Rate Changes in discount rate assumptions impact net periodic (income)/cost and the PBO.
For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds is used to
construct a yield curve. Cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation payments are
matched to the yield curve to derive the discount rates.
In other non-U.S. countries where the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not as well
developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used as a base, and a credit spread is added to
simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan. This is the
benchmark for developing the respective discount rates.
Expected Represents the expected long-term returns on plan assets based on the calculated market-related value
Long-Term of plan assets and considers long-term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and
Returns on strategies discussed on page 132. These rates of return are developed and tested for reasonableness
Plan Assets against historical returns by the company.
The use of expected returns may result in pension income that is greater or less than the actual return
of those plan assets in a given year. Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed to
approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income or loss recognition
that more closely matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees.
The difference between actual and expected returns is recognized as a component of net loss or gain
in AOCI, which is amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life
expectancy of the plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain
thresholds provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of plan assets recognizes
changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return
on plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost.
The projected long-term rate of return on plan assets for 2020 is 4.5% for U.S. and 3.4% for
non-U.S. DB Plans.
Rate of Compensation rate increases are determined based on the company’s long-term plans for such increases.
Compensation These rate increases are not applicable to the U.S. DB pension plans as benefit accruals ceased
Increases December 31, 2007.
and Mortality
Mortality assumptions are based on life expectancy and death rates for different types of
Assumptions
participants and are periodically updated based on actual experience.
Interest Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a cash balance formula. An assumption
Crediting Rate underlying this formula is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/cost and
the PBO. This provides the basis for projecting the expected interest rate that plan participants will earn
on the benefits that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based on the average from
August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
Healthcare For nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company reviews external data and its own historical
Cost Trend trends for healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. The healthcare cost trend rate
Rate has an insignificant effect on plan costs or the benefit obligation due to the terms of the plan which
limit the company’s obligation to the participants.
The company’s U.S. healthcare cost trend rate assumption for 2020 is 6.50 percent. The company assumes
that trend rate will decrease to 5.0 percent over the next six years.
The following tables present the increase/(decrease) in net periodic income and benefit obligations as a result of changes in
plan assumptions.
($ in millions) ($ in millions)
Net Periodic Income Benefit Obligations
For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018 2017 At December 31: 2019 2018
Discount rate (U.S. DB Discount rate impact
pension plans) $307 $(124) $ (64) PBO (U.S. DB pension plans) $4,385 $(3,239)
Expected long-term return on APBO (U.S. nonpension plans) 252 (153)
plan assets (U.S. DB
Benefit obligations (all plans) 8,932 (4,032)
pension plans) — (256) (656)
Mortality assumptions impact
Interest crediting rate (PPP) (59) (25) (14)
PBO (U.S. DB and nonpension plans) (186) 27

===== PAGE 133 =====
132 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Assets Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $4,043 million
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2019 invested
measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of in private market assets consisting of private equities and private
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $1,347
transactions. million in commitments for future investments in private markets
to be made over a number of years. These commitments are
Investment Policies and Strategies expected to be funded from plan assets.
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
obligations will be settled depends on future events, including the strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. fixed income management, including duration, interest rate
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors manage currency strategies.
described previously on page 131. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s
investment strategy balances the requirement to generate Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to
returns, using potentially higher yielding assets such as equity those described previously, subject to local regulations. The
securities, with the need to control risk in the portfolio with less weighted-average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is
volatile assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, 20 percent equity securities, 71 percent fixed-income securities,
among others, inflation, volatility in equity values and changes in 3 percent real estate and 6 percent other investments, which is
interest rates that could cause the plan to become underfunded, consistent with the allocation decisions made by the company’s
thereby increasing its dependence on contributions from the management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation
company. To mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful to fixed income is required to manage solvency and funding
consideration is given to balancing the portfolio among industry risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments
sectors, companies and geographies, taking into account interest typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent of
rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, currency and members elected by employees and retirees. This can result
other factors that affect investment returns. There were no in slight differences compared with the strategies previously
significant changes to investment strategy made in 2019 and described. Generally, these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid
none are planned for 2020. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s target assets and their use of derivatives is consistent with the U.S. plan
allocation is 12 percent equity securities, 80 percent fixed-income and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management,
securities, 4 percent real estate and 4 percent other investments. credit exposure and alternative investment strategies.
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans
investment professionals who are employees of the company. are underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company
They are bound by investment mandates determined by the maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure
company’s management and are measured against specific timely benefit payments.
benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given,
but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer
concentration, investment style and reliance on particular active
and passive investment strategies.

===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 133
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2019. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $1,943 $ — $ — $ 1,943 $2,209 $ 0 $ — $ 2,209
Equity mutual funds (2) 85 — — 85 — — — —
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 21,134 — 21,134 — 10,288 2 10,290
Corporate bonds (4) — 16,666 518 17,185 — 2,124 — 2,124
Mortgage and asset-backed
securities — 630 — 630 — 19 — 19
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 386 — — 386 — — — —
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,862 — 1,862
Cash and short-term investments (6) 54 848 — 903 204 644 — 849
Real estate — — — — — — 328 328
Derivatives (7) 0 6 — 6 18 969 — 987
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 25 0 — 25
Subtotal 2,469 39,284 518 42,271 2,456 15,907 330 18,693
Investments measured at net
asset value using the NAV
practical expedient (9) — — — 9,519 — — — 21,653
Other (10) — — — (6) — — — (26)
Fair value of plan assets $2,469 $39,284 $518 $51,784 $2,456 $15,907 $330 $40,319
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $2 million, representing 0.004 percent of the
U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $10 million, representing 0.02 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) I ncludes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $37 million, representing 0.07 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include
IBM corporate bonds of $8 million, representing 0.02 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(5) I nvests predominantly in fixed income securities.
(6) I ncludes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7) I ncludes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(9) I nvestments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical e xpedient, including
commingled funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(10) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $3 Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were
million were invested primarily in cash equivalents, categorized invested primarily in government and related fixed-income
as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the
postretirement benefit plan assets of $65 million, primarily in fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 135 =====
134 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31,
2018. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $1,538 $ — $ — $ 1,538 $2,333 $ — $ 0 $ 2,333
Equity mutual funds (2) 65 — — 65 18 5 — 23
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 19,661 — 19,661 20 8,951 2 8,973
Corporate bonds (4) — 15,849 359 16,208 — 1,865 0 1,865
Mortgage and asset-backed
securities — 635 4 640 — 6 — 6
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 421 — — 421 11 — — 11
Insurance contracts — — — — — 1,308 — 1,308
Cash and short-term investments (6) 55 1,020 — 1,075 322 431 — 753
Real estate — — — — — — 339 339
Derivatives (7) 3 (1) — 2 24 606 — 630
Other mutual funds (8) — — — — 24 — — 24
Subtotal 2,081 37,164 363 39,608 2,753 13,172 341 16,266
Investments measured at net
asset value using the NAV
practical expedient (9) — — — 8,835 — — — 20,525
Other (10) — — — (230) — — — (32)
Fair value of plan assets $2,081 $37,164 $363 $48,213 $2,753 $13,172 $341 $36,758
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $2 million, representing 0.004 percent of the
U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $10 million, representing 0.03 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) I ncludes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plan does not include any IBM corporate bonds. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $3 million, representing
0.007 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(5) I nvests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(6) I ncludes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(7) I ncludes interest rate derivatives, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(8) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(9) I nvestments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including
commingled funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(10) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were
$29 million were invested in cash equivalents, categorized as invested primarily in government and related fixed-income
Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the
postretirement benefit plan assets of $65 million, primarily in fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 135
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2019 and 2018 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Mortgage and
Corporate Asset-Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2019 $359 $ 4 $363
Return on assets held at end of year 40 — 40
Return on assets sold during the year 1 0 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 105 0 105
Transfers, net 13 (4) 9
Balance at December 31, 2019 $518 $ — $518
($ in millions)
Mortgage and
Corporate Asset-Backed
Bonds Securities Total
Balance at January 1, 2018 $372 $4 $376
Return on assets held at end of year (23) 0 (23)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 0 0
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 10 0 10
Transfers, net — 0 0
Balance at December 31, 2018 $359 $4 $363
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2019 and 2018 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government and Private Real
Related Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2019 $ 2 $339 $341
Return on assets held at end of year 0 (11) (11)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 4 4
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (1) (17) (18)
Transfers, net — — —
Foreign exchange impact 0 13 13
Balance at December 31, 2019 $ 2 $328 $330
($ in millions)
Government and Private Real
Related Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2018 $ 8 $356 $365
Return on assets held at end of year 0 8 8
Return on assets sold during the year (1) (2) (2)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (3) (3) (6)
Transfers, net (2) — (2)
Foreign exchange impact 0 (21) (21)
Balance at December 31, 2018 $ 2 $339 $341

===== PAGE 137 =====
136 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Valuation Techniques Contributions and Direct Benefit Payments
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth
valuation techniques during 2019 and 2018. in applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From
time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the deems appropriate.
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New The following table presents the contributions made to the
York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued based non-U.S. DB plans, nonpension postretirement benefit plans,
on quoted market prices. These assets are generally classified multi-employer plans, DC plans and direct payments for 2019
as Level 1. and 2018. The cash contributions to the multi-employer plans
represent the annual cost included in the net periodic (income)/
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated cost recognized in the Consolidated Income Statement. The
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally impact on the company’s financial statements.
classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing
price reported on the major market on which the individual ($ in millions)
securities are traded. For the year ended December 31: 2019 2018
Non-U.S. DB plans $ 243 $ 325
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 304 335
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair
Multi-employer plans 32 38
value. Short-term investments represent securities with original
DC plans 1,040 1,024
maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as
Level 1 or Level 2. Direct benefit payments 559 567
Total $2,177 $2,288
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the
absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity
In 2019 and 2018, $635 million and $598 million, respectively,
and the long-term nature of such assets. These assets are initially
was contributed in U.S. Treasury securities, which is considered
valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available
a non-cash transaction (includes the Active Medical Trust).
and relevant market data, including appraisals, to determine
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
assets are classified as Level 3.
In 2020, the company is not legally required to make any
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
Exchange-traded derivatives are valued at the closing price
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close
PPP during the year.
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including,
In 2020, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S.
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility
defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately
and foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1
$300 million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined
or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
benefit pension plans in Spain and Japan. This amount generally
represents legally mandated minimum contributions.
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net
asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical
expedient. These investments, which include commingled funds,
hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are
typically valued using the NAV provided by the administrator of
the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding.

===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 137
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial market performance in 2020 could increase the legally Expected Benefit Payments
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The following table presents the total expected benefit payments
The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors. have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to
measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2019 and include
benefits attributable to estimated future compensation
increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2020 $ 3,533 $122 $ 1,937 $ 320 $ 5,913
2021 3,523 122 1,951 317 5,912
2022 3,494 122 1,990 327 5,932
2023 3,441 120 2,012 336 5,909
2024 3,394 119 2,030 345 5,887
2025—2029 15,680 557 10,015 1,864 28,115
The 2020 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets The following table presents the total expected benefit payments
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These
and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions
Balance Sheet. used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2019.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2020 $ 354 $ 19 $ 23 $ 395
2021 381 20 23 424
2022 388 21 23 432
2023 379 23 23 425
2024 359 24 24 407
2025—2029 1,449 146 116 1,712
The 2020 expected benefit payments to nonpension and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated
postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the Balance Sheet.
respective plan assets represent a component of compensation

===== PAGE 139 =====
138 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of
plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table
on page 129.
($ in millions)
2019 2018
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $31,714 $18,398 $30,059 $16,783
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 30,882 18,127 29,312 16,522
Plans with plan assets in excess of PBO 66,842 73,705 63,524 68,190
The following table presents information for the nonpension postretirement benefit plan with APBO in excess of plan assets. For a
more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans, see the table on page 129.
($ in millions)
2019 2018
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with APBO in excess of plan assets $4,685 $47 $4,616 $94
Plans with plan assets in excess of APBO 19 21 — —
NOTE W. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 28, 2020, the company announced that the Board of
Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.62 per common
share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2020 to shareholders
of record on February 10, 2020.
On January 30, 2020, the company announced that Arvind
Krishna has been elected Chief Executive Officer and a member
of the IBM Board of Directors, effective April 6, 2020. Mr. Krishna
is presently IBM Senior Vice President for Cloud & Cognitive
Software. Jim Whitehurst, IBM Senior Vice President and CEO of
Red Hat, will become IBM President, also effective April 6, 2020.
Virginia M. Rometty will continue as IBM Executive Chairman
through year-end 2020.
On February 3, 2020, the company announced that it elected to
redeem on March 6, 2020 $2.9 billion of outstanding fixed-rate
debt due in 2021. The notes are expected to be redeemed at a
price equal to 100 percent of the $2.9 billion aggregate principal
plus a make-whole premium and accrued interest. The company
expects to incur a loss of approximately $41 million upon
redemption which will be recorded in other (income) and expense
in the Consolidated Income Statement.
On February 11, 2020, the company issued $4.1 billion of Euro
fixed-rate notes in multiple tranches with maturities ranging from
8 to 20 years and coupons ranging from 0.3 to 1.2 percent.

===== PAGE 140 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 139
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2019* 2018 2017 2016 2015
Revenue $ 77,147 $ 79,591 $ 79,139 $ 79,919 $ 81,741
Income from continuing operations $ 9,435 $ 8,723 $ 5,758 $ 11,881 $ 13,364
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (4) $ 5 $ (5) $ (9) $ (174)
Net income $ 9,431 $ 8,728 $ 5,753 $ 11,872 $ 13,190
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 11,436 $ 12,657 $ 12,807 $ 12,880 $ 14,519
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
Assuming dilution:
Continuing operations $ 10.57 $ 9.51 $ 6.14 $ 12.39 $ 13.60
Discontinued operations $ (0.01) $ 0.01 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.18)
Total $ 10.56 $ 9.52 $ 6.14 $ 12.38 $ 13.42
Basic:
Continuing operations $ 10.63 $ 9.56 $ 6.17 $ 12.44 $ 13.66
Discontinued operations $ 0.00 $ 0.01 $ 0.00 $ (0.01) $ (0.18)
Total $ 10.63 $ 9.57 $ 6.17 $ 12.43 $ 13.48
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 12.81 $ 13.81 $ 13.66 $ 13.44 $ 14.77
Cash dividends paid on common stock $ 5,707 $ 5,666 $ 5,506 $ 5,256 $ 4,897
Investment in property, plant and equipment $ 2,286 $ 3,395 $ 3,229 $ 3,567 $ 3,579
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity 52.6% 48.0% 31.1% 74.0% 101.1%
At December 31: 2019* 2018 2017 2016 2015
Total assets $152,186 $123,382 $125,356 $117,470 $110,495
Net investment in property, plant and equipment $ 10,010 $ 10,792 $ 11,116 $ 10,830 $ 10,727
Working capital $ 718+ $ 10,918 $ 12,373 $ 7,613 $ 8,235
Total debt $ 62,899 $ 45,812 $ 46,824 $ 42,169 $ 39,890
Total equity $ 20,985 $ 16,929 $ 17,725 $ 18,392 $ 14,424
* The company acquired Red Hat on July 9, 2019, impacting 2019 results.
** Refer to the table below for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2017, 2016 and 2015.
Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 46 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2019 and 2018.
+ Refer to “IBM Working Capital” on page 43 for additional information.
GAAP Reconciliations
The table below provides a reconciliation of the company’s income and diluted earnings per share from continuing operations as
reported under GAAP to its operating earnings presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating
(non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the
“Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section for management’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement-
Related Related Tax Reform Operating
For the year ended December 31: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Charge (non-GAAP)
2017
Income from continuing operations $ 5,758 $ 718 $ 856 $5,475 $12,807
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 6.14 $0.77 $0.91 $ 5.84 $ 13.66
2016
Income from continuing operations $11,881 $ 735 $ 265 — $12,880
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 12.39 $0.77 $0.28 — $ 13.44
2015
Income from continuing operations $13,364 $ 562 $ 593 — $14,519
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 13.60 $0.57 $0.60 — $ 14.77
The following presents a reconciliation of annualized revenue, excluding divestitures and currency from 2012 to 2019:
($ in billions)
Approximate Impact From:
2011 Total 2019
Revenue Divestitures Currency Performance Impact Revenue
$106.9 -1.3 pts. -2.2 pts. -0.5 pts. -4.0 pts. $77.1

===== PAGE 141 =====
140 Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
First Second Third Fourth
2019 Quarter Quarter Quarter* Quarter* Full Year
Revenue $18,182 $19,161 $18,028 $21,777 $77,147
Gross profit $ 8,043 $ 9,010 $ 8,336 $11,100 $36,488
Income from continuing operations $ 1,593 $ 2,499 $ 1,673 $ 3,669 $ 9,435
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (2) $ (1) $ (1) $ 0 $ (4)
Net income $ 1,591 $ 2,498 $ 1,672 $ 3,670 $ 9,431
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 2,009 $ 2,827 $ 2,394 $ 4,206 $11,436
Earnings per share of common stock—
continuing operations+
Assuming dilution $ 1.78 $ 2.81 $ 1.87 $ 4.11 $ 10.57
Basic $ 1.79 $ 2.82 $ 1.89 $ 4.14 $ 10.63
Earnings per share of common stock—total+
Assuming dilution $ 1.78 $ 2.81 $ 1.87 $ 4.11 $ 10.56
Basic $ 1.79 $ 2.82 $ 1.89 $ 4.14 $ 10.63
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 2.25 $ 3.17 $ 2.68 $ 4.71 $ 12.81
($ in millions except per share amounts)
First Second Third Fourth
2018 Quarter Quarter Quarter Quarter Full Year
Revenue $19,072 $20,003 $18,756 $21,760 $79,591
Gross profit $ 8,247 $ 9,199 $ 8,803 $10,687 $36,936
Income from continuing operations $ 1,675 $ 2,402 $ 2,692 $ 1,954 $ 8,723
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ 4 $ 1 $ 2 $ (2) $ 5
Net income $ 1,679 $ 2,404 $ 2,694 $ 1,951 $ 8,728
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings** $ 2,272 $ 2,834 $ 3,134 $ 4,417 $12,657
Earnings per share of common stock—
continuing operations+
Assuming dilution $ 1.81 $ 2.61 $ 2.94 $ 2.15 $ 9.51
Basic $ 1.82 $ 2.63 $ 2.95 $ 2.17 $ 9.56
Earnings per share of common stock—total+
Assuming dilution $ 1.81 $ 2.61 $ 2.94 $ 2.15 $ 9.52
Basic $ 1.82 $ 2.63 $ 2.95 $ 2.17 $ 9.57
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)** $ 2.45 $ 3.08 $ 3.42 $ 4.87 $ 13.81
* The company acquired Red Hat on July 9, 2019, impacting third- and fourth-quarter results.
** R efer to page 74 of the company’s first-quarter 2019 Form 10-Q filed on April 30, 2019, page 98 of the company’s second-quarter 2019 Form 10-Q
filed on July 30, 2019, page 102 of the company’s third-quarter 2019 Form 10-Q filed on October 29, 2019, and page 52 under the heading “GAAP
Reconciliation” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the quarterly periods of 2019 and 2018. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,”
on page 46 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2019 and 2018.
+ Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the
full year is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not
equal the full-year EPS.

===== PAGE 142 =====
Performance Graphs 141
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF ONE- AND FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index used
TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM, for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-business
S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P INFORMATION index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index.
TECHNOLOGY INDEX IBM is also included in this index.
The following graphs compare the one- and five-year cumulative
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial
cumulative returns of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons
Stock Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the assume that all dividends are reinvested.
One-Year Five-Year
160 300
140
250
120
200
100
80 150
60
100
40
50
20
0 0
12/18 3/19 6/19 9/19 12/19 14 15 16 17 18 19
One-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 12/2018 3/2019 6/2019 9/2019 12/2019
International Business Machines $100.00 $125.59 $124.22 $132.50 $123.57
S & P 500 100.00 113.65 118.54 120.55 131.49
S & P Information Technology 100.00 119.86 127.13 131.37 150.29
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019
International Business Machines $100.00 $ 88.59 $110.90 $106.49 $ 82.49 $101.93
S & P 500 100.00 101.38 113.51 138.29 132.23 173.86
S & P Information Technology 100.00 105.92 120.59 167.42 166.94 250.89

===== PAGE 143 =====
142 Stockholder Information
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services IBM Stock
Stockholders with questions about their accounts IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange
should contact: and the Chicago Stock Exchange under the symbol “IBM”.
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005,
Stockholder Communications
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005, (888) IBM-6700.
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results, a summary of
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada the Annual Meeting remarks, and voting results from the
and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727. meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending an e-mail to
infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations,
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company,
New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a Annual Meeting
telecommunications device (TDD) can communicate directly The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on
with Computershare Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) Tuesday, April 28, 2020, at 10 a.m. at the Louisville Marriott
490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Downtown Hotel, 280 W. Jefferson Street, Louisville, Kentucky.
Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
IBM on the Internet The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at charge from:
www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products,
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 505005,
services and other activities can also be found at that website.
Louisville, Kentucky 40233-5005 (888) IBM-6700.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
(SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any
other filings required by the SEC. The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly
reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant
business. The 10-K report is released by the end of February;
amount of information about IBM, including the company’s
10-Q reports are released by early May, August and November.
annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q,
current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those An audio recording of the 2019 Annual Report will be available
reports filed or furnished pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) for sight-impaired stockholders in June 2020.
of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as soon as reasonably
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s
practicable after such material is electronically filed with or
values and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility,
furnished to the SEC. These materials are available free of
including its innovative strategies to transform communities
charge on or through IBM’s website.
through global citizenship. Highlights from the Corporate
The SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains Responsibility Report are available online at www.ibm.org/
reports, proxy and information statements, and other information responsibility/2018. The full Corporate Responsibility Report is
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC. available in printed form by downloading the report at
https:www.ibm.org/responsibility/reports.
Computershare Investment Plan (CIP)
(formerly IBM Investor Services Program) General Information
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a Stockholders of record can receive account information and
number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder
IBM investors, including the reinvestment of dividends, accounts online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of
direct purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports
safekeeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of the brochure. and Proxy Statements online through this site.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk,
New York 10504.

===== PAGE 144 =====
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 143
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Thomas Buberl* Arvind Krishna *** Joseph R. Swedish
Chief Executive Officer Senior Vice President Senior Advisor and
AXA S.A. Cloud and Cognitive Software Retired Chairman, President
IBM and Chief Executive Officer
Michael L. Eskew Anthem, Inc.
Retired Chairman and Andrew N. Liveris
Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and Sidney Taurel
United Parcel Service, Inc. Chief Executive Officer Chairman Emeritus
The Dow Chemical Company Eli Lilly and Company
David N. Farr
Chairman
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Frederick William McNabb, III
Pearson plc
Emerson Electric Co. Retired Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer Peter R. Voser
Alex Gorsky The Vanguard Group, Inc. Retired Chief Executive Officer
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Royal Dutch Shell plc
Johnson & Johnson Martha E. Pollack
President Chairman
Michelle J. Howard Cornell University ABB Ltd.
Retired Admiral
United States Navy Virginia M. Rometty Frederick H. Waddell
Chairman, President and Retired Chairman and
Shirley Ann Jackson** Chief Executive Officer Chief Executive Officer
President IBM Northern Trust Corporation
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Term on the Board begins on April 28, 2020
** Term on the Board ends on April 28, 2020
*** Term on the Board begins on April 6, 2020
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Simon J. Beaumont James J. Kavanaugh Virginia M. Rometty **
Vice President Senior Vice President and Chairman, President and
Tax and Treasurer Chief Financial Officer Chief Executive Officer
Finance and Operations
Michelle H. Browdy Thomas W. Rosamilia
Senior Vice President John E. Kelly III Senior Vice President
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, Executive Vice President Systems
and General Counsel
Kenneth M. Keverian Martin J. Schroeter
Robert F. Del Bene Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
Vice President and Controller Corporate Strategy Global Markets, Global Financing,
Marketing & Communications
Mark Foster Arvind Krishna *
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President Frank Sedlarcik
Global Business Services Cloud and Cognitive Software Vice President
and IBM Services Assistant General Counsel
Robert W. Lord and Secretary
Diane J. Gherson Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President and Cognitive Applications Bridget A. van Kralingen
Chief Human Resources Officer Senior Vice President
Michelle Peluso Industry Platforms and
John Granger Senior Vice President and Global Industries
Senior Vice President Chief Marketing Officer
Cloud Application Innovation Digital Sales and Marketing James M. Whitehurst ***
and Chief Operating Officer Senior Vice President, IBM,
Global Business Services Robert J. Picciano and Chief Executive Officer,
Senior Vice President and
Red Hat
Martin Jetter Master Technical Client Advisor
Senior Vice President Global Markets Juan A. Zufiria Zatarain
Europe Senior Vice President
Global Technology Services
* Dr. Krishna will become the Chief Executive Officer on April 6, 2020
** Mrs. Rometty will become the Executive Chairman on April 6, 2020
*** Mr. Whitehurst will become the President on April 6, 2020

===== PAGE 145 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
Aix, Cognitive Enterprise, DB2, Global Business Services, Global
Technology Services, IBM, IBM Cloud, IBM Garage, IBM Research,
IBM Security, IBM Services, IBM Watson, IBM Z, Maximo, POWER,
POWER9, Watson, WebSphere, z14, z15, z/OS and Z Systems are
trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Linux is
a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds in the United States, other
countries, or both. Red Hat, OpenShift and Ansible are trademarks
or registered trademarks of Red Hat, Inc. or its subsidiaries in the
United States and other countries. UNIX is a registered trademark
of The Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other
company, product and service names may be trademarks or service
marks of others.
Images, p. 4 (Fortune), from Fortune © 2019 Fortune Media IP
Limited. All Rights Reserved. Used under license. Fortune and
Fortune Media IP Limited are not affiliated with, and do not
endorse, products or services of IBM; p. 12, courtesy Sund & Baelt;
p. 13 (left), courtesy Woodside Energy
The IBM Annual Report is printed on papers harvested
to sustainable standards.
Printed in the U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-19
Printing: Allied Printing Services

===== PAGE 146 =====
