

===== PAGE 1 =====
Let’s Create
2022 Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
In 2022 we took decisive steps
to build a stronger IBM, executing
against a sound strategy with speed,
focus, and consistency. Our growth
is accelerating, our confidence is
growing, and our company is
gaining momentum.
The reasons for this are clear. Our clients and partners are
facing a series of specific business challenges: inflation,
supply chain disruption, tight labor markets, sustainability
Arvind Krishna
requirements, and an ever-evolving cybersecurity threat
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
landscape. They recognize technology as a source of
competitive advantage, capable of addressing these
immediate issues and future-proofing their businesses by
increasing productivity, reducing costs, driving innovation, and
fueling growth.
To that end, we have sharpened our focus on IBM’s unique
ability to integrate technology and business expertise for
our clients and our partners. Our portfolio is built around
hybrid cloud and artificial intelligence (AI), the two most
transformational technologies of our time. And our go-to-
market approach brings together the necessary software,
consulting, and infrastructure our clients require, from across
our expanding ecosystem of partners.
This is today’s IBM.
2022 Performance
For the year, IBM generated $60.5 billion in revenue and $9.3
billion of free cash flow. Our focus on delivering client value
fueled revenue growth of 12% at constant currency in 2022,
including about four points from incremental external sales
to Kyndryl. Our solid and growing recurring revenue base
now represents more than 50% of IBM’s total revenue. And
today, more than 70% of our annual revenue is in Software
and Consulting.
IBM 2022 Annual Report 1

===== PAGE 4 =====
IBM Software
IBM Consulting
IBM Infrastructure
IBM Software revenues were up 12% at constant currency, Hybrid cloud has become the leading architecture for
including about 6 points from incremental sales to Kyndryl. enterprises because it offers more value than relying on
Red Hat, which allows clients to harness the power of open- a single, public cloud. This value takes the form of scale,
source software innovations, continues to grow at a healthy security, ease of use, flexibility, seamless experiences, and
rate. Our automation, data and AI and security software have faster innovation cycles. Companies continue to adopt hybrid
been optimized for this platform and delivered solid growth. cloud to unify their data and applications across multiple
clouds, on premise, and at the edge.
IBM Consulting revenues were up 15% at constant
currency, driven by clients’ strong demand for our extensive Containers are the preferred destination for hybrid cloud
technical and business expertise to accelerate their digital applications and IBM’s container platform, with Red Hat at
transformation journeys. the core, continues to gain clients. For example, the Canadian
Imperial Bank of Commerce (CIBC) adopted a hybrid cloud
IBM Infrastructure revenues were up 14% at constant approach that uses Red Hat technology to manage and scale
currency, including about 6 points from incremental sales its infrastructure with greater speed and flexibility. As a result,
to Kyndryl. Clients continue to leverage IBM zSystems and they delivered hundreds of new applications while reducing
Distributed Infrastructure platforms as foundational elements provisioning time by 95% and deployment time by 50%. They
of their hybrid cloud infrastructure. join organizations like Bharti Airtel, Charles Schwab, Samsung
Electronics, and the U.S. Department of Education in working
This revenue growth and cash generation allowed for both with IBM to realize the value of hybrid cloud.
continued investment in the business and shareholder returns.
In 2022, we spent more than $2 billion to acquire eight These powerful, hybrid cloud environments also allow clients
companies and returned nearly $6 billion to stockholders to infuse AI across their business operations. AI is expected
through dividends. to unlock $16 trillion in value from the global economy by
2030 – including massive boosts in productivity – by scaling
Technology and expertise data-driven insight and automating business workflows in
Our perspective on technology is clear and consistent: hybrid everything from IT operations and financial reporting to
cloud and AI are helping to usher in a new era of greater human resources and customer service.
productivity, faster insights, better decision-making, and
enhanced employee and customer experiences. That is why Examples include IBM’s work with McDonald’s to automate
we have designed our products and services to maximize the the drive-thru experience with AI at scale. We also partnered
business value of hybrid cloud and AI for our clients. with the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs to automate the
2

===== PAGE 5 =====
delivery of pension benefits, accelerating the claims process, IBM solutions now available on the Microsoft Marketplace
and freeing up VA staff to focus on higher value work. And and deployable on Microsoft Azure. Meanwhile, Adobe and
BBC Studios is now using our AIOps software to automate the Salesforce are now leveraging open-source innovation based
management of its IT infrastructure. on Red Hat technologies in their offerings.
To help power hybrid cloud environments, and the AI that runs To ensure clients engage with IBM and its partners simply and
on them, IBM introduced the z16 platform with an integrated efficiently, we made significant changes to our go-to-market
on-chip AI accelerator specifically designed to process and model in 2022 and improved our sales productivity. The IBM
analyze real-time transactions at scale. We also unveiled Sales and IBM Ecosystem functions joined together to create
IBM’s next generation LinuxONE servers, which help clients a single, coordinated unit focused on a distinct set of sales
dramatically reduce data center energy consumption in plays, deeper technical engagement, and a more experiential
support of their sustainability goals. approach to selling built around IBM Garages, Innovation
Studios, and Client Engineering teams.
IBM Consulting’s business and industry expertise brings these
offerings to life for our clients, helping them modernize and Exploratory research and applied science
manage their applications in a hybrid cloud environment, IBM Research is driven by our longstanding mission to define the
automate their workflows with data and AI, and meet their future of computing. Our investments span multiple time horizons
security and regulatory requirements. IBM Consulting has and range across all of IBM’s businesses, maintaining a careful
strengthened its commitment to be a trusted partner for balance between exploratory research and applied science.
digital transformation and expanded its use of the IBM Garage
– an agile approach to co-creating with clients – with more In 2022, IBM Research focused its talent and resources
than 6,700 IBM Garage engagements during the year. on innovation with practical application, particularly in the
areas of hybrid cloud, data and AI, automation, security,
For example, IBM Consulting is co-creating with Discover, semiconductors, and quantum computing. For example, the
developing solutions for migrating its systems and applications IBM Telum Processor features on-chip acceleration for AI
to an open and flexible hybrid cloud architecture with Red Hat inferencing in real-time. Today it powers the AI capabilities of
OpenShift. As a result, Discover can automate key business the IBM z16, allowing clients to identify fraud at scale
processes and deliver solutions more quickly, improving in milliseconds.
its customer experience and advancing its overall digital
transformation. We also pioneered breakthrough innovation in the AI field
of large language and foundational models. Project Wisdom
To complement these offerings, IBM made eight acquisitions in for Red Hat Ansible uses foundational AI models to enable
2022. We added software and consulting capabilities to address developers to generate high-quality code, using plain English,
specific client challenges, including environmental performance across multiple clouds.
management software (Envizi), cybersecurity attack surface
management (Randori), and digital transformation services for IBM Research – like the rest of the company – has embraced
the U.S. federal government (Octo). partnership and open innovation as it works to solve the most
urgent problems of business and society. While we continue to
Client engagement: Partnership and co-creation build and maintain a valuable portfolio of intellectual property,
IBM continues to embrace our partner ecosystem as a strategic we understand that open collaboration with clients, partners,
advantage in delivering value to our clients. In 2022, we made and even competitors can accelerate the realization of value.
significant progress in bolstering these partnerships, including
the introduction of a new skills program to equip partners with IBM’s work in quantum computing is a good example of how
the same training and enablement as IBMers, at no cost. we blend proprietary and open innovation. In November,
we again advanced the fundamental science of quantum
The increasing value of our partner ecosystem – to our computing, unveiling the 433- qubit IBM Osprey processor.
company, our clients, and the partners themselves – is This will help us move forward on our roadmap to deliver a
evident. Business with our strategic partners continues 1,000-plus qubit system this year, and a 4,000-plus qubit
to grow with SAP, Microsoft and AWS all over $1 billion in system in 2025. Our IBM Quantum Network has more than
revenue for the year. We partnered with Amazon Web Services 200 members, with companies like Boeing, HSBC, and
to deliver IBM software as a service on the AWS Marketplace. Mitsubishi Chemical pursuing potentially industry-changing
Our partnership with Microsoft expanded in 2022, with 30 research. Meanwhile, we continue to provide access to
IBM 2022 Annual Report 3

===== PAGE 6 =====
quantum capability through the cloud. More than 1.5 Why the world needs IBM (and IBMers)
million people have downloaded the free Qiskit software Today’s IBM is more closely aligned with the needs of our
development kit, and an ecosystem of more than 450,000 clients. Our engagement model is simpler and more effective.
registered users have developed applications and published And we have expanded our ecosystem by strengthening existing
papers based on our quantum technology. relationships and forging new, productive partnerships.
Environmental, equitable, and ethical impact There is, of course, more to be done. Increasing our levels of
Both internally, and in our work with clients, IBM aspires to productivity will be paramount. To get there, we are infusing
make a lasting, positive impact on the world by protecting the our own technology into workflows and processes that span
environment, advocating for inclusion, and fostering trust and from HR, to finance, to sales and more. We are prioritizing
transparency in both technology and business. speed and simplicity in our execution while cultivating a high-
performance culture designed to ensure every activity is tied
In 2022, we announced IBM Impact, a new framework to a clear and tangible business outcome.
that reflects our approach to creating a more sustainable,
equitable, and ethical future. Using this framework, we will I am proud of the progress we have made as a company and
continue to set goals, measure progress, and report our the results we have delivered. And I am especially proud of the
results as part of our culture of accountability. IBMers who have made it possible. Because the performance
of our business depends entirely on a workforce that is smart,
We continued to make progress towards our goal of net-zero committed, and inspired.
operational greenhouse gas emissions by 2030. In fact, we
have reduced those emissions by 61% since 2010. We are That inspiration comes from our belief in the fundamental
using IBM Sustainability solutions to simplify and automate our promise of technology: that when we apply innovation to
sustainability reporting processes. During the year, we were real-world problems, we drive progress, for both business and
recognized by Boston Consulting Group and TIME Magazine for society. IBMers deliver on that promise every day. When we
helping clients turn their sustainability ambitions into actions. help a pharmacy administer more vaccines. When we help
reduce the carbon footprint of a retailer. Or when we help
IBM demonstrates its commitment to diversity, equity, and prevent a cyberattack on a bank.
inclusivity by creating space and opportunity for everyone at
IBM and in society at large. Our diversity practices have resulted Today’s IBM is not simply a technology company. We are a
in a year-over-year increase of representation for women problem-solving company and a convener of capability that
globally and Black and Hispanic employees in the U.S. We are brings together our colleagues, our clients, and our partners
collaborating with more than 20 Historically Black Colleges and with a simple, open invitation: Let’s create.
Universities on IBM Cybersecurity Centers to advance STEM-
based opportunities. We also continue to narrow the STEM skills We do this because we believe that IBM is the catalyst that
gap with our IBM SkillsBuild initiative, adding to our network of makes the world work better. And as we have learned over the
170 partners in our effort to provide access to education and last several years, the world needs to work better. That is why
training to 30 million people worldwide by 2030. the world needs IBM, today more than ever.
IBM continues to develop innovation, policy, and practices that
prioritize ethics, trust, transparency, and above all, accountability.
In 2022, we exceeded our goal to train 1,000 partners in
technology ethics. IBM was named to Ethisphere’s list of the Arvind Krishna
most ethical companies in the world for the fourth time. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP), these materials contain non-GAAP financial measures on a continuing operations basis, including revenue growth rates
adjusted for constant currency. Free cash flow is presented on a consolidated basis, which includes activity from discontinued operations. The rationale for
management’s use of this non-GAAP information is included on page 6 and 34 of the company’s 2022 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K
submitted with the SEC on February 28, 2023. For reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures to GAAP and other information, please refer to pages 17
and 34 of the company’s 2022 Annual Report.
4

===== PAGE 7 =====
Report of Financials 5
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
M ANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Overview 6 Basis & Policies
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 7
A Significant Accounting Policies 52
Management Discussion Snapshot 8
B Accounting Changes 65
Description of Business 11
C Separation of Kyndryl 67
Year in Review 17
Performance & Operations
Prior Year in Review 30
D Revenue Recognition 68
Other Information 32
E Segments 70
Looking Forward 32
F Acquisitions & Divestitures 74
Liquidity and Capital Resources 33
G Research, Development & Engineering 79
Critical Accounting Estimates 36
H Taxes 80
Currency Rate Fluctuations 38
I Earnings Per Share 83
Market Risk 39
Balance Sheet & Liquidity
Cybersecurity 40
J Financial Assets & Liabilities 84
Financing 40
K Inventory 85
L Financing Receivables 86
Report of Management 43
M Property, Plant & Equipment 89
Report of Independent Registered
N Leases 89
Public Accounting Firm 44
O Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 91
P Borrowings 92
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Q Other Liabilities 95
Income Statement 46
R Commitments & Contingencies 96
Comprehensive Income 47
S Equity Activity 98
Balance Sheet 48
Risk Management, Compensation/Benefits & Other
Cash Flows 49
T Derivative Financial Instruments 101
Equity 50
U Stock-Based Compensation 105
V Retirement-Related Benefits 108
W Subsequent Events 120
Performance Graphs 121
Stockholder Information 122
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 123

===== PAGE 8 =====
6 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW
The financial section of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or the company) 2022 Annual Report includes the
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This Overview is
designed to provide the reader with some perspective regarding the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers with an overview of the business and a narrative on our financial
results and certain factors that may affect our future prospects from the perspective of management. The “Management
Discussion Snapshot” presents an overview of the key performance drivers in 2022.
• Beginning with the "Year in Review," the Management Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable segment
of the business, a discussion of our financial position and a discussion of cash flows as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows. Other key sections within the Management Discussion include: "Looking Forward" and "Liquidity and Capital
Resources," the latter of which includes a description of management's definition and use of free cash flow.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements provide an overview of income and cash flow performance and financial position.
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among other items, the Notes contain our accounting policies, revenue
information, acquisitions and divestitures, certain commitments and contingencies and retirement-related plans information.
• On November 3, 2021, we completed the separation of our managed infrastructure services unit into a new public company with
the distribution of 80.1 percent of the outstanding common stock of Kyndryl Holdings, Inc. (Kyndryl) to IBM stockholders on a pro
rata basis. To effect the separation, IBM stockholders received one share of Kyndryl common stock for every five shares of IBM
common stock held at the close of business on October 25, 2021, the record date for the distribution. IBM retained 19.9 percent
of the shares of Kyndryl common stock immediately following the separation. During 2022, we fully disposed of our retained
interest in Kyndryl common stock pursuant to exchange agreements with a third-party financial institution, which were completed
within twelve months of separation. Refer to note J, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for additional information. At December 31,
2022, we no longer held an ownership interest in Kyndryl.
• The accounting requirements for reporting the separation of Kyndryl as a discontinued operation were met when the separation
was completed. Accordingly, the historical results of Kyndryl are presented as discontinued operations and, as such, have been
excluded from continuing operations and segment results for all periods presented. Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for
additional information.
• In the first quarter of 2022, we realigned our management structure to reflect the planned divestiture of our healthcare software
assets which was completed in the second quarter of 2022. This change impacted our Software segment and Other–divested
businesses category, but did not impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to note E, “Segments,” for additional
information on our reportable segments. The segments presented in this Annual Report are reported on a comparable basis for all
periods.
• In September 2022, the IBM Qualified Personal Pension Plan (Qualified PPP) purchased two separate nonparticipating single
premium group annuity contracts from The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Metropolitan Life Insurance Company
(collectively, the Insurers) and irrevocably transferred to the Insurers approximately $16 billion of the Qualified PPP’s defined
benefit pension obligations and related plan assets, thereby reducing our pension obligations and assets by the same amount.
The group annuity contracts were purchased using assets of the Qualified PPP and no additional funding contribution was
required from IBM. The transaction resulted in no changes to the benefits to be received by the plan participants. As a result of
this transaction we recognized a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in
the third quarter of 2022, primarily related to the accelerated recognition of accumulated actuarial losses of the Qualified PPP.
Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant currency” in the Management Discussion do not include operational
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency rates. When we refer to growth rates at constant currency or adjust
such growth rates for currency, it is done so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in
foreign currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance. Financial results
adjusted for currency are calculated by translating current period activity in local currency using the comparable prior-year
period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the functional currency is the local currency.
Generally, when the dollar either strengthens or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant currency rates or
adjusting for currency will be higher or lower than growth reported at actual exchange rates. Refer to “Currency Rate
Fluctuations” for additional information.
• To provide useful decision-making information for management and shareholders, we define and measure hybrid cloud revenue
as end-to-end cloud capabilities within hybrid cloud environments, which includes technology (software and hardware), services
and solutions to enable clients to implement cloud solutions across public, private and multi-clouds. This spans across IBM’s
Consulting, Software and Infrastructure segments. Examples include (but are not limited to) Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), Red
Hat OpenShift, Cloud Paks, as-a-service offerings, service engagements related to cloud deployment of technology and
applications, and infrastructure used in cloud deployments.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Management Discussion 7
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers. Certain prior-
year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results of the business, supplementally, management separates
business results into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP measure
that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges, intangible asset amortization, expense resulting from basis differences
on equity method investments, retirement-related costs, certain impacts from the Kyndryl separation and their related tax impacts.
Due to the unique, non-recurring nature of the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. tax reform), management
characterizes the one-time provisional charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 and adjustments to that charge as non-operating.
Adjustments primarily include true-ups, accounting elections and any changes to regulations, laws, audit adjustments that affect the
recorded one-time charge. Management characterizes direct and incremental charges incurred related to the Kyndryl separation as
non-operating given their unique and non-recurring nature. These charges primarily relate to any net gains or losses on the Kyndryl
common stock and the related cash-settled swap with a third-party financial institution, which are recorded in other (income) and
expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. For acquisitions, operating (non-GAAP) earnings exclude the amortization of
purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related charges such as in-process research and development, transaction costs,
applicable retention, restructuring and related expenses, tax charges related to acquisition integration and pre-closing charges, such
as financing costs. These charges are excluded as they may be inconsistent in amount and timing from period to period and are
significantly impacted by the size, type and frequency of our acquisitions. All other spending for acquired companies is included in both
earnings from continuing operations and in operating (non-GAAP) earnings. For retirement-related costs, management characterizes
certain items as operating and others as non-operating, consistent with GAAP. We include defined benefit plan and nonpension
postretirement benefit plan service costs, multi-employer plan costs and the cost of defined contribution plans in operating earnings.
Non-operating retirement-related costs include defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan amortization of prior
service costs, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan
curtailments/settlements including the one-time, non-cash, pre-tax settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion, net of tax) in the
third quarter of 2022 and pension insolvency costs and other costs. Non-operating retirement-related costs are primarily related to
changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial market performance, and we consider these costs to be outside
of the operational performance of the business.
Overall, management believes that supplementally providing investors with a view of operating earnings as described above provides
increased transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the business and the performance of our pension plans; improves
visibility to management decisions and their impacts on operational performance; enables better comparison to peer companies; and
allows us to provide a long-term strategic view of the business going forward. In addition, these non-GAAP measures provide a
perspective consistent with areas of interest we routinely receive from investors and analysts. Our reportable segment financial results
reflect pre-tax operating earnings from continuing operations, consistent with our management and measurement system.
FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which
it is made; IBM assumes no obligation to update or revise any such statements except as required by law. Forward-looking
statements are based on IBM’s current assumptions regarding future business and financial performance; these statements, by
their nature, address matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks,
uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this
Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including IBM’s 2022 Form 10-K
filed on February 28, 2023.

===== PAGE 10 =====
8 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/Margin
For year ended December 31: 2022 * 2021 Change
Revenue $ 60,530 $ 57,350 5.5 %**
Gross profit margin 54.0 % 54.9 % (0.9)pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 31,531 $ 26,649 18.3 %
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 1,156 $ 4,837 (76.1)%
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes from continuing operations $ (626) $ 124 NM
Income from continuing operations $ 1,783 $ 4,712 (62.2)%
Income from continuing operations margin 2.9 % 8.2 % (5.3)pts.
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ (143) $ 1,030  NM
Net income $ 1,639 $ 5,743 (71.5)%
Earnings per share from continuing operations–assuming dilution $ 1.95 $ 5.21 (62.6)%
Consolidated earnings per share–assuming dilution $ 1.80 $ 6.35 (71.7)%
Weighted-average shares outstanding–assuming dilution 912.3 904.6 0.8 %
Assets $127,243 $132,001 (3.6)%
Liabilities $105,222 $113,005 (6.9)%
Equity $ 22,021 $ 18,996 15.9 %
* Includes a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) resulting in an impact of ($4.84) to diluted
earnings per share from continuing operations and an impact of ($4.83) to consolidated diluted earnings per share. See note V, “Retirement-Related
Benefits,” for additional information.
** 11.6 percent adjusted for currency.
At December 31.
NM–Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2022 and 2021. See page 29 for additional information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
For year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Percent Change
Net income as reported $1,639 * $5,743 (71.5)%
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (143) 1,030 NM
Income from continuing operations $1,783 * $4,712 (62.2)%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 1,329 1,424 (6.7)
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) 4,933 * 1,031 NM
U.S. tax reform impacts (70) 89 NM
Kyndryl-related impacts 351 (81) NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $8,326 $7,174 16.0 %
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 9.13 $ 7.93 15.1 %
* Includes a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $4.4 billion net of tax.
NM–Not meaningful
Macroeconomic Environment
Our business profile positions us well in challenging times. Our diversification across geographies, industries, clients and business
mix provides some stability in revenue, profit and cash generation.
Throughout 2022, we experienced escalating labor and component costs and a strong U.S. dollar. While those dynamics have put
pressure on our margin profile, we are seeing progress in the actions we have taken to mitigate the impacts of these higher costs.
Consulting, which makes up well over half of IBM’s workforce, is most impacted by the labor cost inflation. We have begun to see
improved utilization and priced margin improvements year over year, and our acquisitions have become more accretive, all of which
will benefit our margin profile going forward. Our Consulting pre-tax margin of 8.8 percent increased 0.7 points in 2022 versus the
prior year and improved 3.2 points in the second half of 2022 compared to the first half reflecting the benefit of these actions.
Additionally, across all of our product-based businesses, we have executed price increases above our historical level of increases
to be more reflective of the labor and component costs we are incurring due to the inflationary environment. This includes price
increases in our maintenance and support agreements for our hardware and software portfolios. Additionally, despite the many
global supply chain disruptions throughout 2022, our supply chain has demonstrated resiliency and the ability to proactively
respond to potential disruptions in order to meet our clients’ needs. The strengthening of the U.S. dollar impacted our reported
revenue and gross profit dollars in 2022. We execute hedging programs which defer but do not eliminate the impact of currency.
The gains from these hedging programs are reflected primarily in other income and expense. With the rate and magnitude of

===== PAGE 11 =====
Management Discussion 9
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
movements, and because we do not hedge all currencies, this did have a currency impact to our overall profit and cash flows in
2022. See “Currency Rate Fluctuations,” for additional information.
The geopolitical situation in Eastern Europe intensified in February 2022, with Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The safety and security
of our employees and their families in the impacted regions has been our primary focus. The sanctions placed on numerous Russian
entities, specific Russian-controlled entities, as well as Belarus and other measures that have been and continue to be imposed as
a result of the war have increased the level of economic and political uncertainty. In the second quarter of 2022, we made the
decision to carry out an orderly wind-down of our Russian operations. As such, we assessed certain accounting-related matters
that generally require consideration of current information reasonably available to us and forecasted financial data in the context
of unknown future impacts to IBM that resulted in certain immaterial asset and restructuring charges in 2022. These charges,
together with the year-to-year lost business due to the wind-down, impacted our pre-tax income by approximately $230 million
for the year ended December 31, 2022. The long-term impacts of the Russian war in Ukraine remain uncertain; however, we do not
expect a significant impact on the company’s future results of operations or financial position. Historically, Russia, Ukraine and
Belarus made up less than one percent of the company’s full-year revenue. While the revenue impact is not material to total
consolidated IBM revenue, the business in Russia has historically been high margin and therefore, is a more significant headwind
to our profit and cash flows.
Financial Performance Summary
In 2022, we reported $60.5 billion in revenue, income from continuing operations of $1.8 billion, including a one-time, non-cash,
pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax), and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of $8.3 billion, which
excludes the impact of the settlement charge. The pension settlement charge was the result of the transfer to Insurers of a portion
of our U.S. benefit pension obligations, an action we took to further reduce the risk profile of our retirement-related plans. Diluted
earnings per share from continuing operations was $1.95 as reported, including an impact of $4.84 from the pension settlement
charge, and diluted earnings per share was $9.13 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. On a consolidated basis, we generated $10.4
billion in cash from operations and $9.3 billion in free cash flow and returned $5.9 billion to shareholders in dividends. We are
pleased with the fundamentals of our business and the progress we have made in executing our strategy. Our 2022 performance
demonstrates that we are now a higher-growth, higher-value company with the ability to generate strong cash from operations and
a growing free cash flow.
Total revenue grew 5.5 percent as reported and 12 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year, including
approximately 4 points from incremental sales to Kyndryl. Over 70 percent of current-year revenue was in our growth areas of
Software and Consulting and approximately half of our revenue is recurring. Software revenue increased 6.9 percent as reported
and 12 percent adjusted for currency, including approximately 6 points of growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. There was
continued momentum in our recurring revenue stream in both Hybrid Platform & Solutions and Transaction Processing. Hybrid
Platform & Solutions grew 4.9 percent as reported and 9 percent adjusted for currency, led by strong double-digit revenue growth
in Red Hat. Transaction Processing increased 12.2 percent as reported and 19 percent adjusted for currency, including
approximately 19 points of growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. Consulting revenue increased 7.1 percent as reported and
15 percent adjusted for currency as we help clients with their digital transformations. Infrastructure revenue increased 7.8 percent
year to year as reported and 14 percent adjusted for currency, reflecting strong double-digit growth in Hybrid Infrastructure driven
by our z16 program, which launched in the second quarter of 2022. The Infrastructure revenue performance also includes
approximately 6 points of growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. Across the segments, total hybrid cloud revenue of $22.4
billion in 2022 grew 11 percent as reported and 17 percent adjusted for currency, and represents 37 percent of IBM’s revenue.
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue grew 9.7 percent year to year as reported (10 percent adjusted for currency).
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) increased 2.9 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency). Asia Pacific declined 0.7 percent as
reported, but grew 11 percent adjusted for currency.
The gross margin of 54.0 percent decreased 0.9 points year to year, however, gross profit dollars increased 3.8 percent compared to
the prior year. Overall, gross margin was impacted by the investments we are making to drive our hybrid cloud and artificial intelligence
(AI) strategy, higher labor and component costs and the impacts of currency, while the mitigating hedging benefits and operational
productivity and efficiency we have realized are primarily reflected in expense. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 55.1 percent
decreased 1.0 points versus the prior year.
Total expense and other (income) increased 18.3 percent in 2022 versus the prior year primarily driven by the pension settlement
charge of $5.9 billion, higher spending reflecting continued investment in our offerings, technical talent and ecosystem, and year-to-
year impacts related to Kyndryl retained shares, partially offset by the effects of currency and benefits from the actions taken to
streamline our operations and go-to-market model. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 3.2 percent
year to year, driven primarily by the effects of currency and benefits from the actions taken to streamline our operations and go-to-
market model, partially offset by higher spending to drive our hybrid cloud and AI strategy.

===== PAGE 12 =====
10 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Pre-tax income from continuing operations of $1.2 billion decreased 76.1 percent and the pre-tax margin was 1.9 percent, a decrease
of 6.5 points versus 2021. These declines were primarily driven by the $5.9 billion pension settlement charge. The continuing
operations effective tax rate for 2022 was (54.2) percent compared to 2.6 percent in 2021. The current-year effective tax rate was
primarily driven by the pension settlement charge. The prior-year effective tax rate was primarily driven by tax benefits related to audit
settlements in multiple jurisdictions. Net income from continuing operations of $1.8 billion decreased 62.2 percent and the net income
from continuing operations margin was 2.9 percent, down 5.3 points year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from
continuing operations of $9.8 billion increased 24.6 percent year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing
operations increased 2.5 points to 16.2 percent. These profit dynamics reflect our portfolio shift toward higher value, driven by
Software and Consulting. Our pre-tax profit includes the contribution from incremental sales to Kyndryl and the negative impacts of
currency primarily due to the strengthening of the U.S. dollar. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate for 2022 was 15.2 percent
compared to 9.0 percent in 2021. The lower prior-year operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was primarily driven by tax benefits
related to audit settlements in multiple jurisdictions. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of $8.3 billion increased
16.0 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) income margin from continuing operations of 13.8 percent was up 1.2 points year to year.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations of $1.95 in 2022 decreased 62.6 percent, which included an impact of $4.84
from the pension settlement charge. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $9.13 increased 15.1 percent versus 2021.
At December 31, 2022, the balance sheet remained strong with the flexibility to support and invest in the business. Cash and cash
equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities at year end were $8.8 billion, an increase of $1.3 billion from December 31,
2021. During 2022, we continued to invest in acquisitions and provide a solid and modestly growing dividend to shareholders. Total
debt of $50.9 billion at December 31, 2022 decreased $0.8 billion driven by currency impacts, partially offset by net debt issuances.
Total assets decreased $4.8 billion ($1.3 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2021 primarily driven by decreases in
prepaid pension assets, intangible assets, deferred taxes, and prepaid expenses and other; partially offset by an increase in cash and
restricted cash. Total liabilities decreased $7.8 billion ($4.3 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2021 primarily driven by
a decrease in retirement and postretirement benefit obligations. Total equity of $22.0 billion increased $3.0 billion from December 31,
2021 as a result of a decrease in accumulated other comprehensive losses, 2022 net income and common stock issuances, partially
offset by dividends paid.
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, include the
cash flows of discontinued operations. On a consolidated basis, cash provided by operating activities was $10.4 billion in 2022, a
decrease of $2.4 billion compared to 2021, driven by financing receivables. Net cash used in investing activities of $4.2 billion
decreased $1.8 billion compared to the prior year and net cash used in financing activities of $5.0 billion decreased $8.4 billion
compared to 2021.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Management Discussion 11
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 28, 2023, for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
IBM is addressing the hybrid cloud and AI opportunity with a platform-centric approach, focused on providing client value through a
combination of technology and business expertise. We provide integrated solutions and products that leverage: data, information
technology, deep expertise in industries and business processes, with trust and security and a broad ecosystem of partners and
alliances. Our hybrid cloud platform and AI technology and services capabilities support clients’ digital transformations and help them
engage with their customers and employees in new ways. These solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of capabilities in
software, consulting services and a deep incumbency in mission-critical systems, all bolstered by one of the world’s leading research
organizations.
IBM Strategy
IBM continues to execute its Hybrid Cloud and AI strategy, the two most transformative technologies for business today. Over the last
couple of years, we have driven deep change within the company to deliver this platform-centric strategy. We have continually delivered
innovation in our software and infrastructure offerings and scaled and enhanced the capabilities of our consulting practices. We have
expanded our partner ecosystem, simplified our go-to-market model, and pursued strategic acquisitions and divestitures.
Our strategy aligns with the needs of our clients
Our clients are accelerating their digital transformations as they face economic uncertainties, skill shortages, supply chain instability,
security breaches and heightened sustainability goals. These market realities confirm the following convictions that have shaped our
strategy:
• Technology is crucial to address business challenges: Our clients see digital capabilities fostering efficiency, revenue growth
and scale in their organizations. High tech adopters gain a revenue growth premium over their peers of 7 percentage points,
according to an IBM Institute for Business Value survey. International Data Corporation (IDC) forecasts that spending on
digital transformation technologies will grow at nearly 17 percent in 2023 versus 2 percent global GDP growth;
• AI accelerates enterprise productivity: Businesses urgently want to optimize end-to-end processes. Most now recognize AI
will be a critical technology to rapidly adopt to realize that goal. According to IDC, today 45 percent of organizations have not
yet expanded AI beyond a few isolated projects, while by 2026, 75 percent of large organizations will rely on AI driven
processes for digital-first operations;
• Digital transformation necessitates heterogeneous environments: Enterprises need digital workloads to be deployed across
all their multiple clouds, data centers and distributed locations where their business runs. Seventy-two percent of the
decision makers interviewed in a Harris Poll survey have their company workloads running across private infrastructure and
public cloud;
• Open-source catalyzes innovative outcomes: Operating on a common open-source platform reduces the cost of managing
that heterogeneity. It also enables enterprises to holistically accelerate developers’ productivity and innovation time-to-
market. Sixty-eight percent of the decision makers interviewed in a Harris Poll survey indicated they are using containers
most or all of the time;
• With Red Hat OpenShift, IBM delivers the new essential platform: Over decades, IBM has delivered industry-shaping and
enduring IT platforms, such as mainframe and middleware. Building on this heritage, Red Hat OpenShift is the leading open-
source hybrid cloud platform to help enterprises realize their digital transformation goals.
IBM’s differentiated value proposition
Our differentiated value proposition encompasses our integrated competencies across software, consulting and infrastructure,
leveraging our open hybrid cloud platform. We draw upon five core capabilities to address our clients’ hybrid cloud and AI needs: (1)
build and modernize for the hybrid cloud environments that operate with speed, consistency and agility, (2) create AI-infused, data-
driven business insights regardless of where data lives, while maintaining enterprise grade data governance, privacy and trust, (3)
automate the end-to-end enterprise processes for efficacy with AI-driven decision-making, (4) secure everywhere, with consistent
governance and compliance across environments, and (5) bring it together by transforming our clients’ businesses and processes into
sustainable best-in-class industry practices.

===== PAGE 14 =====
12 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Our full technology stack helps us meet clients where they are in their digital transformations, and we offer the consulting expertise to
help guide and implement the best solutions for that journey. Our rapidly growing ecosystem of cloud, independent software vendors
(ISVs), hardware, network and services partners enhance the client experience and drive the value and innovation derived from IBM
technologies. Our focus on hybrid cloud accelerates our open and collaborative approach to partnership.
Our hybrid cloud platform strategy drives sustained growth and financial performance: on average, every $1 of platform spend results
in $3 to $5 of software revenue, $6 to $8 of services and $1 to $2 of enterprise infrastructure. The hybrid cloud opportunity represents
over a $1 trillion market across software, consulting and infrastructure.
IBM’s integrated value is amplified by ensuring our existing businesses all advance the hybrid cloud value proposition to our clients.
We strategically embed the Red Hat platform with our offerings: (1) IBM Software’s growing portfolio runs on Red Hat OpenShift
Container Platform (OCP), (2) IBM Infrastructure solutions are optimized hybrid cloud deployments for mission-critical workloads, and
(3) IBM Consulting is the leading market system integrator with hybrid cloud and Red Hat expertise to help clients transform their
business and technology.
IBM Software extends the value of our hybrid cloud platform with four critical capabilities: (1) “Modernize” for agility and speed from
legacy to hybrid cloud architecture, (2) “Data-driven”, predicting outcomes from distributed data and applying AI to empower
predictive decision-making, real-time digital intelligence and sustainable operations, (3) “Automate” at scale to make experiences and
tasks more productive and impactful, and (4) “Secure” all touchpoints, all the time, employing real-time threat insights, automated
detection and orchestrated response. Red Hat, reported in our Software segment, delivers the leading open-source hybrid cloud
platform and enables clients to build, secure, operate and manage any application, anywhere, from on-premises environments to
multiple clouds and the edge. One hundred percent of commercial banks, telecommunication, media and technology companies in the
Fortune Global 500 rely on Red Hat. Red Hat collaborates with a broad ecosystem of partners and communities comprised of millions
of developers. These capabilities allow our clients to “write once, deploy anywhere” for cloud native application development and
modernization. We embed the Red Hat platform with our offerings, to advance the hybrid cloud value proposition to our clients.
IBM Consulting delivers business transformation for our clients through hybrid cloud and AI technologies. Our 160,000+ professionals
together with our open ecosystem of partners help clients advance digital transformation, build open hybrid cloud architectures,
orchestrate critical applications across environments, and optimize key workflows and business processes. IBM Consulting drives
transformative projects across different industries with its IBM Garage method. IBM Consulting has dedicated talent in practices to
support IBM technology and continues to invest in the industry’s largest Red Hat practice to make hybrid cloud a foundation for
innovation and business growth, enabling clients to get more value from investments. IBM Consulting has deepened its hybrid cloud
consulting offerings and scaled cloud capability to 40,000+ cloud platform certifications, while accelerating the transformation
journeys for its clients in 2022. IBM Consulting also captures growth by investing in practices with a wide ecosystem of partners,
including AWS, Azure and major ISVs.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Management Discussion 13
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Infrastructure solutions provide unmatched performance, security and resiliency for mission-critical, trusted, or regulated
applications running in a hybrid environment. We drive customer adoption and leading DevOps experience for IBM hybrid cloud at
scale, deeply integrating with Red Hat and IBM Software offerings. We delivered major breakthroughs in 2022, with next generation
z16, Power10 servers and new storage offerings. Forty-five of the world’s top 50 banks are running on IBM zSystems, which excel at
transaction processing with integrated AI and unmatched throughput, availability and advanced security for the era of quantum
computing. Power, Storage, and IBM Cloud help to accelerate enterprise digital transformation with secure, scalable and resilient
solutions built for hybrid cloud agility and application modernization. Infrastructure Support provides lifecycle services and support to
optimize and maintain hybrid cloud environments, with visibility and automated diagnosis and remediation.
IBM Research continues to help define the evolution of computing. In 2022, our focused research agenda provided a pipeline of
innovations, including automated container-driven environments, AI models, security management, sustainability and many others.
Our published Technology Atlas illustrates strategic goals and detailed plans for the next three years of research. We continued to
develop technology to harness the potential of the paradigm-shifting inflection point in AI represented by foundation models. We
outlined a pioneering vision for quantum-centric supercomputing and announced new breakthrough advancements in quantum
software and hardware, including the 433 qubit Osprey processor. We continue to monetize our unparalleled IP and to leverage our
world-class skills in semiconductors to innovate in hardware and collaborate with industry-leading partners.
In addition to our organic investments in R&D, our inorganic investments foster our strategy by adding critical competencies to our
software and consulting businesses. Our acquisitions of Databand.ai, Randori and Envizi expanded our growing portfolio of AI-driven
software, bringing capabilities to help our clients gain better observability into their data, protect against cybersecurity breaches across
their various exposure points and manage their environmental performance. We expanded our consulting expertise in data, AI, digital,
and cloud through the acquisitions of Sentaca, Neudesic, Dialexa and Octo. These investments also facilitate growth by deepening our
industry expertise and consulting capabilities with government and telco clients. In 2022, IBM successfully completed eight
acquisitions in total.
Expanding client engagements and our ecosystem
During 2022, we helped clients harness the power of hybrid cloud and AI technologies to address current challenges and opportunities.
We invested in experiential selling, client engineering, customer success management, expert lab services and deep technical expertise
to show clients the value of technology as a fundamental source of competitive advantage. We engaged clients in digital
transformations using automation and security and other solutions to increase growth, productivity, resilience and responsiveness. We
introduced a product-led growth initiative under our new global “Let’s create” campaign, illustrating how technology can be brought to
life to solve the biggest challenges in business.
When IBM and our partners work together to solve clients’ most complex business challenges, everyone wins. We opened access to
software technology on the AWS marketplace to provide flexibility through an open ecosystem. IBM customers can purchase 30 IBM
products through the Azure Marketplace and deploy these IBM technologies on Azure. We gave partners access to the same training,
and deep technical and product expertise as IBMers to foster a consistent client experience. We deepened our partnership with cloud
hyperscalers, large independent software vendors and global system integrators, making it easier for partners and clients to embrace
hybrid cloud. Our commitment to the IBM ecosystem gives partners and clients the flexibility and market access they need to run
workloads seamlessly in any environment.
In 2022, IBM’s execution and innovation of our hybrid cloud and AI strategy improved the trajectory of our business. We see the core
convictions that have shaped our strategy continue to resonate in the market. As we enter 2023, we will continue to advance our R&D
innovation, inorganic investment and fast-growing ecosystem, positioning IBM as a leader in a world where hybrid cloud and AI are
central to enterprise success.

===== PAGE 16 =====
14 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Business Segments and Capabilities
IBM operates in more than 175 countries around the world. Our platform-centric hybrid cloud and AI strategy is executed through our
operations and consists of four business segments: Software, Consulting, Infrastructure and Financing.
Software
Software provides software solutions that address client needs for a hybrid cloud platform, data and AI, automation, and security on
their journey to hybrid cloud. It includes all software, except operating system software reported in the Infrastructure segment.
Software comprises two business areas – Hybrid Platform & Solutions and Transaction Processing, which have the following
capabilities:
Hybrid Platform & Solutions: includes software, infused with AI, to help clients operate, manage and optimize their IT resources and
business processes within hybrid, multi-cloud environments. It includes the following:
Red Hat: provides enterprise open-source solutions, for hybrid, multi-cloud environments, which includes Red Hat Enterprise Linux
(RHEL), OpenShift, our hybrid cloud platform, as well as Ansible.
Automation: optimizes processes from business workflows to IT operations with AI-powered automation. Automation includes
software for business automation, IT automation, integration and application runtimes.
Data & AI: accelerates data-driven agendas by infusing AI throughout the enterprise, empowering intelligent decision making. The
portfolio includes capabilities that simplify data consumption through data fabric with data management, optimize lifecycle
management, and make better predictions through business analytics. Data & AI capabilities facilitate sustainable, resilient businesses
and enable intelligent management of enterprise assets and supply chains with environmental intelligence and the world’s most
accurate weather forecast data.
Security: creates a risk-aware, secure business by gaining real-time threat insights, orchestrating actions and automating responses
across all touchpoints, in line with a zero-trust security strategy. Security includes software and services for threat management, data
security, and identity and access management.
Transaction Processing: the software that supports clients’ mission-critical, on-premise workloads in industries such as banking,
airlines and retail. This includes transaction processing software such as Customer Information Control System and storage software,
as well as the analytics and integration software running on IBM operating systems such as DB2 and WebSphere running on z/OS.
Consulting
Consulting provides deep industry expertise and market-leading capabilities in business transformation and technology
implementation. Consulting designs, builds and operates technology and business processes based on open, hybrid cloud
architectures with IBM technology and ecosystem partner technologies. Consulting uses its IBM Garage method to convene experts to
co-create solutions with clients to accelerate their digital transformations through AI and automation.
Consulting comprises three business areas – Business Transformation, Technology Consulting and Application Operations, which have
the following capabilities:
Business Transformation: provides strategy, process design, system implementation and operations services to improve and transform
key business processes. These services deploy AI and automation in business processes to exploit the value of data and include an
ecosystem of partners alongside IBM technology, including strategic partnerships with Adobe, Oracle, Salesforce and SAP, among
others.
Technology Consulting: helps clients architect and implement solutions across cloud platforms, including Amazon, Microsoft and IBM,
and strategies to transform the enterprise experience and enable innovation, including application modernization for hybrid cloud with
Red Hat OpenShift.
Application Operations: focuses on application and cloud platform services required to operationalize and run cloud platforms. It
facilitates clients’ efforts to manage, optimize and orchestrate application and data workloads across platforms and environments
through both custom applications and ISV packages.
Infrastructure
Infrastructure provides trusted, agile and secure solutions for hybrid cloud and is the foundation of the hybrid cloud stack.
Infrastructure is optimized for infusing AI into mission-critical transactions and tightly integrated with IBM Software including Red Hat
for accelerated hybrid cloud benefits.

===== PAGE 17 =====
Management Discussion 15
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Infrastructure comprises two business areas – Hybrid Infrastructure and Infrastructure Support, which have the following capabilities:
Hybrid Infrastructure: provides clients with innovative infrastructure platforms to help meet the new requirements of hybrid multi-
cloud and enterprise AI workloads leveraging flexible and as-a-service consumption models. Hybrid Infrastructure includes zSystems
and Distributed Infrastructure.
zSystems: the premier transaction processing platform with leading security, resilience and scale, highly optimized for mission-critical,
high-volume transaction workloads. It includes zSystems and LinuxONE, with a range of high-performance systems designed to
address computing capacity, security and performance needs of businesses. zSystems operating system software environments
include z/OS, a security-rich, high-performance enterprise operating system, as well as Linux and other platforms that are enabled with
enterprise AI and are hybrid cloud ready.
Distributed Infrastructure: the portfolio is uniquely positioned for hybrid cloud, meeting client demands for scalability, security and
capacity. Distributed Infrastructure includes Power, Storage and IBM Cloud Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). Power consists of high-
performance servers, designed and engineered for big data and AI-enabled workloads and are optimized for hybrid cloud and Linux.
The Storage portfolio consists of a broad range of storage hardware and software-defined offerings, including Z-attach and distributed
flash, tape solutions, software-defined storage controllers, data protection software and network-attach storage. IBM Cloud IaaS is
built on enterprise-grade hardware with an open architecture and is specifically designed for regulated industries with leading security
and compliance capabilities. IBM Cloud IaaS offers flexible computing options across x86, Power, Storage and zSystems as a service
to meet client workload needs.
Hybrid Infrastructure also includes remanufacturing and remarketing of used equipment with a focus on sustainable recovery services.
Infrastructure Support: works across hybrid cloud environments providing a uniquely integrated services experience for clients.
Infrastructure Support delivers comprehensive, proactive and AI-enabled services to maintain and improve the availability and value
of clients’ IT infrastructure (hardware and software) both on-premises and in the cloud. These offerings include maintenance for IBM
products and other technology platforms, as well as open-source and cross-vendor software and solution support.
Financing
Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of information technology systems, software and services through its financing solutions.
The financing arrangements are predominantly for products or services that are critical to the end users’ business operations and
support IBM’s hybrid cloud and AI strategy. Financing conducts a comprehensive credit evaluation of its clients prior to extending
financing. As a captive financier, Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge of its client base and a clear insight into the products
and services financed. These factors allow the business to effectively manage two of the primary risks associated with financing, credit
and residual value, while generating strong returns on equity.
Financing comprises the following two business areas – Client Financing and Commercial Financing:
Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan financing to end-user clients for terms up to seven years, and internal loan
financing in support of IBM IaaS service arrangements. Assets financed are primarily new and used IT hardware, software and services
where we have expertise.
Commercial Financing: short-term working capital financing to distributors and resellers primarily of IBM products. The company has
an existing agreement with a third-party investor to sell IBM short-term commercial financing receivables on a revolving basis.
Human Capital
Employees and Related Workforce
(In thousands)
For the year ended December 31: 2022
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 288.3
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 8.2
Complementary* 14.8
* The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited-term employment
arrangements to meet specific business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
As a globally integrated enterprise, IBM operates in more than 175 countries and is continuing to shift our business to the higher value
segments of enterprise IT. Our highly skilled global workforce is reflective of the work we do for clients in support of their digital
transformations and mission-critical operations through our focus on hybrid cloud and AI. Our employees are among the world’s
leading experts in hybrid cloud, AI, quantum computing, cybersecurity and industry-specific solutions. We believe our success depends
on the caliber of our talent and the engagement and inclusion of IBMers in the workplace.

===== PAGE 18 =====
16 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Talent and Culture
We attract, develop, engage and retain talent in a dynamic and competitive environment. IBM provides a compelling employee value
proposition, offering professionals competitive compensation and attractive career opportunities in the development and delivery of
innovative technologies for clients whose businesses the world relies on. Our value proposition and talent strategy help to retain talent.
During 2022, voluntary attrition decreased consistent with the overall labor market.
We are continuously transforming and developing our talent, both through learning and hiring. In 2022, we added skills in consulting
and key technical areas and invested in scaling our capacity in strategically important markets. We are expanding our ability to deliver
best-in-class customer experiences by investing in talent to facilitate garages, client engineering centers and customer success
management. We continue to invest in upskilling and reskilling our workforce. Our digital learning and career platforms are examples
of this commitment to provide employees access to the resources needed to build strategic skills and grow their careers. These digital
platforms utilize Watson AI to generate personalized recommendations for employees and include peer-to-peer collaboration and
internal social sharing functionality. Helping employees learn and apply new skills is important for retention and critical to our ability
to transform and evolve.
Employee engagement is an indicator of employee well-being and their dedication to the company’s mission, purpose and values. We
conduct an annual engagement survey to assess the health of the company’s culture and employee sentiment. More than 185,000
employees globally participated in the 2022 engagement survey, providing actionable data-driven insights to managers and leaders
around factors such as workplace experience, inclusion, pride and propensity to recommend IBM as an employer. More than eight out
of ten employees that participated in the survey responded that they felt engaged at work, a testament to our industry-leading talent
practices.
Diversity and Inclusion
IBM has a long, proud history as a pioneer in diversity and inclusion. We work to ensure employees from diverse backgrounds are
engaged, can be their authentic selves, build skills and grow their careers. Nearly nine out of ten employees feel empowered to be their
authentic selves at work. We believe a diverse and inclusive workplace leads to greater innovation, agility, performance and
engagement, enabling both business growth and societal impact. Our focus on creating a diverse and inclusive workplace has led to
increased levels of inclusion for women, Black and Hispanic employees. Women make up more than one-third of our workforce. In
addition, executive representation of women globally, and Hispanic and Black executives in the U.S. improved by 0.3 points, 0.4 points
and 0.6 points, respectively, in 2022. Our executive compensation program metrics include a diversity modifier to reinforce our focus
and continued accountability for improving the diverse representation of our workforce. Globally, our executives are measured on the
improvement of diversity and inclusion for women. In the U.S., executives are also measured on improvement of diversity and inclusion
for U.S. underrepresented minorities.
We believe in pay equity whereby employees should be compensated fairly for their work and performance, regardless of their gender,
race or other personal characteristics. We have a long-standing practice of maintaining pay equity, which has been part of our global
policy since 1935 and we remain firmly committed to equal pay for equal work. To this end, we conduct statistical pay equity
assessments across all countries with IBM employees. We also empower employees to understand their pay by providing
comprehensive compensation education. Employees can also directly access information about their pay, including a comparison
against their market pay range, through the HR system or their direct managers.
Health, Safety and Well-Being
IBM has a long-standing commitment to the health, safety and well-being of our employees. This commitment is embodied in our
health and safety policy which is implemented through our externally certified Health and Safety Management System (HSMS).
Objectives of our HSMS include providing a safe and healthy workplace, preventing work-related injuries and illnesses, enhancing
worker health and productivity and providing resources to fulfill these commitments.
We feel that our employees perform best at work, at home and in the communities where they live and work when their well-being is
supported. We believe in not taking a one-size-fits-all approach when it comes to health, safety and well-being. We strive to provide
programs that are culturally relevant and inclusive to address the needs of a diverse employee population. We have taken our
experience from the pandemic and created an environment to support our employees’ needs on flexibility. Access to well-being
services and resources are offered through onsite activities, partnerships with external vendors, amongst other methods of delivery.
We offer a wide range of evidence-based health promotion services and programs, covering all aspects of employee well-being:
physical, mental and financial health. In 2022, programs were focused on cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and mental health,
addressing some of the medical issues that were exacerbated during the COVID-19 pandemic. All IBMers worldwide have confidential,
24/7 access to critical mental health support through employee assistance programs and supplemental resources. Other programs
include additional paid time off for working parents and caregivers experiencing life events, training for employees on resilience, as
well as financial counseling offerings. Employees are supported with around-the-clock access to IBM’s world-class Health and Safety
team, education, timely updates and forums to ask questions and raise concerns.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Management Discussion 17
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
As discussed in the “Organization of Information” section, with the completion of the separation on November 3, 2021, the results of
Kyndryl are reported as discontinued operations and as such, have been excluded from continuing operations and segment results for
all periods presented.
Segment Details
In the first quarter of 2022, we realigned our management structure to reflect the planned divestiture of our healthcare software assets
which was completed in the second quarter of 2022. This change impacted our Software segment and Other–divested businesses
category, but did not impact our Consolidated Financial Statements. Prior-year results have been recast to reflect this change. The
table below presents each reportable segment’s revenue and gross margin results, followed by an analysis of the 2022 versus 2021
reportable segment results.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Revenue
Software $ 25,037 $ 23,426 * 6.9 % 11.9 %
Gross margin 79.6 % 79.6 %* 0.0 pts.
Consulting 19,107 17,844 7.1 % 14.9 %
Gross margin 25.5 % 28.0 % (2.5)pts.
Infrastructure 15,288 14,188 7.8 % 13.5 %
Gross margin 52.8 % 55.3 % (2.6)pts.
Financing 645 774 (16.6)% (13.0)%
Gross margin 38.3 % 31.7 % 6.6 pts.
Other 453 1,119 * (59.6)% (56.2)%
Gross margin (95.3)% (22.3)%* (73.0)pts.
Total revenue $ 60,530 $ 57,350 5.5 % 11.6 %
Total gross profit $ 32,687 $ 31,486 3.8 %
Total gross margin 54.0 % 54.9 % (0.9)pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 682 719 (5.1)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 33,370 $ 32,205 3.6 %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 55.1 % 56.2 % (1.0)pts.
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Software revenue $ 25,037 $ 23,426 * 6.9 % 11.9 %
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 17,866 $ 17,036 * 4.9 % 9.4 %
Red Hat 12.6 17.5
Automation 2.1 6.6
Data & AI 1.5 5.5
Security 2.2 7.3
Transaction Processing 7,171 6,390 12.2 18.7
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Software revenue of $25,037 million increased 6.9 percent as reported (12 percent adjusted for currency) in 2022 compared to the
prior year, driven by growth in both Hybrid Platform & Solutions and Transaction Processing. This includes incremental sales to Kyndryl
which contributed approximately 6 points to Software revenue growth. Software concluded 2022 with seasonally strong transactional
performance in the fourth quarter and a solid and growing recurring revenue base. Within Software, hybrid cloud revenue of $9,321
million grew 11 percent as reported (16 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Our platform-based approach to hybrid cloud and
AI is resonating with clients. We have modernized and optimized our software capabilities to run on this platform across Automation,
Data & AI and Security for the platform.
Hybrid Platform & Solutions revenue of $17,866 million increased 4.9 percent as reported (9 percent adjusted for currency) in 2022
compared to the prior year. Incremental sales to Kyndryl contributed approximately 1 point to revenue growth. Within Hybrid Platform
& Solutions, we had revenue growth across all of our business areas. Red Hat revenue increased 12.6 percent as reported (17 percent

===== PAGE 20 =====
18 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
adjusted for currency) led by double-digit growth in OpenShift and Ansible, both of which gained market share in 2022. OpenShift had
$1.0 billion in annual recurring revenue exiting 2022. Revenue in RHEL also had strong growth and gained share in 2022 compared to
the prior year. Red Hat continues to be a leader in open-source technology and its hybrid cloud offerings continue to transform
enterprise IT. Automation revenue increased 2.1 percent as reported (7 percent adjusted for currency), led by Integration and AIOps
and Management as clients look to automate business workflows and improve applications. Data & AI revenue increased 1.5 percent
as reported (6 percent adjusted for currency), reflecting demand in areas such as Data Management, Data Fabric, Information
Exchange, and Asset and Supply Chain Management. In addition, our offerings such as Envizi and Environmental Intelligence Suite are
resonating with clients as they continue to prioritize sustainability efforts. Security revenue increased 2.2 percent as reported (7
percent adjusted for currency), led by strength across our offerings such as Threat Management, Data Security and Identity. We
continue to help clients detect, prevent and respond to security incidents as they adopt zero-trust security strategies.
Across Hybrid Platform & Solutions, our annual recurring revenue (ARR) was $13.3 billion exiting 2022. ARR is a key performance
metric management uses to assess the health and growth trajectory of our Hybrid Platform & Solutions business within the Software
segment. ARR is calculated by estimating the current quarter’s recurring, committed value for certain types of active contracts as of
the period-end date and then multiplying that value by four. This value is based on each arrangement’s contract value and start date,
mitigating fluctuations during the contract term, and includes the following consumption models: (1) software subscription
agreements, including committed term licenses, (2) as-a-service arrangements such as SaaS and PaaS, (3) maintenance and support
contracts, and (4) security managed services contracts. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue as this performance metric
and its inputs may not represent the amount of revenue recognized in the period and therefore is not intended to represent current
period revenue or revenue that will be recognized in future periods. ARR is calculated at estimated constant currency.
Transaction Processing revenue of $7,171 million increased 12.2 percent as reported (19 percent adjusted for currency) in 2022
compared to the prior year. This includes incremental sales to Kyndryl which contributed approximately 19 points of revenue growth
in 2022. Client demand for this mission-critical software has followed increases in zSystems installed capacity over the last two product
cycles and consistently strong renewal rates during 2022 are evidence of the importance of this software in a hybrid cloud environment.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 * Change
Software
Gross profit $ 19,941 $18,648 6.9 %
Gross profit margin 79.6 % 79.6 % 0.0 pts.
Pre-tax income $ 6,162 $ 4,849 27.1 %
Pre-tax margin 24.6 % 20.7 % 3.9 pts.
* Recast to reflect segment change.
The Software gross profit margin of 79.6 percent in 2022 was flat compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income of $6,162 million
increased 27.1 percent compared to the prior year with a pre-tax margin expansion of 3.9 points to 24.6 percent. The improvements
year to year in pre-tax income and pre-tax margin were driven primarily by the higher gross profit contribution from our strong revenue
growth including the Kyndryl commercial relationship, which reflects the demand for our products, as well as portfolio mix.
Consulting
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Consulting revenue $19,107 $17,844 7.1 % 14.9 %
Business Transformation $ 8,834 $ 8,284 6.6 % 14.0 %
Technology Consulting 3,765 3,466 8.6 16.8
Application Operations 6,508 6,095 6.8 15.0
Consulting revenue of $19,107 million increased 7.1 percent as reported (15 percent adjusted for currency) in 2022 compared to the
prior year, with strong growth across all three business areas. Clients are leveraging IBM’s hybrid cloud leadership and deep industry
expertise to navigate the complexity of their digital transformation journeys. Strong demand for our Consulting offerings led to signings
growth of 6.9 percent as reported (14 percent adjusted for currency) in 2022. We had our best quarterly book-to-bill for 2022 in the
fourth quarter and had a book-to-bill ratio of 1.1 for the year. Book-to-bill represents the ratio of IBM Consulting signings to its revenue
over the same period and is a useful indicator of the demand for our business over time. Clients are partnering with IBM Consulting as
they decide which applications to modernize and how to migrate these applications across hybrid, multi-cloud environments. Within
Consulting, hybrid cloud revenue of $9,019 million grew 15 percent as reported (23 percent adjusted for currency) year to year with
both our Red Hat practice and strategic partnerships contributing to the growth.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Management Discussion 19
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Business Transformation revenue of $8,834 million increased 6.6 percent as reported (14 percent adjusted for currency) compared to
the prior year. We had strong demand for our Business Transformation solutions, with growth across our service line offerings such as
data and client experience transformations, supply chain and finance optimizations. Our partnerships with key ISVs including SAP,
Salesforce and Adobe enabled us to help clients transform their critical workloads at scale and improve the way they engage with their
customers.
Technology Consulting revenue of $3,765 million increased 8.6 percent as reported (17 percent adjusted for currency), led by our cloud
development and cloud modernization practices which architect and implement clients’ cloud platforms and strategies. Our Red Hat
engagements as well as strategic hyperscaler partnerships also contributed to the year-to-year revenue growth.
Application Operations revenue of $6,508 million increased 6.8 percent as reported (15 percent adjusted for currency). We help clients
optimize their operations and reduce costs by taking over the management of applications in hybrid and multi-cloud environments. Our
incumbency and understanding of clients’ applications are key differentiators which helped to contribute to this growth.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Consulting
Gross profit $ 4,864 $ 4,994 (2.6) %
Gross profit margin 25.5 % 28.0 % (2.5) pts.
Pre-tax income $ 1,677 $ 1,449 15.7 %
Pre-tax margin 8.8 % 8.1 % 0.7 pts.
The Consulting gross profit margin decreased 2.5 points to 25.5 percent compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income of $1,677 million
increased 15.7 percent compared to the prior year and the pre-tax margin increased 0.7 points to 8.8 percent. The decline in gross
profit margin reflects labor cost inflation which put pressure on the margin profile in 2022, however, the gross profit margin improved
2.4 points in the second half of 2022 compared to the first half reflecting the benefit from pricing actions and productivity. The year-
to-year improvement in pre-tax income and pre-tax margin reflects the benefits of productivity within our workforce, a more
streamlined operating and go-to-market structure as well as our acquisitions which have become more accretive.
Consulting Signings
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Total Consulting signings $20,485 $19,163 6.9 % 14.3 %
Signings are management’s initial estimate of the value of a client’s commitment under a services contract within IBM Consulting.
There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation of signings. The calculation used by management involves
estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement and the
presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Contract extensions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of the incremental new value. Total signings can
vary over time due to a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the timing of signing a small number of larger contracts. Signings
associated with an acquisition will be recognized on a prospective basis.
Management believes the estimated values of signings disclosed provide an indication of our forward-looking revenue. Signings are
used to monitor the performance of the business and viewed as useful information for management and shareholders. The conversion
of signings into revenue may vary based on the types of services and solutions, contract duration, customer decisions, and other factors,
which may include, but are not limited to, the macroeconomic environment.

===== PAGE 22 =====
20 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Infrastructure
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Infrastructure revenue $15,288 $14,188 7.8 % 13.5 %
Hybrid Infrastructure $ 9,451 $ 8,167 15.7 % 21.0 %
zSystems 30.6 36.0
Distributed Infrastructure 6.6 11.9
Infrastructure Support 5,837 6,021 (3.1) 3.3
Infrastructure revenue of $15,288 million increased 7.8 percent as reported (14 percent adjusted for currency) year to year driven by
strong double-digit growth in Hybrid Infrastructure. Incremental sales to Kyndryl contributed approximately 6 points to the
Infrastructure revenue growth. Within Infrastructure, hybrid cloud revenue of $3,895 million increased 7 percent as reported (11
percent adjusted for currency) year to year, driven by the product cycle dynamics of z16 and Storage in the current year.
Hybrid Infrastructure revenue of $9,451 million increased 15.7 percent as reported (21 percent adjusted for currency). Incremental
sales to Kyndryl contributed approximately 6 points to the revenue growth. Within Hybrid Infrastructure, zSystems revenue grew 30.6
percent as reported (36 percent adjusted for currency) on a year-to-year basis, reflecting strong execution around our new z16
program. The z16 capabilities include cyber-resilient security, embedded AI at scale and cloud-native development for hybrid cloud.
Clients are leveraging cyber-resiliency to comply with business regulations and proactively avoid outages in their operations. The new
on-chip AI accelerator has been helping mitigate and detect fraud in credit card application processing. The z16 is also the industry’s
first quantum-safe system, delivering 25 billion encrypted transactions per day for clients. In the third quarter of 2022, we also
introduced our newest LinuxONE server, a highly scalable Linux and Kubernetes-based platform with capabilities to reduce clients’
energy consumption. IBM zSystems remains an enduring platform, now playing an important role in a hybrid cloud environment.
Distributed Infrastructure revenue increased 6.6 percent as reported (12 percent adjusted for currency). This performance was led by
strength in Power Systems with the extension of our Power10 innovation throughout the Power Systems product lines. The Power10
server platform is designed to deliver flexible and secure infrastructure for hybrid cloud environments. In addition, recent innovation
within our Storage product lines included a refresh to our flash storage solutions which contributed to Storage performance in 2022.
Infrastructure Support revenue of $5,837 million decreased 3.1 percent as reported, but grew 3 percent adjusted for currency year to
year. This includes incremental sales to Kyndryl which contributed approximately 6 points of revenue growth in 2022. Infrastructure
Support performance in 2022 was impacted by client adoption of new hardware with the launch of the z16 program. In the first year
of a new hardware cycle, product is under standard warranty which results in a cyclical decline in maintenance revenue.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Infrastructure
Gross profit $ 8,066 $ 7,848 2.8 %
Gross profit margin 52.8 % 55.3 % (2.6)pts.
Pre-tax income $ 2,262 $ 2,025 11.7 %
Pre-tax margin 14.8 % 14.3 % 0.5 pts.
The Infrastructure gross profit margin decreased 2.6 points to 52.8 percent in 2022 compared to the prior year driven by Infrastructure
Support. The gross profit margin decline in Infrastructure Support was primarily driven by portfolio mix. Hybrid Infrastructure profit
margin reflected declines in zSystems and Distributed Infrastructure profit margins in line with product cycle dynamics, offset by
product mix primarily toward zSystems. Pre-tax income of $2,262 million increased 11.7 percent, primarily driven by the revenue
growth from the z16 product cycle and an increase in IP income year to year from a joint development and licensing agreement signed
in the fourth quarter of 2022. The pre-tax margin increased 0.5 points year to year to 14.8 percent, primarily driven by portfolio mix.
Financing
See pages 40 through 42 for a discussion of Financing’s segment results.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Management Discussion 21
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, we also measure revenue performance on a geographic basis.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change Currency
Total revenue $60,530 $57,350 5.5 % 11.6 %
Americas $31,057 $28,299 9.7 % 10.2 %
Europe/Middle East/Africa 17,950 17,447 2.9 13.9
Asia Pacific 11,522 11,604 (0.7) 11.4
Total revenue of $60,530 million in 2022 increased 5.5 percent year to year as reported and 12 percent adjusted for currency, which
includes approximately 4 points of revenue growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl.
Americas revenue increased 9.7 percent as reported and 10 percent adjusted for currency, which includes approximately 3 points of
revenue growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. Within North America, the U.S. increased 9.2 percent and Canada increased 3.3
percent as reported and 7 percent adjusted for currency. Latin America increased 18.4 percent as reported and 19 percent adjusted
for currency. Within Latin America, Brazil revenue increased 17.6 percent as reported and 14 percent adjusted for currency.
EMEA revenue increased 2.9 percent as reported and 14 percent adjusted for currency, which includes approximately 5 points of
revenue growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. France, the UK and Italy increased 9.6 percent, 5.3 percent and 3.2 percent,
respectively, as reported, and increased 22 percent, 17 percent and 15 percent, respectively, adjusted for currency. Germany
decreased 4.7 percent as reported, but grew 6 percent adjusted for currency. The orderly wind-down of our Russian operations in the
second quarter of 2022 negatively impacted the revenue growth rate in EMEA by 1.7 points as reported and 2 points adjusted for
currency.
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 0.7 percent as reported, but grew 11 percent adjusted for currency, which includes approximately 5
points of revenue growth from incremental sales to Kyndryl. Japan revenue decreased 3.5 percent as reported, but grew 15 percent
adjusted for currency. India increased 20.3 percent as reported and 28 percent adjusted for currency. Australia increased 7.3 percent
as reported and 16 percent adjusted for currency. China decreased 22.7 percent as reported and 20 percent adjusted for currency,
driven primarily by large transactions in the financial sector in the prior year related to our zSystems products.
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Total expense and other (income) $ 31,531 * $26,649 18.3 %
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,065) (1,119) (4.8)
Acquisition-related charges (18) (43) (58.6)
Non-operating retirement-related (costs)/income (6,548)* (1,282) NM
Kyndryl-related impacts (351) 118 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) $ 23,549 $24,324 (3.2) %
Total expense-to-revenue ratio 52.1 % 46.5 % 5.6 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) expense-to-revenue ratio 38.9 % 42.4 % (3.5) pts.
* Includes a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion. See note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
NM–Not meaningful
Our expense dynamics in 2022 reflect our continued investment in innovation, skills and our ecosystem, both organically and through
acquisitions, as we accelerate and execute our hybrid cloud and AI strategy. Our work to digitally transform our operations provides
flexibility to continue to invest in innovation and in talent.
Total expense and other (income) increased 18.3 percent in 2022 versus the prior year primarily driven by the one-time, non-
cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion, higher spending reflecting our continuing focus on our portfolio and investment
in our offerings, technical talent and ecosystem, and year-to-year impacts related to Kyndryl retained shares, partially offset by
the effects of currency and benefits from the actions taken to streamline operations and our go-to-market model.

===== PAGE 24 =====
22 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) decreased 3.2 percent year to year, driven primarily by the effects of
currency and benefits from the actions taken to streamline operations and our go-to-market model, partially offset by higher
spending reflecting our continuing focus on our portfolio and investment in our offerings, technical talent and ecosystem.
For additional information regarding total expense and other (income) for both expense presentations, see the following analyses
by category.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative–other $15,537 $15,550 (0.1)%
Advertising and promotional expense 1,330 1,413 (5.9)
Workforce rebalancing charges 50 181 (72.4)
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 1,062 1,116 (4.8)
Stock-based compensation 566 555 1.9
Provision for/(benefit from) expected credit loss expense 64 (71) NM
Total selling, general and administrative expense $18,609 $18,745 (0.7)%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,062) (1,116) (4.8)
Acquisition-related charges (17) (43) (60.4)
Kyndryl-related impacts 0 (8) (95.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) selling, general and administrative expense $17,529 $17,577 (0.3)%
NM–Not meaningful
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased 0.7 percent in 2022 versus 2021, driven primarily by the
following factors:
• The effects of currency (4 points); and
• Lower workforce rebalancing charges (1 point); partially offset by
• Higher spending (3 points) reflecting our continuing investment to drive our hybrid cloud and AI strategy, expenses of acquired
businesses and higher travel and commission expense, partially offset by benefits from the actions taken to transform our
operations and lower spending for shared services transferred to Kyndryl; and
• A provision for expected credit loss expense in the current year compared to a benefit in the prior year (1 point).
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense decreased 0.3 percent year to year primarily driven by the same factors.
Provisions for expected credit loss expense was $64 million in 2022 as compared to a benefit of $71 million in 2021. The year-to-year
change was primarily driven by an increase in specific reserves in the current year compared to decreases in both general and specific
reserves in the prior year. The prior-year decreases were primarily driven by improvement in customer credit quality and some
emergence from bankruptcies as economies began to reopen after the global pandemic shutdowns. The receivables provision coverage
was 2.4 percent at December 31, 2022, an increase of 30 basis points from December 31, 2021 driven by an increase in specific
reserves and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in receivables.
Research, Development and Engineering Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Total research, development and engineering $ 6,567 $ 6,488 1.2 %
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 1.2 percent in 2022 versus 2021, reflecting our continuing
investment to deliver innovation in AI, hybrid cloud and emerging areas such as quantum. The year-to-year increase was primarily
driven by higher spending (3 points), partially offset by the effects of currency (2 points).

===== PAGE 25 =====
Management Discussion 23
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Licensing of intellectual property including royalty-based fees $ 397 $ 306 29.7 %
Custom development income 246 272 (9.4)
Sales/other transfers of intellectual property 21 35 (40.1)
Total $ 663 $ 612 8.4 %
Total Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income increased 8.4 percent in 2022 compared to 2021. In the fourth quarter
of 2022, we signed a three-year joint development and licensing agreement with a Japanese consortium to leverage our intellectual
property and expertise on advanced semiconductors which resulted in income of approximately $100 million in 2022.
The timing and amount of licensing, sales or other transfers of IP may vary significantly from period to period depending upon the
timing of licensing agreements, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the timing of new patents and know-how
development.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction losses/(gains) $ (643) $ (204) 214.7 %
(Gains)/losses on derivative instruments 225 205 9.9
Interest income (162) (52) 211.1
Net (gains)/losses from securities and investment assets 278 (133) NM
Retirement-related costs/(income) 6,548 * 1,282 NM
Other (443) (225) 97.0
Total other (income) and expense $ 5,803 $ 873 NM
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (2) (2) —
Acquisition-related charges (1) — NM
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) (6,548)* (1,282) NM
Kyndryl-related impacts (351) 126 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) other (income) and expense $ (1,099) $ (285) 285.2 %
* Includes a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion.
NM–Not meaningful
Total other (income) and expense was $5,803 million of expense in 2022 compared to $873 million in 2021. The year-to-year increase
was primarily driven by:
• Higher non-operating retirement-related costs ($5,266 million) driven by the third-quarter 2022 pension settlement charge. Refer
to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information; and
• Net losses related to Kyndryl retained shares in the current year versus a net gain in the prior year ($393 million); partially offset
by
• Net exchange gains (including foreign exchange derivative instruments) in the current year versus net exchange losses in the prior
year ($418 million). The current-year (gains)/losses on derivative instruments includes a loss on the cash-settled swap related to
the Kyndryl retained shares ($83 million);
• Higher gains on divestitures year to year ($234 million) primarily driven by the divestiture of our healthcare software assets
(included in “Other”); and
• Higher interest income ($110 million) driven by higher average interest rates in the current year.
Operating (non-GAAP) other (income) and expense was $1,099 million of income in 2022 and increased $814 million compared to the
prior year. The year-to-year increase was driven primarily by the effects of currency, higher gains on divestitures and higher interest
income described above.

===== PAGE 26 =====
24 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Total interest expense $1,216 $1,155 5.3 %
Interest expense increased $61 million compared to 2021. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the Consolidated
Income Statement only if the related external borrowings are to support the Financing external business. Overall interest expense
(excluding capitalized interest) in 2022 was $1,562 million, an increase of $14 million year to year primarily driven by higher average
interest rates, partially offset by a lower average debt balance in the current year.
Stock-Based Compensation
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $987 million increased $68 million compared to 2021. This was primarily due to a
current-year change in our Employee Stock Purchase Plan which is considered compensatory beginning second-quarter 2022 ($43
million), an increase from performance share units ($21 million), grants of stock options in the current year ($19 million) and an
increase from restricted stock units ($17 million), partially offset by a decrease associated with options previously issued by
acquired entities ($31 million). Stock-based compensation cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected in the following
categories: Cost: $164 million, up $18 million; SG&A expense: $566 million, up $10 million; and RD&E expense: $258 million, up
$40 million.
Retirement-Related Plans
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-related plans. Total operating costs/(income) are included in the
Consolidated Income Statement within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Retirement-related plans–cost
Service cost $ 245 $ 312 (21.3) %
Multi-employer plans 15 17 (12.9)
Cost of defined contribution plans 924 992 (6.8)
Total operating costs/(income) $ 1,184 $ 1,320 (10.3) %
Interest cost $ 1,731 $ 1,626 6.4 %
Expected return on plan assets (2,747) (2,920) (5.9)
Recognized actuarial losses 1,568 2,454 (36.1)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) 12 9 31.1
Curtailments/settlements 5,970 * 94 NM
Other costs 15 18 (19.2)
Total non-operating costs/(income) $ 6,548 * $ 1,282 NM
Total retirement-related plans–cost $ 7,732 * $ 2,601 197.2 %
* Includes a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion.
NM–Not meaningful
Total pre-tax retirement-related plan cost increased by $5,131 million compared to 2021, primarily due to an increase in
curtailment/settlements ($5,875 million) driven by the $5.9 billion third-quarter pension settlement charge, lower expected returns
on plan assets ($174 million) and higher interest costs ($105 million), partially offset by a decrease in recognized actuarial losses ($886
million), lower cost of defined contribution plans ($67 million) and lower service cost ($66 million).
As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section, we characterize certain retirement-related costs as operating and others
as non-operating. Utilizing this characterization, operating retirement-related costs in 2022 were $1,184 million, a decrease of $136
million compared to 2021. These operating cost decreases were primarily driven by lower cost of defined contribution plans and lower
service cost. Non-operating costs of $6,548 million in 2022 increased $5,267 million year to year, driven primarily by the pension
settlement charge, lower expected returns on plan assets and higher interest costs, partially offset by a decrease in recognized
actuarial losses.
Income Taxes
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2022 was (54.2) percent compared to 2.6 percent in 2021. The current-year effective
tax rate was primarily driven by the transfer of a portion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan
assets. The prior-year effective tax rate was primarily driven by tax benefits related to audit settlements in multiple jurisdictions.

===== PAGE 27 =====
Management Discussion 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate for 2022 was 15.2 percent compared to 9.0 percent in 2021. The prior-year operating
(non-GAAP) effective tax rate was primarily driven by tax benefits related to audit settlements in multiple jurisdictions. For more
information, see note H, “Taxes.”
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the
period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding
plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential
common shares include outstanding stock options and stock awards.
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Earnings per share of common stock from continuing operations
Assuming dilution $1.95 * $ 5.21 (62.6)%
Basic $1.97 * $ 5.26 (62.5)%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) $9.13 $ 7.93 15.1 %
Weighted-average shares outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution 912.3 904.6 0.8 %
Basic 902.7 896.0 0.7 %
* The $5.9 billion one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge resulted in an impact of ($4.84) to diluted earnings per share from continuing
operations and an impact of ($4.89) to basic earnings per share from continuing operations.
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2022 and 2021 were 906.1 million and 898.1 million, respectively. The year-to-year
increase was primarily the result of the common stock issued under employee plans. The average number of common shares
outstanding assuming dilution was 7.6 million shares higher in 2022 versus 2021.
Financial Position
Dynamics
Our balance sheet at December 31, 2022 remained strong and continues to provide us with flexibility to support and invest in the
business.
Cash, restricted cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2022 were $8,840 million, an increase of $1,283 million compared
to prior year end. Total debt of $50,949 million decreased $755 million from prior year end primarily driven by currency impacts. We
continue to manage our debt levels while being acquisitive and without sacrificing investments in our business or our solid and growing
dividend.
Our cash flow is presented on a consolidated basis and includes discontinued operations. Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for
additional information. During 2022, we generated $10,435 million in cash from operating activities, a decrease of $2,361 million
compared to 2021 driven by a decline in financing receivables. Our free cash flow for 2022 was $9,291 million, an increase of $2,784
million versus the prior year. See pages 34 and 35 for additional information on free cash flow. We invested $2,348 million in
acquisitions to accelerate our hybrid cloud and AI capabilities, generated $1,272 million from the divestiture of certain businesses,
and returned $5,948 million to shareholders through dividends in 2022. There was no cash flow impact from the U.S. pension
settlement charge. Our cash generation supports investment and deployment of capital to areas with the most attractive long-term
opportunities.
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured the funded status of our retirement and postretirement plans at
December 31. As a result of higher discount rates, partially offset by negative asset returns of 14.3 percent and 15.7 percent on our
U.S. and global qualified plans, respectively, the remeasurement resulted in a significant reduction to our pension plan benefit
obligations and an improvement in our overall funded status. In addition, as discussed in the Overview section, we transferred $16
billion of our U.S. Qualified PPP obligations and related plan assets to Insurers in 2022 to further reduce the risk profile of our plans.
The overall net underfunded position at December 31, 2022 was $2,151 million, a decrease of $3,299 million from the prior year end.
At December 31, 2022, the U.S. Qualified PPP was 125 percent funded and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 114
percent funded. The required contributions related to these plans and multi-employer plans are expected to be approximately $200
million in 2023.

===== PAGE 28 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Current assets $ 29,118 $ 29,539
Current liabilities 31,505 33,619
Working capital $ (2,387) $ (4,080)
Current ratio 0.92:1 0.88:1
Working capital increased $1,693 million from the year-end 2021 position. Current assets decreased $421 million (increased $589
million adjusted for currency) due to a decline in prepaid expenses and other current assets primarily from the disposition of our
investment in Kyndryl of $807 million, and a decrease in accounts receivable driven by currency; partially offset by a net increase in
cash and restricted cash. Current liabilities decreased $2,114 million ($1,133 million adjusted for currency) due to a decrease in short-
term debt mainly due to maturities; partially offset by reclassifications from long-term debt to reflect upcoming maturities.
Receivables and Allowances
Roll Forward of Total IBM Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
Additions/ Foreign currency
January 1, 2022 (Releases) * Write-offs ** and other  December 31, 2022
$ 443 $65 $(55) $43 $495
* Additions/(Releases) for allowance for credit losses are recorded in expense.
** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information regarding allowance for credit losses write-offs.
 Other includes reserve additions/(releases) related to discontinued operations.
Excluding receivables classified as held for sale, the total IBM receivables provision coverage was 2.4 percent at December 31, 2022,
an increase of 30 basis points compared to December 31, 2021. The increase in coverage was primarily driven by an increase in specific
reserves and, to a lesser extent, a decrease in receivables. The majority of the write-offs during the year related to receivables which
had been previously reserved.
Financing Segment Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external Financing segment receivables excluding receivables classified as held for sale, and immaterial
miscellaneous receivables.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Amortized cost* $ 12,843 $ 12,859
Specific allowance for credit losses 127 159
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 46 42
Total allowance for credit losses 173 201
Net financing receivables $ 12,670 $ 12,658
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.3 % 1.6 %
* Includes deferred initial direct costs which are expensed in IBM’s consolidated financial results.
The percentage of Financing segment receivables reserved decreased from 1.6 percent at December 31, 2021, to 1.3 percent at
December 31, 2022, primarily driven by write-offs of previously reserved receivables.
Roll Forward of Financing Segment Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses (included in Total IBM)
($ in millions)
Additions/ Foreign currency
January 1, 2022 (Releases) * Write-offs ** and other  December 31, 2022
$ 201 $(3) $(25) $1 $173
* Additions/(Releases) for allowance for credit losses are recorded in expense.
** Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information regarding allowance for credit loss write-offs.
Financing’s expected credit loss expense (including reserves for off-balance sheet commitments which are recorded in other liabilities)
was a net release of $5 million and $54 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The prior-year net release was primarily
driven by lower unallocated reserve requirements in Americas and EMEA due to sales of receivables.

===== PAGE 29 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Noncurrent assets $ 98,125 $102,462
Long-term debt $ 46,189 $ 44,917
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $ 27,528 $ 34,469
The decrease in noncurrent assets of $4,337 million ($1,912 million adjusted for currency) was driven by a decrease in prepaid pension
assets and associated deferred taxes mainly driven by plan remeasurements, amortization of intangibles, and derecognition of goodwill
and intangible assets related to the divestiture of our healthcare software assets.
Long-term debt increased $1,272 million ($2,329 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by issuances; partially offset by
reclassifications to short-term debt to reflect upcoming maturities and currency impacts.
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) decreased $6,942 million ($5,515 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by a decrease
in retirement and postretirement benefit obligations and deferred taxes driven by plan remeasurements.
Debt
Our funding requirements are continually monitored and we execute our strategies to manage the overall asset and liability
profile. Additionally, we maintain sufficient flexibility to access global funding sources as needed.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Total debt $ 50,949 $ 51,703
Financing segment debt* $ 12,872 $ 13,929
Non-Financing debt $ 38,077 $ 37,775
* Financing segment debt includes debt of $918 million in 2022 and $1,345 million in 2021 to support intercomp any financ in g receiva bles and ot h er
intercompany assets. Refer to Financing’s “Financial Position” on page 41 for additional details.
Total debt of $50,949 million decreased $755 million (increased $296 million adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2021,
primarily driven by maturities of $6,984 million and currency impacts; partially offset by issuances of $7,971 million.
Non-Financing debt of $38,077 million increased $302 million ($983 million adjusting for currency) from December 31, 2021, primarily
due to new debt issuances.
Financing segment debt of $12,872 million decreased $1,057 million ($687 million adjusting for currency) from December 31, 2021,
primarily due to lower funding requirements associated with financing assets.
Financing provides financing solutions predominantly for IBM’s external client assets, and the debt used to fund Financing assets is
primarily composed of intercompany loans. Total debt changes generally correspond with the level of client and commercial financing
receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents, the change in intercompany and external payables and the change in intercompany
investment from IBM. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially match the term, currency and
interest rate variability underlying the financing receivable. The Financing debt-to-equity ratio remained at 9.0 to 1 at December 31,
2022.
We measure Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense relating to debt supporting Financing’s external client
and internal business is included in the “Financing Results of Operations” and in note E, “Segments.” In the Consolidated Income
Statement, the external debt-related interest expense supporting Financing’s internal financing to the company is classified as interest
expense.
Equity
Total equity increased $3,025 million from December 31, 2021 as a result of:
• A decrease in accumulated other comprehensive loss of $6,494 million driven by retirement-related benefit plans, primarily due
to the pension settlement charge of $4,411 million, net of tax;
• Net income of $1,639 million, which includes the pension settlement charge of $4,411 million net of tax; and
• Common stock issuances of $962 million; partially offset by
• Dividends paid of $5,948 million.

===== PAGE 30 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Cash Flow
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows on page 49,
are summarized in the table below and include the cash flows of discontinued operations. These amounts also include the cash flows
associated with the Financing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021
Net cash provided by/(used in)
Operating activities $ 10,435 $ 12,796
Investing activities (4,202) (5,975)
Financing activities (4,958) (13,354)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (244) (185)
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash $ 1,032 $ (6,718)
Net cash provided by operating activities decreased $2,361 million in 2022. This was due to a decrease in cash provided by financing
receivables of $4,623 million primarily driven by higher prior-year sales of financing receivables and current-year z16 product cycle
dynamics, partially offset by an increase in cash from sales cycle working capital of $2,027 million primarily due to efficiencies in our
collections, and a decrease in payments for structural actions and Kyndryl separation-related charges.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $1,773 million driven by an increase in cash provided by divestitures, and a decrease
in cash used in acquisitions.
Net cash used in financing activities decreased $8,397 million. Total debt was a net source of cash of $1,221 million in 2022 as
compared to a net use of cash of $8,116 million in 2021. The year-to-year change was driven by higher issuances offsetting maturities
in the current year, compared to net higher maturities in the prior year.
Discontinued Operations
Pre-tax loss from discontinued operations was $20 million in 2022 compared to pre-tax income of $1,744 million in the prior year. As
the separation of Kyndryl occurred on November 3, 2021, the discontinued operations results for 2021 included ten months of Kyndryl
operations. The loss in 2022 primarily reflects the net impact of changes in separation-related estimates, the settlement of assets and
liabilities in accordance with the separation and distribution agreement and a gain on sale of a joint venture historically managed by
Kyndryl, which transferred to Kyndryl in the first quarter of 2022 upon receiving regulatory approval. The discontinued operations
provision for income taxes in 2022 was $124 million compared with $714 million in 2021. The discontinued operations provision for
income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2022, primarily reflects the impact of provision to return adjustments on the Kyndryl-
related taxes. See note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of our income statement results as reported under GAAP to our operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. Management’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ
from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section for
management’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax Kyndryl-
Related Related Reform Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2022: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments * Impacts Impacts (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $32,687 $ 682 $ — $ — $ — $33,370
Gross profit margin 54.0 % 1.1 pts. — pts. — pts. — pts. 55.1 %
SG&A $18,609 $(1,080) $ — $ — $ 0 $17,529
Other (income) and expense 5,803 (3) (6,548) — (351) (1,099)
Total expense and other (income) 31,531 (1,083) (6,548) — (351) 23,549
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 1,156 1,765 6,548 — 351 9,821
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 1.9 % 2.9 pts. 10.8 pts. — pts. 0.6 pts. 16.2 %
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes** $ (626) $ 436 $1,615 $ 70 $ — $ 1,495
Effective tax rate (54.2)% 14.2 pts. 52.6 pts. 0.7 pts. 1.9 pts. 15.2 %
Income from continuing operations $ 1,783 $1,329 $4,933 $ (70) $351 $ 8,326
Income margin from continuing operations 2.9 % 2.2 pts. 8.1 pts. (0.1)pts. 0.6 pts. 13.8 %
Diluted earnings per share from continuing
operations $ 1.95 $ 1.46 $ 5.41 $(0.08) $0.38 $ 9.13
* Retirement-Related Adjustments includes a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion after tax). See note V
“Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
** The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which
employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax Kyndryl-
Related Related Reform Related Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2021: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Impacts Impacts (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $31,486 $ 719 $ — $ — $ — $32,205
Gross profit margin 54.9 % 1.3 pts. — pts. — pts. — pts. 56.2 %
SG&A $18,745 $(1,160) $ — $ — $ (8) $17,577
Other (income) and expense 873 (2) (1,282) — 126 (285)
Total expense and other (income) 26,649 (1,162) (1,282) — 118 24,324
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,837 1,881 1,282 — (118) 7,881
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 8.4 % 3.3 pts. 2.2 pts. — pts. (0.2)pts. 13.7 %
Provision for income taxes* $ 124 $ 457 $ 251 $ (89) $ (37) $ 706
Effective tax rate 2.6 % 5.2 pts. 2.8 pts. (1.1)pts. (0.4)pts. 9.0 %
Income from continuing operations $ 4,712 $1,424 $1,031 $ 89 $ (81) $ 7,174
Income margin from continuing operations 8.2 % 2.5 pts. 1.8 pts. 0.2 pts. (0.1)pts. 12.5 %
Diluted earnings per share from continuing
operations $ 5.21 $ 1.57 $ 1.14 $0.10 $(0.09) $ 7.93
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which
employs an annual effective tax rate method to the results.

===== PAGE 32 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
This section provides a summary of our segment results and year-to-year comparisons between 2021 and 2020. These results have
been recast to conform to our segment change effective first-quarter 2022 which impacted the Software segment and the Other—
divested businesses category. The recast results are presented below. There was no change to the Consulting, Infrastructure or
Financing segments, and there was no change to our consolidated results. Refer to “Year in Review” pages 17 to 29 of the “Management
Discussion” section of our 2021 Annual Report for other details of our financial performance in 2021 compared to 2020.
Segment Details
The table below presents each reportable segment’s revenue and gross margin results. Prior-year results have been recast to conform
with the segment change effective first-quarter 2022.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2021 2020 Change Currency
Revenue
Software $ 23,426 * $ 22,124 * 5.9 % 4.7 %
Gross margin 79.6 %* 79.3 %* 0.3 pts.
Consulting 17,844 16,257 9.8 % 8.3 %
Gross margin 28.0 % 29.3 % (1.3)pts.
Infrastructure 14,188 14,533 (2.4)% (3.4)%
Gross margin 55.3 % 57.5 % (2.2)pts.
Financing 774 975 (20.6)% (21.9)%
Gross margin 31.7 % 41.6 % (9.9)pts.
Other 1,119 * 1,291 * (13.3)% (14.4)%
Gross margin (22.3)%* (16.0)%* (6.2)pts.
Total revenue $ 57,350 $ 55,179 3.9 % 2.7 %
Total gross profit $ 31,486 $ 30,865 2.0 %
Total gross margin 54.9 % 55.9 % (1.0)pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 719 726 (1.0)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 32,205 $ 31,591 1.9 %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 56.2 % 57.3 % (1.1)pts.
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2021 2020 Change Currency
Software revenue $ 23,426 * $ 22,124 * 5.9 % 4.7 %
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 17,036 * $ 15,518 * 9.8 % 8.5 %
Red Hat 30.6 29.6
Automation 6.1 4.8
Data & AI 0.0 (1.2)
Security 6.8 5.0
Transaction Processing 6,390 6,606 (3.3) (4.2)
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Software revenue of $23,426 million increased 5.9 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2021 compared to the prior
year. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we had incremental sales to Kyndryl, representing approximately 2 points of full-year revenue
growth. We had strong double-digit growth in Software hybrid cloud revenue as reported and adjusted for currency. There was strong
growth in Hybrid Platform & Solutions, as reported and at constant currency, driven primarily by Red Hat, Security and Automation, as
our strategy around hybrid cloud and AI solutions continued to resonate with our clients. Transaction Processing revenue decreased
year to year as reported and adjusted for currency. Although a significant portion of the revenue in this area is annuity based, the timing
of larger transactions is tied to client buying cycles and their preference for more consumption-like models which impacted sales of
perpetual licenses.
Hybrid Platform & Solutions revenue of $17,036 million increased 9.8 percent as reported (9 percent adjusted for currency) in 2021
compared to the prior year. The incremental sales from Kyndryl in the fourth quarter of 2021 in Hybrid Platform & Solutions were not
material to the full-year revenue growth. Red Hat revenue increased 30.6 percent as reported (30 percent adjusted for currency), with
strong growth across infrastructure software and application development and emerging technologies, as RHEL and OpenShift address

===== PAGE 33 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
enterprises’ critical hybrid cloud requirements. Automation revenue increased 6.1 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for
currency), reflecting solid performance in AIOps and Management as we help our clients address resource management and
observability. We are building our capabilities both organically and inorganically, and clients are realizing rapid time to value from our
acquisitions including Instana and Turbonomic. Security revenue increased 6.8 percent as reported (5 percent adjusted for currency)
with year-to-year growth across security software and services. Security innovation is an integral part of our strategy and, in the fourth
quarter of 2021, we launched a new data security solution, Guardium Insights, and completed the acquisition of ReaQta. Data & AI
revenue was flat year to year and declined 1 percent adjusted for currency. Within Data & AI, we had solid year-to-year growth in Data
Fabric as well as our Business Analytics and Weather offerings.
Transaction Processing revenue of $6,390 million decreased 3.3 percent as reported (4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2021
compared to the prior year. Incremental sales from Kyndryl in the fourth quarter of 2021 contributed approximately 5 points of full-
year revenue growth. In 2021, clients continued their preference for operating expenses over capital expenditures, which continued
to put pressure on perpetual licenses, in favor of more consumption-like models. Our subscription and support renewal rate was
stronger in 2021 compared to the prior year, reflecting our clients’ commitment to our infrastructure platform and our high-value
software offerings.
Within Software, hybrid cloud revenue of $8.4 billion grew 29 percent as reported and 27 percent adjusted for currency year to year,
driven by Red Hat as well as our software that has been optimized for our hybrid cloud platform which helps our clients apply AI,
automation and security across their environments to transform and improve their business workflows.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2021 * 2020 * Change
Software
Gross profit $ 18,648 $ 17,548 6.3 %
Gross profit margin 79.6 % 79.3 % 0.3 pts.
Pre-tax income $ 4,849 $ 3,423 41.7 %
Pre-tax margin 20.7 % 15.5 % 5.2 pts.
* Recast to reflect segment change.
The Software gross profit margin increased 0.3 points to 79.6 percent in 2021 compared to the prior year. Pre-tax income of $4,849
million increased 41.7 percent compared to the prior year with a pre-tax margin expansion of 5.2 points to 20.7 percent. The increase
in pre-tax income and margin reflects the lower workforce rebalancing charges year to year, which resulted in a 3.3 point improvement
in the pre-tax margin compared to 2020.

===== PAGE 34 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
As technology remains a fundamental source of competitive advantage, we continue to see strong demand for our hybrid cloud and AI
solutions. It is clear that technology is playing a significant role in today’s environment as clients continue to navigate several
challenges including inflation and demographic shifts, supply chain issues and heightened sustainability efforts. We are helping our
clients seize new business opportunities, overcome today’s challenges and emerge stronger. We are building a stronger, more focused
company that is closely aligned to the needs of our clients. We have continued to focus our portfolio in hybrid cloud and AI, invest in
our offerings, technical talent and ecosystem and streamline our go-to-market model.
Hybrid Cloud and AI Progress
We believe hybrid cloud and AI are the two most transformational enterprise technologies of our time. These technologies work
together to drive business outcomes. Hybrid cloud is where the world is going and containers are the preferred destination for
applications. Our platform, built on Red Hat, is the leading container platform. It allows our clients to harness the power of open-source
software innovations. Our software and infrastructure technologies have been optimized to run on that platform and include advanced
data and AI, automation and the security capabilities our clients need. Our global team of consultants leverage their extensive technical
and business expertise to accelerate clients’ digital transformation journeys. Companies are eager to deploy AI and automation
capabilities to boost their levels of productivity. We have been co-creating with clients to deploy AI at scale. We are investing in large
language or foundation models, that will allow our clients to deploy AI with greater speed and less resources and we have infused
these capabilities across our AI portfolio.
Our partner ecosystem is a key element of our strategy. We continue to expand and extend the work we do with partners to serve our
joint clients through strategic collaboration agreements. In 2023, we are expanding and better enabling our broader ecosystem. In
January, we launched PartnerPlus, a new, simplified program that increases our reach and scale through new and existing IBM
partners.
We continue to invest, both organically and inorganically, to deliver innovation for our clients and shape the technologies of the future.
Throughout 2022, we delivered significant innovations in Infrastructure with our z16 and Power platforms. Quantum is an example of
our commitment to shape the future of technology. We unveiled Osprey, a 433-qubit quantum processor that brings us closer to
delivering our goal of building a 1,000+ qubit system in 2023. We also formed a collaboration with a Japanese consortium to leverage
the depth of our intellectual property on advanced semiconductors. We completed eight acquisitions in 2022 to complement our
organic innovation, adding capabilities in areas like hybrid cloud services, security, data observability and sustainability and expanded
our footprint in the U.S. Federal market with our acquisition of Octo. Additionally, as sustainability becomes more of a priority,
companies need digital technologies to create a baseline, analyze data and improve the way they operate. We have been building a
portfolio of solutions to help companies make progress on this journey.
We remain confident in the strategy that we are executing and in the fundamentals of our business. Our balance sheet and liquidity
position remain strong. At December 31, 2022 we had $8.8 billion of cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable
securities and we continue to manage our debt levels while being acquisitive and without sacrificing investments in our business or our
solid dividend policy. We also took actions in 2022 to further reduce the risk profile of our retirement-related plans.
Our 2022 performance demonstrates that we are now a higher-growth, higher-value company. Our strategy continues to strongly
resonate with clients and partners. We enter 2023 as a more capable and nimble company, well-equipped to meet our clients’ needs.
We expect to continue our progress as a leading hybrid cloud and AI company with a focus on revenue growth and cash generation
while maintaining our solid and modestly growing dividend policy.
We expect a few dynamics to impact our profit in 2023. Currency was a significant headwind in 2022, impacting our revenue by
approximately $3.5 billion. At mid-January spot rates, currency translation would be fairly neutral to revenue in 2023, with a headwind
in the first-half changing to a tailwind in the second-half 2023. However, we recognized over $650 million of hedging gains in 2022
which will not repeat in 2023, resulting in an impact to our profit and cash on a year-to-year basis.
With the significant portfolio actions we have taken over the last couple of years, we have some remaining stranded costs in our
business. We expect to address these remaining stranded costs early in the year and anticipate a charge of approximately $300 million
in the first quarter of 2023. We would expect to generate savings in the second half and pay back by the end of the year.
Lastly, after completion of our annual review of useful lives of our property, plant and equipment assets, due to advances in technology,
we have made an accounting change to extend the useful life of our server and network equipment, effective the first of January. Based
on our year-end asset base, we expect this change to benefit 2023 pre-tax profit by over $200 million, primarily in our Infrastructure
segment. Given this is a change to depreciation expense, there is no benefit to cash.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Retirement-Related Plans
The combination of higher discount rates and the U.S. pension risk transfer, partially offset by negative asset returns, improved the
overall funded status of our plans. In aggregate, our worldwide-tax qualified plans are funded at 114 percent, with the U.S. at 125
percent. Contributions for all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $2.1 billion in 2023, an increase of
approximately $100 million compared to 2022, of which $0.2 billion generally relates to legally required contributions to non-U.S.
defined benefit and multi-employer plans. We expect 2023 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost to be approximately $1.2 billion. This
estimate reflects current pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2022. Within total retirement-related plan cost, operating
retirement-related plan cost is expected to be approximately $1.2 billion in 2023, approximately flat versus 2022. Non-operating
retirement-related plan cost is expected to be approximately $0.1 billion, a decrease of approximately $6.5 billion compared to 2022,
primarily driven by the $5.9 billion settlement charge resulting from the U.S. pension risk transfer, lower recognized actuarial losses,
partially offset by higher interest cost.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have generated solid cash flow from operations allowing us to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-term
opportunities. We provide for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to global
funding sources, committed global credit facilities and other committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The following table
provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2020 through 2022.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2022 2021 2020
Net cash from operating activities* $ 10.4 $ 12.8 ** $ 18.2
Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term marketable securities $ 8.8 $ 7.6 $ 14.3
Committed global credit facilities $ 10.0 $ 10.0 $ 15.3
* Includes cash flows of discontinued operations of $1.6 billion and $4.4 billion in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
** Includes 10 months of Kyndryl operations, and reflects cash paid in 2021 for separation charges and structural actions initiated in the fourth-quarter
2020.
See note P, “Borrowings,” for additional information.
The indenture governing our debt securities and our various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which obligate the
company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback
transactions to 10 percent of IBM’s consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict our ability to merge or consolidate unless certain
conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a covenant on our consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
We are in compliance with all of our significant debt covenants and provide periodic certification to our lenders. The failure to comply
with debt covenants could constitute an event of default with respect to our debt to which such provisions apply. If certain events of
default were to occur, the principal and interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would become immediately due and
payable.
We do not have “ratings trigger” provisions in our debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders to declare an event
of default and seek to accelerate payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. Our debt covenants are well within the
required levels. Our contractual agreements governing derivative instruments contain standard market clauses which can trigger the
termination of the agreement if IBM’s credit rating were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2022, the fair value of those
instruments that were in a liability position was $1,034 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is subject to fluctuations
in fair value period to period based on the level of our outstanding instruments and market conditions. We have no other contractual
arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect on our financial position or liquidity.
The major ratings agencies’ ratings on our debt securities at December 31, 2022 were as follows and remain unchanged from
December 31, 2021.
Moody’s
Standard Investors
IBM Ratings and Poor’s Service
Senior long-term debt A- A3
Commercial paper A-2 Prime-2
IBM has ample financial flexibility, supported by our strong liquidity position and cash flows, to operate at a single A credit rating. We
issued debt in 2022 to further improve our liquidity and plan for our 2023 debt maturities. Debt levels have decreased $0.8 billion from

===== PAGE 36 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
December 31, 2021 primarily driven by currency, partially offset by net debt issuances. In the first quarter of 2023, we issued $9.5
billion of debt primarily to plan for our debt maturity obligations in 2024. See note W, “Subsequent Events,” for additional information.
Effective December 31, 2021, the use of LIBOR was substantially eliminated for purposes of any new financial contract executions.
The UK’s Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) extended the phase out of LIBOR in the case of U.S. dollar settings for certain tenors until
the end of June 2023. Any legacy USD LIBOR based financial contracts are expected to be addressed using the LIBOR rates published
through the June 2023 extension period. The replacement of the LIBOR benchmark within the company’s risk management activities
did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial results.
We prepare our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow presentation
on page 49 and highlight causes and events underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 28. For the purpose of running
its business, IBM manages, monitors and analyzes cash flows in a different manner.
Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate its operating results, plan shareholder return levels, strategic investments
and assess its ability and need to incur and service debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily available for discretionary
expenditures. We define free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the change in Financing receivables and net capital
expenditures, including the investment in software. A key objective of the Financing business is to generate strong returns on equity,
and our Financing receivables are the basis for that growth. Accordingly, management considers Financing receivables as a profit-
generating investment, not as working capital that should be minimized for efficiency. Therefore, management includes presentations
of both free cash flow and net cash from operating activities that exclude the effect of Financing receivables.
The following is management’s view of cash flows for 2022, 2021 and 2020 prepared in a manner consistent with the description
above and is presented on a consolidated basis, including cash flows of discontinued operations.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP* $10.4 $ 12.8 $ 18.2
Less: the change in Financing receivables (0.7) 3.9 4.3
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Financing receivables 11.2 8.9 13.8
Capital expenditures, net (1.9) (2.4) (3.0)
Free cash flow (FCF) 9.3 6.5 ** 10.8
Acquisitions (2.3) (3.3) (0.3)
Divestitures 1.3 0.1 0.5
Dividends (5.9) (5.9) (5.8)
Non-Financing debt 1.9 (1.2) 0.2
Other (includes Financing receivables and Financing debt) (2.9)  (3.0) (0.1)
Change in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term
marketable securities $ 1.3  $ (6.7) $ 5.3
* Includes cash flows of discontinued operations of $1.6 billion and $4.4 billion in 2021 and 2020, respectively.
** Includes cash impacts of approximately $1.4 billion for Kyndryl-related structural actions and separation charges.
 Recast to conform to 2022 presentation.
 Includes the distribution from Kyndryl of $0.9 billion.
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 2022, after investing $1.9 billion in capital investments, we generated
free cash flow of $9.3 billion, an increase of $2.8 billion versus the prior year. The year-to-year increase in consolidated free cash flow
reflects prior year Kyndryl-related activity including the impact of separation-related charges and capital expenditures, current year
working capital improvements driven by efficiencies in collections and mainframe cycle dynamics, higher cash tax payments and
payments for structural actions in 2021, partially offset by an increase in capital expenditures in 2022 to drive our strategy. In 2022,
we continued to return value to shareholders with $5.9 billion in dividends and invested $2.3 billion in eight acquisitions.
IBM’s Board of Directors considers the dividend payment on a quarterly basis. In the second quarter of 2022, the Board of Directors
increased the company’s quarterly common stock dividend from $1.64 to $1.65 per share.
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow dynamics discussed previously include significant changes in operating
results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding
requirements during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such
an adverse impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more completely described in note R, “Commitments &
Contingencies.” With respect to pension funding, in 2022, we contributed $118 million to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans compared
to $103 million in 2021. As highlighted in the Contractual Obligations table, we expect to make legally mandated pension plan
contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of approximately $1.1 billion in the next five years. The 2023 contributions are currently
expected to be approximately $200 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately

===== PAGE 37 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
$2.1 billion in 2023, an increase of approximately $100 million compared to 2022. Financial market performance could increase the
legally mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status.
We are not quantifying any further impact from pension funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in the capital
markets or pension plan funding regulations.
In 2023, we are not legally required to make any contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
Our cash flows are sufficient to fund our current operations and obligations, including investing and financing activities such as
dividends and debt service. When additional requirements arise, we have several liquidity options available. These options may include
the ability to borrow additional funds at reasonable interest rates and utilizing our committed global credit facilities. With our share
repurchase program suspended since the close of the Red Hat acquisition, our overall shareholder payout remains at a comfortable
level and we remain fully committed to our long-standing dividend policy.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual Payments Due In
Payment Stream 2023 2024–25 2026–27 After 2027
Long-term debt obligations $51,747 $ 4,679 $ 11,131 $ 9,368 $26,570
Interest on long-term debt obligations 16,305 1,492 2,536 1,906 10,371
Finance lease obligations* 239 75 111 37 15
Operating lease obligations* 3,331 960 1,343 715 313
Purchase obligations 2,771 1,223 1,351 176 21
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit plan pension funding
(mandated)** 1,100 200 500 400
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,528 221 472 512 323
Long-term termination benefits 853 168 153 98 434
Tax reserves 5,636 143
Other 576 164 111 43 258
Total $84,086 $ 9,324 $ 17,708 $ 13,256 $38,306
* Finance lease obligations are presented on a discounted cash flow basis, whereas operating lease obligations are presented on an undiscounted cash
flow basis.
** As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2027 could not be reasonably estimated.
These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. We estimate that approximately $143 million of the liability is expected to be settled
within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of
the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next
12 months.
Certain contractual obligations reported in the previous table exclude the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the
amounts reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the previous table as their future
cash outflows are uncertain. This includes deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and other sundry items.
Certain obligations related to our divestitures are included.
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any of the
following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) we would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or (3) we must make
specified minimum payments even if we do not take delivery of the contracted products or services (take-or-pay). If the obligation to
purchase goods or services is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the previous table. If the obligation is
cancelable, but we would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obligation. Contracted
minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they represent the portion of each contract that
is a firm commitment.
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contracts that specify that we will purchase all or a portion of our requirements of a
specific product, commodity or service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in order to secure pricing
or other negotiated terms. They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, we do not consider them
to be purchase obligations.
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the effective interest rate at December 31, 2022, plus the interest rate
spread associated with that debt, if any.

===== PAGE 38 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we may enter into off-balance sheet arrangements such as client financing commitments and
guarantees. At December 31, 2022, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material
current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity,
capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for our contractual obligations, and note R, “Commitments &
Contingencies,” for detailed information about our guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification arrangements. We do not
have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires IBM to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect its
reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to be the
most critical to our financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or
assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of
outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to IBM’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed the development,
selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of IBM’s Board of Directors. Our significant accounting policies
are described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides
material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users
of the financial statements to understand a general direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not represent
management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely develop exactly as
forecasted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For our defined benefit pension plans, the measurement of the benefit obligation to plan participants and net periodic pension
(income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount rates and expected return on
plan assets.
Changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the (gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic
pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). The discount rate assumption for the IBM Personal
Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based defined benefit plan, increased by 270 basis points to 5.30 percent on December 31, 2022. This
change will decrease pre-tax income recognized in 2023 by an estimated $89 million. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the
discount rate assumption for the PPP would cause a corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the pre-tax income recognized
in 2023 of an estimated $5 million. Further changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact
our funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount rate would cause a
corresponding decrease or increase, respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $0.4 billion based upon December 31, 2022 data.
The expected long-term return on plan assets assumption is used in calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. Expected
returns on plan assets are calculated based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of
plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost. The
differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are recognized over five years
in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component of actuarial (gains)/losses,
which are recognized over the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed
thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by accounting standards.
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such that management changes its expected long-term return on plan assets
assumption, each 50 basis point change in the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption would have an estimated
impact of $139 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at
December 31, 2022 and assuming no contributions are made in 2023).
We may voluntarily make contributions or be required, by law, to make contributions to our pension plans. Actual results that differ
from the estimates may result in more or less future IBM funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. Impacts of
these types of changes on our pension plans in other countries worldwide would vary depending upon the status of each respective
plan.
In addition to the above, we evaluate other pension assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement age and mortality,
and update these assumptions to reflect experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given year can differ from
actuarial assumptions because of economic and other factors.
For additional information on our pension plans and the development of these assumptions, see note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits.”

===== PAGE 39 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue Recognition
Application of GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates. Specifically,
complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to determine the
appropriate accounting, including whether promised goods and services specified in an arrangement are distinct performance
obligations. Other significant judgments include determining the standalone selling price (SSP), determining whether IBM or a reseller
is acting as the principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts should be combined and considered part of one arrangement.
Revenue recognition is also impacted by our ability to determine when a contract is probable of collection and to estimate variable
consideration, including, for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties and performance bonuses. We consider
various factors when making these judgments, including a review of specific transactions, historical experience and market and
economic conditions. Evaluations are conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If the estimates were changed
by 10 percent in 2022, the impact on net income would have been $65 million.
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
We enter into numerous service contracts through our services businesses. During the contractual period, revenue, cost and profits
may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which we use cost-to-cost
measures of progress. For those contracts, if at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated
loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. We perform ongoing profitability analyses of these services
contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed to estimate the future costs to
complete each contract are future labor costs and product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions
recorded as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were immaterial at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determining the
consolidated provision for income taxes.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is
uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. These tax
liabilities are recognized when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are supportable, we believe that certain positions may
not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. We believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit years
based on our assessment of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates
and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that new information becomes
available which causes us to change our judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will
impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results,
estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. In the event that we change our
determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with a corresponding
impact to income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period to period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, state and
local taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations before income
taxes, consolidated net income would have decreased/improved by $12 million in 2022.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment accounting requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The
acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value of assets acquired including
separately identifiable intangible assets, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree to properly allocate
purchase price consideration. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill, requires the allocation of cash flows to those assets
or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. Our estimates are based upon assumptions
believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of management’s
assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of goodwill
may not be recoverable. We first assess qualitative factors in each of our reporting units that carry goodwill including relevant events
and circumstances that affect the fair value of the reporting units to determine whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a

===== PAGE 40 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
reporting unit is less than its carrying amount. Judgment in the assessment of qualitative factors of impairment include entity specific
factors, industry, market and other macroeconomic conditions, legal and regulatory actions, as well as other individual factors
impacting each reporting unit such as loss of key personnel and overall financial performance. If we do not perform a qualitative
assessment, or if the qualitative assessment indicates it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than its
carrying amount, we perform a quantitative test.
In the quantitative test, we compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying amount. Estimating the fair value of a reporting
unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We estimate the fair value of our reporting
units using the income approach. When circumstances warrant, we may also use a combination of the income approach and certain
market approaches. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present value of estimated
discounted future cash flows. The discounted cash flow methodology includes the use of projections, which require the use of
significant estimates and assumptions specific to the reporting unit as well as those based on general economic conditions. Factors
specific to each reporting unit include revenue growth rates, gross margins, discount rates, terminal value growth rates, capital
expenditures projections, assumed tax rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management.
After performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis during the fourth quarter of 2022, the company determined it was
not necessary to perform the quantitative goodwill impairment test. In 2021, as a result of the separation of Kyndryl and the segment
changes that occurred immediately prior to the separation, we performed the quantitative test for all reporting units which resulted in
no impairment as the estimated fair value of each reporting unit exceeded its carrying value.
Loss Contingencies
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. At least quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter
and assess our potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the
amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the
determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties related
to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes available,
we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and litigation, and may revise our estimates. These revisions in the
estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
The Financing business reviews its financing receivables portfolio on a regular basis in order to assess collectibility and records
adjustments to the allowance for credit losses at least quarterly. A description of the methods used by management to estimate the
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.” Factors that could result in actual receivable
losses that are materially different from the estimated reserve include significant changes in the economy, or a sudden change in the
economic health of a client that represents a significant concentration in Financing’s receivables portfolio.
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Financing’s segment
pre-tax income and our income from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher or lower by an estimated $17 million
depending upon whether the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates.
Change in Accounting Estimate
In the fourth quarter of 2022, we completed our annual assessment of the useful lives of our property, plant and equipment. Due to
advances in technology, we determined we should increase the estimated useful lives of our server and network equipment from five
to six years for new assets and from three to four years for used assets. This change in accounting estimate will be effective beginning
January 1, 2023 and applied on a prospective basis to the assets on our balance sheet as of December 31, 2022, as well as future
asset purchases. Based on the carrying amount of server and network equipment included in property, plant and equipment-net in our
Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2022, we estimate this change to this existing asset class will increase income from
continuing operations before income taxes for 2023 by over $200 million.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Throughout 2022, there has been significant strengthening of the U.S. dollar (USD) as compared to most other currencies. Changes in
the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the USD affect our financial results and financial position. At December 31, 2022, currency
changes resulted in assets and liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer dollars than at year-end 2021.
We use financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to foreign currency-based transactions.
The combination of the rate, breadth and magnitude of movements in currency, and the fact that we do not hedge 100 percent of our
currency exposures, resulted in a currency impact to our profit and cash flows in 2022. We execute a hedging program which defers,
versus eliminates, the volatility of currency impacts on our financial results. During periods of sustained movements in currency, the
marketplace and competition adjust to the changing rates over time.
We translate revenue, cost and expense in our non-U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. References to
“adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect adjustments based upon a simple mathematical formula. However, this constant
currency methodology that we utilize to disclose this information does not incorporate any operational actions that management could

===== PAGE 41 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
take to mitigate fluctuating currency rates, such as updates to pricing and sourcing. Currency movements impacted our year-to-year
revenue and earnings per share results in 2022. Based on the currency rate movements in 2022, total revenue increased 5.5 percent
as reported and 11.6 percent at constant currency versus 2021. On an income from continuing operations before income taxes basis,
these translation impacts mitigated by the net impact of hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum (assuming no pricing or
sourcing actions) decrease of approximately $335 million in 2022 on an as-reported basis and a decrease of approximately $455
million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The same mathematical exercise resulted in an increase of approximately $70 million in
2021 on an as-reported basis and an increase of approximately $100 million on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. We view these amounts
as a theoretical maximum impact to our as-reported financial results. Considering the operational responses mentioned above,
movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts on
any particular period.
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, translation
adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, we manage currency risk in these entities by linking prices and contracts
to U.S. dollars.
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, our financial position is routinely subject to a variety of risks, including the market risk associated
with interest rate and currency movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities, and other risks
such as collectibility of accounts receivable.
We regularly assess these risks and have established policies and business practices to protect against the adverse effects of these
and other potential exposures. As a result, we do not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
Our debt, in support of the Financing business and the geographic breadth of our operations, contains an element of market risk from
changes in interest and currency rates. We manage this risk, in part, through the use of a variety of financial instruments including
derivatives, as described in note T, “Derivative Financial Instruments.”
To meet disclosure requirements, we perform a sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures may have on
the fair values of our debt and other financial instruments.
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity analysis are comprised of our cash and cash equivalents, marketable
securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long-term and
short-term debt and derivative financial instruments. Our derivative financial instruments generally include interest rate swaps, foreign
currency swaps and forward contracts.
To perform the sensitivity analysis, we assess the risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in interest rates and
foreign currency exchange rates on market-sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign currency exchange risk
are computed based on the present value of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are attributable to the market
risk being measured. The discount rates used for the present value computations were selected based on market interest and foreign
currency exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2022 and 2021. The differences in this comparison are the hypothetical losses
associated with each type of risk.
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that we would incur
under normal market conditions because, due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor are held
constant. In addition, the results of the model are constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from the analysis,
while the financial instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items include
short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the
company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, reported changes in the values of some of the financial instruments
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those
instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2022 and 2021, are as follows:
Interest Rate Risk
A hypothetical 10 percent adverse change in the levels of interest rates, with all other variables held constant, would result in a
decrease in the fair value of our financial instruments of approximately $0.2 billion and $0.4 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021,
respectively. Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of our financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the
level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.

===== PAGE 42 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
A hypothetical 10 percent adverse change in the levels of foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar, with all other
variables held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair value of our financial instruments of approximately $1.4 billion at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. The theoretical changes are primarily driven by changes in foreign currency activities related to long-
term debt and derivatives.
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 15 for a discussion of the financing risks associated with the Financing business and
management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Cybersecurity
While cybersecurity risk can never be completely eliminated, our approach draws on the depth and breadth of our global capabilities,
both in terms of our offerings to clients and our internal approaches to risk management. We offer commercial security solutions that
deliver capabilities in areas such as identity and access management, data security, application security, network security and endpoint
security. These solutions include pervasive encryption, threat intelligence, analytics, cognitive and artificial intelligence, and forensic
capabilities that analyze client security events, yielding insights about attacks, threats, and vulnerabilities facing the client. We also
offer professional consulting and technical services solutions for security from assessment and incident response to deployment and
resource augmentation. In addition, we offer managed and outsourced security solutions from multiple security operations centers
around the world. Finally, security is embedded in a multitude of our products and offerings through secure engineering and operations,
and by critical functions (e.g., encryption, access control) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions.
From an enterprise perspective, we implement a multi-faceted risk-management approach based on the National Institute of
Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework to identify and address cybersecurity risks. In addition, we have established
policies and procedures that provide the foundation upon which IBM’s infrastructure and data are managed. We regularly assess and
adjust our technical controls and methods to identify and mitigate emerging cybersecurity risks. We use a layered approach with
overlapping controls to defend against cybersecurity attacks and threats on networks, end-user devices, servers, applications, data
and cloud solutions. We draw heavily on our own commercial security solutions and services to mitigate cybersecurity risks. We also
have threat intelligence and security monitoring programs, as well as a global incident response process to respond to cybersecurity
threats and attacks. In addition, we utilize a combination of online training, educational tools, videos and other awareness initiatives
to foster a culture of security awareness and responsibility among our workforce.
FINANCING
Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a stand-alone entity. Financing facilitates IBM clients' acquisition of information
technology systems, software and services by providing financing solutions in the areas where the company has the expertise, while
generating solid returns on equity.
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 Change
Revenue $645 $774 (16.6)%
Pre-tax income $340 $441 (22.9)%
Our Financing business is focused on IBM’s products and services. Financing revenue decreased 16.6 percent (13 percent adjusted for
currency) to $645 million compared to the prior year, primarily driven by the strategic actions taken in the prior year including selling
certain client lease and loan financing receivables to third parties. While these strategic actions impact revenue and pre-tax income on
a year-to-year basis, our repositioning of the Financing business has strengthened our liquidity position, improved the quality of our
portfolio, and lowered our debt needs.
Financing pre-tax income decreased 22.9 percent to $340 million compared to the prior year and the pre-tax margin of 52.6 percent
decreased 4.4 points year to year. The decrease in pre-tax income in 2022 was primarily driven by the strategic actions described
above.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financial Position
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Cash and cash equivalents $ 699 $ 1,359
Client financing receivables
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases (1) 4,047 3,396
Client loans 8,329 8,818
Total client financing receivables $12,376 $12,215
Commercial financing receivables
Held for investment 293 444
Held for sale 939 793
Other receivables 66 61
Total external receivables (2) $13,674 $13,512
Intercompany financing receivables (3)(4) 602 778
Other assets(5) 781 1,231
Total assets $15,757 $16,880
Intercompany payables (3) $ 637 $ 467
Debt (6) 12,872 13,929
Other liabilities 814 937
Total liabilities $14,323 $15,333
Total equity $ 1,433 $ 1,547
Total liabilities and equity $15,757 $16,880
(1) Includes deferred initial direct costs which are expensed in IBM’s consolidated financial results.
(2) The difference between the decrease in total external receivables of $0.2 billion (from $13.5 billion in 2021 to $13.7 billion in 2022) and the $0.7 billion
change in Financing segment’s receivables disclosed in the free cash flow presentation on page 34 is primarily attributable to currency impacts.
(3) The entire amount is eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated financial results and therefore does not appear in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(4) These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the value in the table using Financing segment debt.
(5) Includes $0.4 billion of other intercompany assets in 2022 and $0.7 billion in 2021.
(6) Financing segment debt is primarily composed of intercompany loans.
At December 31, 2022, we continue to apply our rigorous credit policies. Approximately 73 percent of the total external portfolio was
with investment-grade clients with no direct exposure to consumers, an increase of 6 points year to year and an increase of 1 point
compared to September 30, 2022. This investment grade percentage is based on the credit ratings of the companies in the portfolio
and reflects certain mitigating actions taken to reduce the risk to IBM.
We have a long-standing practice of taking mitigation actions, in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to third parties. These
actions may include credit insurance, financial guarantees, nonrecourse secured borrowings, transfers of receivables recorded as true
sales in accordance with accounting guidance or sales of equipment under operating lease. Sale of receivables arrangements are also
utilized in the normal course of business as part of our cash and liquidity management.
The company has an existing agreement with a third-party investor to sell IBM short-term commercial financing receivables on a
revolving basis. The company has expanded this agreement to other countries and geographies since commencement in the U.S. and
Canada in 2020. In addition, the company enters into agreements with third-party financial institutions to sell certain of its client
financing receivables, including both loan and lease receivables, for cash proceeds. In 2022, sales of client financing receivables were
largely focused on credit mitigation. During 2021, sales of client financing receivables were utilized as part of the company’s cash and
liquidity management as well as for credit mitigation.

===== PAGE 44 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the total amount of commercial and client financing receivables transferred:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021
Commercial financing receivables
Receivables transferred during the period $9,029 $7,359
Receivables uncollected at end of period* $1,561 $1,653
Client financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 15 $ 819
Loan receivables 2 2,224
Total client financing receivables transferred $ 17 $3,043
* Of the total amount of commercial financing receivables sold and derecognized from the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the amounts presented remained
uncollected from business partners as of December 31, 2022 and 2021.
For additional information relating to financing receivables refer to note L, “Financing Receivables.” Refer to pages 26 to 27 for
additional information related to Financing segment receivables, allowance for credit losses and debt.
Return on Equity Calculation
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Numerator
Financing after-tax income (1) * $ 279 $ 374
Denominator
Average Financing equity (2) ** $ 1,389 $ 1,935
Financing return on equity (1)/(2) 20.1 % 19.3 %
* Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is
determined on a consolidated basis.
** Average of the ending equity for Financing for the last five quarters.
Return on equity was 20.1 percent compared to 19.3 percent for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The
increase was driven by a lower average equity balance, partially offset by a decrease in net income, which reflects the strategic actions
taken in the prior year to reposition the Financing business.
Residual Value
The estimated residual value represents the estimated fair value of the equipment under lease at the end of the lease. The company
estimates the future fair value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market for new and used
equipment and obtaining forward-looking product information such as marketing plans and technology innovations.
The company optimizes the recovery of residual values by extending lease arrangements with, or selling leased equipment to existing
clients and periodically reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values.
The following table presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed residual value for sales-type and direct financing leases at
December 31, 2022 and 2021. In addition, the table presents the run out of when the unguaranteed residual value assigned to
equipment on leases at December 31, 2022, is expected to be returned to the company. The unguaranteed residual value for operating
leases at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was not material.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Estimated Run Out of December 31, 2022 Balance
At December 31, At December 31, 2026
2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 and Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $335 $422 $84 $68 $147 $123

===== PAGE 45 =====
Report of Management 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management.
The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America, applying certain estimates and judgments as required.
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines of
responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive systems and control procedures. An important element of the control
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to
correct deficiencies as they are identified.
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective
functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest
ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are
distributed to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through internal programs to assure that they are understood and
followed.
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed solely of independent, non-management directors, and is responsible for
recommending to the Board the independent registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets regularly and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm,
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and
financial reporting matters.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. Internal
control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company;
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets
that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria established
in Internal Control–Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission
(COSO). Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective as
of December 31, 2022.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).
Arvind Krishna
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
February 28, 2023
James J. Kavanaugh
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
February 28, 2023

===== PAGE 46 =====
44 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of International Business Machines Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of International Business Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries
(the “Company”) as of December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the related consolidated statements of income, of comprehensive income,
of equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2022, including the related notes (collectively
referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company's internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of
the Company as of December 31, 2022 and 2021, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the
period ended December 31, 2022 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in
our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31,
2022, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Basis for Opinions
The Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over
financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s
consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are required to be
independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations
of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits
to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due
to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of
the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as
well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial reporting
included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and
testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable
basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of
financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the
company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements
in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only
in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect
on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in
conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial statements
that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are

===== PAGE 47 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The
communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a
whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the critical audit matter or on
the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Income Taxes–Uncertain Tax Positions
As described in Notes A and H to the consolidated financial statements, the Company is subject to income taxes in the United States and
numerous foreign jurisdictions. As disclosed by management, during the ordinary course of business there are many transactions and
calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. As a result, management recognizes tax liabilities based on estimates of
whether additional taxes and interest will be due. As further described by management, these tax liabilities are recognized when, despite
management’s belief that the tax return positions are supportable, management believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained
upon review by tax authorities. Management bases its assessment of the accruals for tax liabilities on many factors, including past
experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex
judgments about future events. As of December 31, 2022, unrecognized tax benefits were $8.7 billion.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to uncertain tax positions is a critical audit matter
are the significant judgment by management when estimating the uncertain tax positions, including applying complex tax laws, and a high
degree of estimation uncertainty based on potential for significant adjustments as a result of audits by tax authorities or other forms of tax
settlement. This in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, effort, and subjectivity in performing procedures to evaluate management’s
timely identification and measurement of uncertain tax positions. Also, the evaluation of audit evidence available to support the uncertain
tax positions is complex and required significant auditor judgment as the nature of the evidence is often inherently subjective, and the audit
effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the
consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the identification and
recognition of the uncertain tax positions, and controls addressing completeness of the uncertain tax positions, as well as controls over
measurement of the amount recorded. These procedures also included, among others (i) testing the information used in the calculation of
the uncertain tax positions, including intercompany agreements and international, federal, and state filing positions; (ii) testing the
calculation of the uncertain tax positions by jurisdiction, including management’s assessment of the technical merits of tax positions and
estimates of the amount of tax benefit expected to be sustained; (iii) testing the completeness of management’s assessment of both the
identification of uncertain tax positions and possible outcomes of each uncertain tax position; and (iv) evaluating the status and results of
income tax audits pending in various tax jurisdictions. Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in the
evaluation of the completeness and measurement of the Company’s uncertain tax positions, including evaluating the reasonableness of
management’s assessment of whether tax positions are more-likely-than-not of being sustained and the amount of potential benefit to be
realized.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 28, 2023
We, or firms that we have ultimately acquired, have served as the Company’s auditor since 1923. For the period from 1923 to 1958,
the Company was audited by firms that a predecessor firm to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP ultimately acquired.

===== PAGE 48 =====
46 Consolidated Income Statement
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2022 2021 2020
Revenue
Services $30,206 $29,225 $27,626
Sales 29,673 27,346 26,569
Financing 651 780 984
Total revenue D 60,530 57,350 55,179
Cost
Services 21,062 19,147 17,689
Sales 6,374 6,184 6,048
Financing 406 534 577
Total cost 27,842 25,865 24,314
Gross profit 32,687 31,486 30,865
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 18,609 18,745 20,561
Research, development and engineering G 6,567 6,488 6,262
Intellectual property and custom development income (663) (612) (620)
Other (income) and expense A 5,803 873 802
Interest expense P&T 1,216 1,155 1,288
Total expense and other (income) 31,531 26,649 28,293
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 1,156 4,837 2,572
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes H (626) 124 (1,360)
Income from continuing operations 1,783 4,712 3,932
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax C (143) 1,030 1,658
Net income $ 1,639 * $ 5,743 $ 5,590
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations I $ 1.95 $ 5.21 $ 4.38
Discontinued operations I (0.16) 1.14 1.85
Total I $ 1.80 $ 6.35 $ 6.23
Basic
Continuing operations I $ 1.97 $ 5.26 $ 4.42
Discontinued operations I (0.16) 1.15 1.86
Total I $ 1.82 $ 6.41 $ 6.28
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 912,269,062 904,641,001 896,563,971
Basic 902,664,190 895,990,771 890,348,679
* Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 49 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2022 2021 * 2020 *
Net income $ 1,639 $ 5,743 $ 5,590
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments S 176 987 (1,500)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities S
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period (1) 0 (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities (1) 0 (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges S
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 241 344 (349)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income (400) 243 (21)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges (158) 587 (370)
Retirement-related benefit plans S
Prior service costs/(credits) 463 (51) (37)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 878 2,433 (1,678)
Curtailments and settlements 5,970 94 52
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs 12 9 13
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,596 2,484 2,314
Total retirement-related benefit plans 8,919 4,969 664
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax S 8,936 6,542 (1,206)
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income S (2,442) (1,703) 466
Other comprehensive income/(loss) S 6,494 4,839 (740)
Total comprehensive income $ 8,134 $ 10,582 $ 4,850
* Amounts presented have not been recast to exclude discontinued operations.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 50 =====
48 Consolidated Balance Sheet
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2022 2021
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 7,886 $ 6,650
Restricted cash 103 307
Marketable securities J 852 600
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $233 in 2022 and $218 in 2021) 6,541 6,754
Short-term financing receivables L
Held for investment (net of allowances of $145 in 2022 and $176 in 2021) 6,851 7,221
Held for sale 939 793
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $89 in 2022 and $24 in 2021) 817 1,002
Inventory K 1,552 1,649
Deferred costs D 967 1,097
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 2,611 3,466
Total current assets 29,118 29,539
Property, plant and equipment M 18,695 20,085
Less: Accumulated depreciation M 13,361 14,390
Property, plant and equipment—net M 5,334 5,694
Operating right-of-use assets—net N 2,878 3,222
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $28 in 2022 and $25 in 2021) L 5,806 5,425
Prepaid pension assets V 8,236 9,850
Deferred costs D 866 924
Deferred taxes H 6,256 7,370
Goodwill O 55,949 55,643
Intangible assets—net O 11,184 12,511
Investments and sundry assets 1,617 1,823
Total assets $ 127,243 $ 132,001
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes H $ 2,196 $ 2,289
Short-term debt J&P 4,760 6,787
Accounts payable 4,051 3,955
Compensation and benefits 3,481 3,204
Deferred income 12,032 12,518
Operating lease liabilities N 874 974
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 4,111 3,892
Total current liabilities 31,505 33,619
Long-term debt J&P 46,189 44,917
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations V 9,596 14,435
Deferred income 3,499 3,577
Operating lease liabilities N 2,190 2,462
Other liabilities Q 12,243 13,996
Total liabilities 105,222 113,005
Commitments and Contingencies R
Equity S
IBM stockholders' equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 58,343 57,319
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2022—2,257,116,920; 2021—2,248,577,848)
Retained earnings 149,825 154,209
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2022—1,351,024,943; 2021—1,350,509,249) (169,484) (169,392)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (16,740) (23,234)
Total IBM stockholders' equity 21,944 18,901
Noncontrolling interests A 77 95
Total equity 22,021 18,996
Total liabilities and equity $ 127,243 $ 132,001
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 51 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 1,639 $ 5,743 $ 5,590
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities
Pension settlement charge 5,894 — —
Depreciation 2,407 3,888 4,227
Amortization of intangibles 2,395 2,529 2,468
Stock-based compensation 987 982 937
Deferred taxes (2,726) (2,001) (3,203)
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other (122) (307) (70)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) (539) 1,372 5,297
Retirement related 331 1,038 936
Inventory 71 138 (209)
Other assets/other liabilities (115) (671) 2,087
Accounts payable 213 85 138
Net cash provided by operating activities 10,435 12,796 18,197
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (1,346) (2,062) (2,618)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment 111 387 188
Investment in software (626) (706) (612)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (5,930) (3,561) (6,246)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 4,665 3,147 5,618
Non-operating finance receivables—net 0 0 475
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (2,348) (3,293) (336)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 1,272 114 503
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities (4,202) (5,975) (3,028)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 7,804 522 10,504
Payments to settle debt (6,800) (8,597) (13,365)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 217 (40) (853)
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (407) (319) (302)
Financing—other 176 70 92
Distribution from Kyndryl — 879 * —
Cash dividends paid (5,948) (5,869) (5,797)
Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities (4,958) (13,354) (9,721)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (244) (185) (87)
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash 1,032 (6,718) 5,361
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at January 1 6,957 13,675 8,314
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at December 31 $ 7,988 $ 6,957 $ 13,675
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 1,865 $ 2,103 $ 2,253
Interest paid on debt $ 1,401 $ 1,512 $ 1,830
* Represents $879 million net cash proceeds from Kyndryl dividend payments to IBM, funded from the proceeds of $2.9 billion of debt issued and retained
by Kyndryl.
Cash flows above are presented on an IBM consolidated basis. Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for additional information related to cash flows from
Kyndryl discontinued operations.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 52 =====
50 Consolidated Statement of Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2020
Equity, January 1, 2020 $55,895 $ 162,954 $ (169,413) $(28,597) $20,841 $144 $20,985
Cumulative effect of change in accounting
principle* (66) (66) (66)
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 5,590 5,590 5,590
Other comprehensive income/(loss) (740) (740) (740)
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 4,850 $ 4,850
Cash dividends paid—common stock
($6.51 per share) (5,797) (5,797) (5,797)
Common stock issued under employee
plans (4,972,028 shares) 661 661 661
Purchases (2,363,966 shares) and sales
(2,934,907 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plans—net 36 74 110 110
Changes in noncontrolling interests (15) (15)
Equity, December 31, 2020 $56,556 $ 162,717 $ (169,339) $(29,337) $20,597 $129 $20,727
* Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on current expected credit losses.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2021
Equity, January 1, 2021 $56,556 $162,717 $(169,339) $(29,337) $20,597 $129 $20,727
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 5,743 5,743 5,743
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 4,839 4,839 4,839
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $10,582 $10,582
Cash dividends paid—common stock
($6.55 per share) (5,869) (5,869) (5,869)
Common stock issued under employee
plans (5,608,845 shares) 762 762 762
Purchases (2,286,912 shares) and sales
(2,093,243 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plans—net 22 (53) (31) (31)
Separation of Kyndryl* (8,404) 1,264 (7,140) (62) (7,203)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 28 28
Equity, December 31, 2021 $57,319 $154,209 $(169,392) $(23,234) $18,901 $ 95 $18,996
* Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for additional information.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 53 =====
Consolidated Statement of Equity 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2022
Equity, January 1, 2022 $57,319 $154,209 $(169,392) $(23,234) $18,901 $ 95 $ 18,996
Net income plus other comprehensive
income/(loss)
Net income 1,639 1,639 1,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss) 6,494 6,494 6,494
Total comprehensive income/(loss) $ 8,134 $ 8,134
Cash dividends paid—common stock
($6.59 per share) (5,948) (5,948) (5,948)
Common stock issued under employee
plans (8,539,072 shares) 962 962 962
Purchases (3,027,994 shares) and sales
(2,512,300 shares) of treasury stock
under employee plans—net (12) (92) (104) (104)
Other equity 63 (63) 0 0
Changes in noncontrolling interests (18) (18)
Equity, December 31, 2022 $58,343 $149,825 $(169,484) $(16,740) $21,944 $ 77 $ 22,021
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 54 =====
52 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or the
company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP).
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers for
disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior-year amounts
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable. In addition, in the first quarter
of 2022, an adjustment of $63 million was recorded between common stock and retained earnings related to the issuance of treasury
stock in connection with certain previously issued stock-based compensation awards and is reflected in the Consolidated Balance
Sheet and Consolidated Statement of Equity at December 31, 2022.
On November 3, 2021, the company completed the separation of its managed infrastructure services unit into a new public company
with the distribution of 80.1 percent of the outstanding common stock of Kyndryl Holdings, Inc. (Kyndryl) to IBM stockholders on a pro
rata basis. To effect the separation, IBM stockholders received one share of Kyndryl common stock for every five shares of IBM common
stock held at the close of business on October 25, 2021, the record date for the distribution. The company retained 19.9 percent of the
shares of Kyndryl common stock immediately following the separation. During 2022, the company fully disposed of its retained interest
in Kyndryl common stock pursuant to exchange agreements with a third-party financial institution, which were completed within twelve
months of separation. Refer to note J, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for additional information. At December 31, 2022, the company
no longer held an ownership interest in Kyndryl.
The accounting requirements for reporting the separation of Kyndryl as a discontinued operation were met when the separation was
completed. Accordingly, the historical results of Kyndryl are presented as discontinued operations and, as such, have been excluded
from continuing operations and segment results for all periods presented. Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for additional
information.
In the first quarter of 2022, the company realigned its management structure to reflect the planned divestiture of its healthcare
software assets which was completed in the second quarter of 2022. This change impacted the company’s Software segment and
Other–divested businesses category, but did not impact the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Refer to note E,
“Segments,” for additional information on the company’s reportable segments. The segments presented in this Annual Report are
reported on a comparable basis for all periods.
In September 2022, the IBM Qualified Personal Pension Plan (Qualified PPP) purchased two separate nonparticipating single premium
group annuity contracts from The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Metropolitan Life Insurance Company (collectively,
the Insurers) and irrevocably transferred to the Insurers approximately $16 billion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension
obligations and related plan assets, thereby reducing the company’s pension obligations and assets by the same amount. The group
annuity contracts were purchased using assets of the Qualified PPP and no additional funding contribution was required from the
company. As a result of this transaction the company recognized a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9
billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2022, primarily related to the accelerated recognition of accumulated actuarial
losses of the Qualified PPP. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
The company reported a benefit from income taxes of $626 million for the year ended December 31, 2022. This tax benefit was
primarily due to the transfer of a portion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan assets, as described
above. The benefit from income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2020 was primarily due to the tax impacts of an intra-entity
sale of certain of the company’s intellectual property. Refer to note H, “Taxes,” for additional information.
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $20 million, $19 million and $13 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021
and 2020, respectively, are included as a reduction within other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority owned.
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported as a component of total equity in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is reported as described above in the Consolidated Income Statement.
The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in
business entities in which the company does not have control but has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and the company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in
other (income) and expense. The accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is described within the “Marketable
Securities” section of this note. Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities lacking controlling financial interest or significant
influence are primarily measured at cost, absent other indicators of fair value, net of impairment, if any. All intercompany transactions
and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.

===== PAGE 55 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that affect
amounts that are reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclosures. Estimates are made for the
following, among others: revenue, costs to complete service contracts, income taxes, pension assumptions, valuation of assets
including goodwill and intangible assets, loss contingencies, allowance for credit losses and other matters. These estimates are based
on management’s best knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that the company may undertake in the future and
on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may be different from these
estimates.
In the fourth quarter of 2022, the company completed its annual assessment of the useful lives of its information technology
equipment. Due to advances in technology, the company determined it should increase the estimated useful lives of its server and
network equipment from five to six years for new assets and from three to four years for used assets. This change in accounting
estimate will be effective beginning January 1, 2023 and applied on a prospective basis to these assets on the company’s balance
sheet as of December 31, 2022, as well as future asset purchases. Based on the carrying amount of server and network equipment
included in property, plant and equipment-net in the company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet as of December 31, 2022, the company
estimates this change will increase income from continuing operations before income taxes for 2023 by over $200 million.
Revenue
The company accounts for a contract with a client when it has written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the parties,
including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product or service transfers to a client, in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring those products or services. If the consideration
promised in a contract includes a variable amount, the company estimates the amount to which it expects to be entitled using either
the expected value or most likely amount method. The company’s contracts may include terms that could cause variability in the
transaction price, including, for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties, and performance bonuses or other forms
of contingent revenue.
The company only includes estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of
cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The company
may not be able to reliably estimate contingent revenue in certain long-term arrangements due to uncertainties that are not expected
to be resolved for a long period of time or when the company’s experience with similar types of contracts is limited. The company’s
arrangements infrequently include contingent revenue. Changes in estimates of variable consideration are included in note D, “Revenue
Recognition.”
The company’s standard billing terms are that payment is due upon receipt of invoice, payable within 30 days. Invoices are generally
issued as control transfers and/or as services are rendered. Additionally, in determining the transaction price, the company adjusts the
promised amount of consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the billing terms are not standard and the timing of
payments agreed to by the parties to the contract provide the client or the company with a significant benefit of financing, in which
case the contract contains a significant financing component. As a practical expedient, the company does not account for significant
financing components if the period between when the company transfers the promised product or service to the client and when the
client pays for that product or service will be one year or less. Most arrangements that contain a financing component are financed
through the company’s Financing business and include explicit financing terms.
The company may include subcontractor services or third-party vendor equipment or software in certain integrated services
arrangements. In these types of arrangements, revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services is recorded net of costs
when the company is acting as an agent between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is the principal for the
transaction. To determine whether the company is an agent or principal, the company considers whether it obtains control of the
products or services before they are transferred to the customer. In making this evaluation, several factors are considered, most
notably whether the company has primary responsibility for fulfillment to the client, as well as inventory risk and pricing discretion.
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as resellers) when the
reseller has economic substance apart from the company and the reseller is considered the principal for the transaction with the end-
user client.
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions.
In addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements with
multiple performance obligations and for each major category of revenue.

===== PAGE 56 =====
54 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
The company’s global capabilities as a hybrid cloud platform and AI company include services, software, hardware and related
financing. The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist of any combination of these products and services based
on the needs of its clients.
The company continues to develop new products and offerings and their associated consumption and delivery methods, including the
use of cloud and as-a-Service models. These are not separate businesses; they are offerings across the segments that address market
opportunities in areas such as analytics, data, cloud, security and sustainability. Revenue from these offerings follows the specific
revenue recognition policies for arrangements with multiple performance obligations and for each major category of revenue,
depending on the type of offering, which are comprised of services, software and/or hardware.
To the extent that a product or service in multiple performance obligation arrangements is subject to other specific accounting
guidance, such as leasing guidance, that product or service is accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. For all other
products or services in these arrangements, the company determines if the products or services are distinct and allocates the
consideration to each distinct performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis.
When products and services are not distinct, the company determines an appropriate measure of progress based on the nature of its
overall promise for the single performance obligation.
The revenue policies in the Services, Hardware and/or Software sections below are applied to each performance obligation, as
applicable.
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include consulting services, including business transformation; technology consulting and
application operations including the design and development of complex IT environments to a client’s specifications (e.g., design and
build); cloud services; business process outsourcing; and infrastructure support. Many of these services can be delivered entirely or
partially through cloud or as-a-Service delivery models. The company’s services are provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-
price contract or as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the contract terms generally range from less than one year to 5
years.
In services arrangements, the company typically satisfies the performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time. In design and
build arrangements, the performance obligation is satisfied over time either because the client controls the asset as it is created (e.g.,
when the asset is built at the customer site) or because the company’s performance does not create an asset with an alternative use
and the company has an enforceable right to payment plus a reasonable profit for performance completed to date. In most other
services arrangements, the performance obligation is satisfied over time because the client simultaneously receives and consumes the
benefits provided as the company performs the services.
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized on an output basis as labor hours are delivered and/or direct expenses are
incurred. Revenue from as-a-Service type contracts, such as Infrastructure-as-a-Service, is recognized either on a straight-line basis
or on a usage basis, depending on the terms of the arrangement (such as whether the company is standing ready to perform or whether
the contract has usage-based metrics). If an as-a-Service contract includes setup activities, those promises in the arrangement are
evaluated to determine if they are distinct.
In areas such as application management, business process outsourcing and other cloud-based services arrangements, the company
determines whether the services performed during the initial phases of the arrangement, such as setup activities, are distinct. In most
cases, the arrangement is a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are substantially the same and
that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). The company applies a measure of progress (typically time-based)
to any fixed consideration and allocates variable consideration to the distinct periods of service based on usage. As a result, revenue
is generally recognized over the period the services are provided on a usage basis. This results in revenue recognition that corresponds
with the value to the client of the services transferred to date relative to the remaining services promised.
Revenue related to maintenance and technology lifecycle support and extended warranty is recognized on a straight-line basis over
the period of performance because the company is standing ready to provide services.
In design and build contracts, revenue is recognized based on progress toward completion of the performance obligation using a cost-
to-cost measure of progress. Revenue is recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total estimated
labor costs to fulfill the contract. Due to the nature of the work performed in these arrangements, the estimation of cost at completion
is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. Key factors reviewed by the company to estimate costs to
complete each contract are future labor and product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Changes in original estimates are
reflected in revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise to the revision become

===== PAGE 57 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
known by the company. Refer to note D, “Revenue Recognition,” for the amount of revenue recognized in the reporting period on a
cumulative catch-up basis (i.e., from performance obligations satisfied, or partially satisfied, in previous periods).
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its design and build services contracts accounted for using a cost-to-cost
measure of progress in order to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and profits require updating. If at any time
these estimates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded
immediately. For other types of services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income of
$3,241 million and $3,460 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, is included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. In
other services contracts, the company performs the services prior to billing the client. When the company performs services prior to
billing the client in design and build contracts, the right to consideration is typically subject to milestone completion or client
acceptance and the unbilled accounts receivable is classified as a contract asset. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, contract assets for
services contracts of $426 million and $430 million, respectively, are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. The remaining amount of unbilled accounts receivable of $788 million and $723 million at December 31,
2022 and 2021, respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable–trade in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of Hybrid Infrastructure solutions including zSystems as well as Distributed
Infrastructure solutions such as Power and storage solutions. The capabilities of these products can also be delivered through as-a-
Service or cloud delivery models, such as Infrastructure-as-a-Service and Storage-as-a-Service. The company also offers installation
services for its more complex hardware products. Hardware offerings are often sold with distinct maintenance services, described in
the Services section above.
Revenue from hardware sales is recognized when control has transferred to the customer which typically occurs when the hardware
has been shipped to the client, risk of loss has transferred to the client and the company has a present right to payment for the
hardware. In limited circumstances when a hardware sale includes client acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized either when
client acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria
specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. Revenue from hardware sales-type leases is recognized at the
beginning of the lease term. Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the rental
or lease.
Revenue from as-a-Service arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or on a usage basis as described in the Services
section above. Installation services are accounted for as distinct performance obligations with revenue recognized as the services are
performed. Shipping and handling activities that occur after the client has obtained control of a product are accounted for as an activity
to fulfill the promise to transfer the product rather than as an additional promised service and, therefore, no revenue is deferred and
recognized over the shipping period.
Software
The company’s software offerings include hybrid platform software solutions, which contain many of the company’s strategic areas
including Red Hat, automation, data and AI, security and sustainability; transaction processing, which primarily supports mission-
critical systems for clients; and distributed infrastructure software, which provides operating systems for zSystems and Power Systems
hardware. These offerings include proprietary software and open-source software, and many can be delivered entirely or partially
through as-a-Service or cloud delivery models, while others are delivered as on-premise software licenses.
Revenue from proprietary perpetual (one-time charge) license software is recognized at a point in time at the inception of the
arrangement when control transfers to the client, if the software license is distinct from the post-contract support (PCS) offered by the
company.
Revenue from proprietary term license software is recognized at a point in time for the committed term of the contract, unless
consideration depends on client usage, in which case revenue is recognized when the usage occurs.
Proprietary term licenses often have a one-month contract term due to client termination rights, in which case, revenue would be
recognized in that month for both the license and PCS. Clients may contract to convert their existing IBM term license software into
perpetual license software plus PCS. When proprietary term license software is converted to perpetual license software, the
consideration becomes fixed with no cancellability and, therefore, revenue for the perpetual license is recognized upon conversion,
consistent with the accounting for other perpetual licenses, as described above. PCS revenue is recognized as described below.

===== PAGE 58 =====
56 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company also has open-source software offerings. Since open-source software is offered under an open-source licensing model
and therefore, the license is available for free, the standalone selling price is zero. As such, when the license is sold with PCS or other
products and services, no consideration is allocated to the license when it is a distinct performance obligation and therefore no revenue
is recognized when control of the license transfers to the client. Revenue is recognized over the PCS period. In certain cases, open-
source software is bundled with proprietary software and, if the open-source software is not considered distinct, the software bundle
(e.g., Cloud Pak) is accounted for under a proprietary software model. Cloud Paks can be sold either as perpetual or committed-term
software licenses, both of which are described above.
Revenue from PCS is recognized over the contract term on a straight-line basis because the company is providing a service of standing
ready to provide support, when-and-if needed, and is providing unspecified software upgrades on a when-and-if available basis over
the contract term.
Revenue from software hosting or Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or on a usage
basis as described in the Services section above. In software hosting arrangements, the rights provided to the client (e.g., ownership
of a license, contract termination provisions and the feasibility of the client to operate the software) are considered in determining
whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements that include a software license, the associated revenue is recognized in
accordance with the software license recognition policy above rather than over time as a service.
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Standalone Selling Price
The company allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The standalone
selling price (SSP) is the price at which the company would sell a promised product or service separately to a client. In most cases, the
company is able to establish SSP based on the observable prices of products or services sold separately in comparable circumstances
to similar clients. The company typically establishes SSP ranges for its products and services which are reassessed on a periodic basis
or when facts and circumstances change.
In certain instances, the company may not be able to establish a SSP range based on observable prices, and as a result, the company
estimates SSP. The company estimates SSP by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, overall market conditions,
including geographic or regional specific factors, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing practices. Additionally, in certain
circumstances, the company may estimate SSP for a product or service by applying the residual approach. Estimating SSP is a formal
process that includes review and approval by the company’s management.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts are recognized as incurred. For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of
external hardware and software accounted for under the cost-to-cost measure of progress are deferred and recognized based on the
labor costs incurred to date (i.e., the measure of progress), as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the contract as
control transfers over time for these performance obligations. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs (i.e., setup costs) incurred in the
initial phases of business process outsourcing contracts and other cloud-based services contracts, including Software-as-a-Service
arrangements, are capitalized when the costs relate directly to the contract, the costs generate or enhance resources of the company
that will be used in satisfying the performance obligation in the future, and the costs are expected to be recovered. These costs consist
of transition and setup costs related to the provisioning, configuring, implementation and training and other deferred fulfillment costs,
including, for example, prepaid assets used in services contracts (i.e., prepaid software or prepaid maintenance). Capitalized costs are
amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which includes anticipated contract renewals or extensions,
consistent with the transfer to the client of the services to which the asset relates. Additionally, fixed assets associated with these
contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract
specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess
of the fair value of acquired assets used in business process outsourcing arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line
basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit. The company performs periodic reviews to assess the recoverability
of deferred contract transition and setup costs. If the carrying amount is deemed not recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized.
Refer to note D, “Revenue Recognition,” for the amount of deferred costs to fulfill a contract at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
In situations in which a business process outsourcing or other cloud-based services contract is terminated, the terms of the contract
may require the client to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamortized deferred contract costs
and additional costs incurred by the company to transition the services.

===== PAGE 59 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research,
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging up
to three years and are recorded in software cost within cost of sales. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that
unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged to
software cost within cost of sales as incurred.
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to purchase or develop internal-use software. Internal-use software programs
also include software used by the company to deliver Software-as-a-Service when the client does not receive a license to the software
and the company has no substantive plans to market the software externally. Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis
over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense or cost of sales, depending on
whether the software is used by the company in revenue generating transactions. Additionally, the company may capitalize certain
types of implementation costs and amortize them over the term of the arrangement when the company is a customer in a cloud-
computing arrangement.
Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract (e.g., sales commissions) are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected customer relationship period if the company expects to recover those costs. The expected customer relationship period,
determined based on the average customer relationship period, including expected renewals, for each offering type, is three years.
Expected renewal periods are only included in the expected customer relationship period if commission amounts paid upon renewal
are not commensurate with amounts paid on the initial contract. Incremental costs of obtaining a contract include only those costs the
company incurs to obtain a contract that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been obtained. The company has determined
that certain commissions programs meet the requirements to be capitalized. Some commission programs are not subject to
capitalization as the commission expense is paid and recognized as the related revenue is recognized. Additionally, as a practical
expedient, the company expenses costs to obtain a contract as incurred if the amortization period would have been a year or less.
These costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that generally range up to three years, with the majority being either one or
three years. Any cost of standard warranties is accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. The company estimates its
standard warranty costs for products based on historical warranty claim experience and estimates of future spending and applies this
estimate to the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue recognized
in the current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the
remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made when
actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended
warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-line
basis over the delivery period because the company is providing a service of standing ready to provide services over such term.
Refer to note R, “Commitments & Contingencies,” for additional information.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred and included in cost in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to income as incurred, except for certain sales commissions, which are
capitalized and amortized. For further information regarding capitalizing sales commissions, see “Incremental Costs of Obtaining a
Contract” above. Expenses of promoting and selling products and services are classified as selling expense and, in addition to sales
commissions, include such items as compensation, advertising and travel. General and administrative expense includes such items as
compensation, legal costs, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and office rental. In addition, general and administrative
expense includes other operating items such as an allowance for credit losses, workforce rebalancing charges for contractually
obligated payments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, acquisition costs related to business combinations,
amortization of certain intangible assets and environmental remediation costs.
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are
recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred.

===== PAGE 60 =====
58 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,330 million, $1,413 million and
$1,509 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the
finished product after technological feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets
and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based
sales/other transfers. Income from licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of the license term if the nature of the
company’s promise is to provide a right to use the company’s intellectual property as it exists at that point in time (i.e., the license is
functional intellectual property) and control has transferred to the client. Income is recognized over time if the nature of the company’s
promise is to provide a right to access the company’s intellectual property throughout the license period (i.e., the license is symbolic
intellectual property), such as a trademark license. Income from royalty-based fee arrangements is recognized at the later of when the
subsequent sale or usage occurs or the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been allocated has been satisfied
(or partially satisfied). The company also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from these arrangements is
recognized when control transfers to the customer. In addition, the company earns income from certain custom development projects
with strategic technology partners and specific clients. The company records the income from these projects over time as the company
satisfies the performance obligation if the fee is nonrefundable and is not dependent upon the ultimate success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Components of other (income) and expense are as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction losses/(gains)* $ (643) $ (204) $ 114
(Gains)/losses on derivative instruments 225 205 (101)
Interest income (162) (52) (105)
Net (gains)/losses from securities and investment assets 278 (133) (22)
Retirement-related costs/(income) 6,548 ** 1,282 1,073
Other (443) (225) (156)
Total other (income) and expense $ 5,803 $ 873 $ 802
* The company uses financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to foreign currency-based transactions. The hedging program
does not hedge 100 percent of currency exposures and defers, versus eliminates, the impact of currency. Refer to note T, “Derivative Financial
Instruments,” for additional information on foreign exchange risk.
** Includes a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
 Other primarily consists of (gains)/losses from divestitures, dispositions of land/buildings and other.
Government Assistance
The company receives grants from governments and government agencies (government) in support of certain of the company’s
business activities, primarily related to research, job creation, or job training. Grants are generally received in the form of cash as either
a recovery for expenses incurred or as an incentive for meeting certain requirements as agreed to in the grant, with terms ranging from
one to five years. Grants are recorded as credits against Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement based on the
nature of the grant and the expense being offset once the conditions and restrictions of the grant have been met and payment has been
received from the government. When a grant is received before conditions of the grant have been met, the grant is recorded in other
accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. For the year ended December 31, 2022, grants
recorded in the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements were not material.
Business Combinations and Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, the
liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree are generally recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Contract
assets and contract liabilities are measured in accordance with the guidance on revenue recognition. Goodwill represents the excess
of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The primary
drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired assembled
workforce, neither of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. Goodwill recorded in an acquisition is assigned to
applicable reporting units based on expected revenues or expected cash flows. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are
amortized over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology is recorded in cost, and amortization of all other intangible
assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation and pre-close and other

===== PAGE 61 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
costs, are typically expensed in the periods in which the costs are incurred and are recorded in SG&A expense. The results of operations
of acquired businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount may not be recoverable. The impairment test is typically based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the asset
is written down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill is tested for impairment at least
annually, in the fourth quarter and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. The goodwill impairment
test is performed at the reporting unit level, which is generally at the level of or one level below an operating segment.
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land
improvements, 20 years; production, engineering, office and other equipment, 2 to 20 years; and information technology equipment,
1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the related lease term, rarely
exceeding 25 years. Refer to the “Use of Estimates” section above for additional information about the useful lives of information
technology equipment.
As noted within the “Software Costs” section of this note, capitalized software costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods
ranging up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods between 1 and 20 years.
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, the
company accrues remediation costs for known environmental liabilities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets and the liability is initially
recorded at fair value. The related asset retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets by the
same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets.
Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of time
in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair value
of plan assets and the benefit obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension plans, the benefit
obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected to be paid upon
retirement based on employee services already rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the nonpension
postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which represents the
actuarial present value of postretirement benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value of plan assets
represents the current market value of assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are
invested by the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and
recorded as a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of
plan assets, are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value of
benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement and
includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses
previously recognized as a component of other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) and amortization of the net transition asset
remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). The service cost component of net benefit cost is recorded in
Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement (unless eligible for capitalization) based on the employees’ respective
functions. The other components of net benefit cost are presented separately from service cost within other (income) and expense in
the Consolidated Income Statement.
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are recognized as a component of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive
Income as they arise. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic

===== PAGE 62 =====
60 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a
result of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service
costs/(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service granted in plan amendments.
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such as
compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is recorded when the employee renders service to the company. The charge
is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement based on the employees’ respective functions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-based awards granted to employees. The company measures stock-
based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a straight-line
basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee requisite service period. The company grants its employees Restricted Stock
Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs); Performance Share Units (PSUs); and stock options. RSUs are stock
awards granted to employees that entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a one- to four-year
period. PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately received by the employee depends on performance against
specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period. Over the performance period, the number of shares that will be issued is
adjusted based upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. The ultimate number of shares issued and the related
compensation cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the final performance metrics to the specified targets.
Dividend equivalents are not paid on the stock awards described above. The fair value of the awards is determined and fixed on the
grant date based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents where applicable and for PSUs
assumes that performance targets will be achieved. The company estimates the fair value of stock options using a Black-Scholes
valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement based
on the employees’ respective functions.
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the
amount of compensation cost recognized and the relevant statutory tax rates. The differences between the deferred tax assets
recognized for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax return are recorded as a benefit
or expense to the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are
recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. The company includes
Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) in measuring deferred taxes. Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax
assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management considers
all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of
ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. When the company changes its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can
be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which such
determination is made.
The company recognizes additional tax liabilities when the company believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent
likely of being realized upon settlement. The noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. To the extent that new information becomes available which causes the company to change its judgment regarding the
adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which such
determination is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for potential tax assessments are included in income
tax expense.
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local functional currency are translated to U.S. dollars at year-end exchange
rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-average rates of exchange
prevailing during the year.
Inventory, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches
that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the assets or

===== PAGE 63 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange rates
with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) and expense. Income and expense items are translated at the weighted-
average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. These translation gains and losses are included in net income for the period in
which exchange rates change.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company uses derivative financial instruments primarily to manage foreign currency and interest rate risk, and to a lesser extent,
equity and credit risk. The company does not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Derivatives that
qualify for hedge accounting can be designated as either cash flow hedges, net investment hedges, or fair value hedges. The company
may enter into derivative contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks, even when hedge accounting does not apply, or the
company elects not to apply hedge accounting.
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value on a gross basis as either assets or liabilities and classified
as current or noncurrent based upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI and subsequently
reclassified into the same income statement line as the hedged exposure when the underlying hedged item is recognized in earnings.
Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. Changes in the fair value of highly effective
net investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded
as foreign currency translation adjustments in AOCI. Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging derivative
excluded from the assessment of effectiveness are recorded in interest expense and cost of financing. Changes in the fair value of
interest rate derivatives designated as a fair value hedge and the offsetting changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged exposure
are recorded in interest expense and cost of financing. Changes in the fair value of derivatives not designated as hedges are reported
in earnings primarily in other (income) and expense. See note T, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for further information.
The cash flows associated with derivatives designated as fair value and cash flow hedges are reported in cash flows from operating
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges and
derivatives not designated as hedges are reported in cash flows from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Cash flows from derivatives designated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt directly associated with the settlement of the
principal are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based on
market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. See note J, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for further information. All
methods of assessing fair value result in a general approximation of value, and such value may never actually be realized.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction between
market participants at the measurement date. The company classifies certain assets and liabilities based on the following fair value
hierarchy:
• Level 1–Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the measurement
date;
• Level 2–Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or
indirectly; and
• Level 3–Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies such
items as Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based upon internally developed models that use current
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
The determination of fair value considers various factors including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate
with the duration of the instrument.

===== PAGE 64 =====
62 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below for several parameters that market participants would consider in
determining fair value:
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair value. The
methodology is consistent with that applied in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incorporates the company’s
own credit risk as observed in the credit default swap market.
The company holds investments primarily in time deposits, certificates of deposit, and U.S. government debt that are designated as
available-for-sale. The primary objective of the company’s cash and debt investment portfolio is to maintain principal by investing in
very liquid and highly rated investment grade securities.
Available-for-sale securities are measured for impairment on a recurring basis by comparing the security’s fair value with its amortized
cost basis. If the fair value of the security falls below its amortized cost basis, the change in fair value is recognized in the period the
impairment is identified when the loss is due to credit factors. The change in fair value due to non-credit factors is recorded in other
comprehensive income when the company does not intend to sell and has the ability to hold the investment. The company’s standard
practice is to hold all of its debt security investments classified as available-for-sale until maturity. There were no impairments for
credit losses and no material non-credit impairments recognized for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Certain nonfinancial assets such as property, plant and equipment, land, goodwill and intangible assets are subject to nonrecurring fair
value measurements if they are deemed to be impaired. The impairment models used for nonfinancial assets depend on the type of
asset. There were no material impairments of nonfinancial assets for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
The company measures equity investments at fair value with changes recognized in net income.
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance
sheet date. Long-term debt securities and alliance equity securities are included in investments and sundry assets. At December 31,
2022 and 2021, alliance equity securities were $142 million and $159 million, respectively. Debt securities are considered available-
for-sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, in OCI. The realized gains and losses
on available-for-sale debt securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Realized gains
and losses are calculated based on the specific identification method.
Inventory
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the lower of average cost or net realizable value.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade and Contract Assets
The company classifies the right to consideration in exchange for products or services transferred to a client as either a receivable or a
contract asset. A receivable is a right to consideration that is unconditional as compared to a contract asset which is a right to
consideration that is conditional upon factors other than the passage of time. The majority of the company’s contract assets represent
unbilled amounts related to design and build services contracts when the cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition is utilized,
revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to the client, and the right to consideration is subject to milestone completion or client
acceptance. Contract assets are generally classified as current and are recorded on a net basis with deferred income (i.e., contract
liabilities) at the contract level.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables primarily consist of client loan and installment payment receivables (loans) and investment in sales-type and
direct financing leases (collectively referred to as client financing receivables) and commercial financing receivables. Leases are
accounted for in accordance with lease accounting standards. Loans, which are generally unsecured, are primarily for software and
services. Commercial financing receivables are primarily for working capital financing to distributors and resellers of IBM products and
services. Financing receivables are classified as either held for sale or held for investment, depending on the company’s intent and
ability to hold the underlying contract for the foreseeable future or until maturity or payoff. Loans and commercial financing receivables
are recorded at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.
Transfers of Financial Assets
The company enters into arrangements to sell certain financial assets (primarily notes and accounts receivable–trade and financing
receivables) to third-party financial institutions. For a transfer of financial assets to be considered a sale, the asset must be legally

===== PAGE 65 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
isolated from the company and the purchaser must have control of the asset. Determining whether all the requirements have been met
includes an evaluation of legal considerations, the extent of the company’s continuing involvement with the assets transferred and any
other relevant consideration. When the true sale criteria are met, the company derecognizes the carrying value of the financial asset
transferred and recognizes a net gain or loss on the sale. The proceeds from these arrangements are reflected as cash provided by
operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. If the true sale criteria are not met, the transfer is considered a
secured borrowing and the financial asset remains on the Consolidated Balance Sheet with proceeds from the sale recognized as debt
and recorded as cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows.
Arrangements to sell notes and accounts receivable–trade are used in the normal course of business as part of the company’s cash
and liquidity management. Facilities primarily in the U.S. and several countries in Europe enable the company to sell certain notes and
accounts receivable–trade, without recourse, to third parties in order to manage credit, collection, concentration and currency risk.
The gross amounts sold (the gross proceeds) under these arrangements were $3.3 billion, $1.8 billion and $2.2 billion for the years
ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. Within the notes and accounts receivables–trade sold and derecognized from
the Consolidated Balance Sheet, $1.0 billion, $0.7 billion, and $0.4 billion remained uncollected from customers at December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. The fees and the net gains and losses associated with the transfer of receivables were not material
for any of the periods presented. Refer to note L, “Financing Receivables,” for more information on transfers of financing receivables.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. An allowance for
uncollectible trade receivables and contract assets, if needed, is estimated based on specific customer situations, current and future
expected economic conditions, past experiences of losses, as well as an assessment of potential recoverability of the balance due.
The company estimates its allowances for expected credit losses for financing receivables by considering past events, including any
historical default, historical concessions and resulting troubled debt restructurings, current economic conditions, any non-freestanding
mitigating credit enhancements, and certain forward-looking information, including reasonable and supportable forecasts. The
methodologies that the company uses to calculate its financing receivables reserves, which are applied consistently to its different
portfolios, are as follows:
Individually Evaluated–The company reviews all financing receivables considered at risk quarterly, and performs an analysis based
upon current information available about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, published credit ratings, current
market-implied credit analysis, as well as collateral net of repossession cost, prior collection history and current and future expected
economic conditions. For loans that are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the collateral when
foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and calculates an
estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company records a
specific reserve.
Collectively Evaluated–The company determines its allowances for credit losses for collectively evaluated financing receivables
(unallocated) based on two portfolio segments: client financing receivables and commercial financing receivables. The company further
segments the portfolio into three classes: Americas, Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific.
For client financing receivables, the company uses a credit loss model to calculate allowances based on its internal loss experience
and current conditions and forecasts, by class of financing receivable. The company records an unallocated reserve that is calculated
by applying a reserve rate to its portfolio, excluding accounts that have been individually evaluated and specifically reserved. This
reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term and loss history. The allowance is adjusted quarterly for expected
recoveries of amounts that were previously written off or are expected to be written off. Recoveries cannot exceed the aggregated
amount of the previous write-off or expected write-off.
The company considers forward-looking macroeconomic variables such as gross domestic product, unemployment rates, equity prices
and corporate profits when quantifying the impact of economic forecasts on its client financing receivables allowance for expected
credit losses. Macroeconomic variables may vary by class of financing receivables based on historical experiences, portfolio
composition and current environment. The company also considers the impact of current conditions and economic forecasts relating
to specific industries, geographical areas, and client credit ratings, in addition to performing a qualitative review of credit risk factors
across the portfolio. Under this approach, forecasts of these variables over two years are considered reasonable and supportable.
Beyond two years, the company reverts to long-term average loss experience. Forward-looking estimates require the use of judgment,
particularly in times of economic uncertainty.
The portfolio of commercial financing receivables is short term in nature and any allowance for these assets is estimated based on a
combination of write-off history and current economic conditions, excluding any individually evaluated accounts.

===== PAGE 66 =====
64 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Credit-Related Policies
Past Due–The company views receivables as past due when payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the original
billing date.
Non-Accrual–Non-accrual assets include those receivables (impaired loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other
accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to original terms of the lease or loan
agreement. Interest income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a reduction to
principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is recognized as interest income. Receivables
may be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances, such as a sustained history of
payments.
Write-Off–Receivable losses are charged against the allowance in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible.
Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to the extent that
the customer is no longer in operation and/or there is no reasonable expectation of additional collections or repossession.
Leases
The company conducts business as both a lessee and a lessor. In its ordinary course of business, the company enters into leases as a
lessee for property, plant and equipment. The company is also the lessor of certain equipment, mainly through its Financing segment.
When procuring goods or services, or upon entering into a contract with its clients, the company determines whether an arrangement
contains a lease at its inception. As part of that evaluation, the company considers whether there is an implicitly or explicitly identified
asset in the arrangement and whether the company, as the lessee, or the client, if the company is the lessor, has the right to control
the use of that asset.
Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
When the company is the lessee, all leases with a term of more than 12 months are recognized as right-of-use (ROU) assets and
associated lease liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease liabilities are measured at the lease commencement date and
determined using the present value of the lease payments not yet paid and the company’s incremental borrowing rate, which
approximates the rate at which the company would borrow on a secured basis in the country where the lease was executed. The
interest rate implicit in the lease is generally not determinable in transactions where the company is the lessee. The ROU asset equals
the lease liability adjusted for any initial direct costs (IDCs), prepaid rent and lease incentives. The company’s variable lease payments
generally relate to payments tied to various indexes, non-lease components and payments above a contractual minimum fixed amount.
Operating leases are included in operating right-of-use assets–net, current operating lease liabilities and operating lease liabilities in
the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Finance leases are included in property, plant and equipment, short-term debt and long-term debt in
the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease term includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably certain that
the company will exercise that option.
The company made a policy election to not recognize leases with a lease term of 12 months or less in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
For all asset classes, the company has elected the lessee practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components (e.g.,
maintenance services) and account for the combined unit as a single lease component. A significant portion of the company’s lease
portfolio is real estate, which are mainly accounted for as operating leases, and are primarily used for corporate offices and data
centers. The average term of the real estate leases is approximately five years. The company also has equipment leases, such as IT
equipment and vehicles, which have lease terms that range from two to five years. For certain of these operating and finance leases,
the company applies a portfolio approach to account for the lease assets and lease liabilities.
Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
The company typically enters into leases as an alternative means of realizing value from equipment that it would otherwise sell. Assets
under lease primarily include new and used IBM equipment. IBM equipment generally consists of zSystems, Power and Storage
products.
Lease payments due to IBM are typically fixed and paid in equal installments over the lease term. The majority of the company’s leases
do not contain variable payments that are dependent on an index or a rate. Variable lease payments that do not depend on an index or
a rate (e.g., property taxes), that are paid directly by the company and are reimbursed by the client, are recorded as revenue, along
with the related cost, in the period in which collection of these payments is probable. Payments that are made directly by the client to
a third party, including certain property taxes and insurance, are not considered part of variable payments and therefore are not
recorded by the company. The company has made a policy election to exclude from consideration in contracts all collections from sales
and other similar taxes.

===== PAGE 67 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s payment terms for leases are typically unconditional. Therefore, in an instance when the client requests to terminate
the lease prior to the end of the lease term, the client would typically be required to pay the remaining lease payments in full. At the
end of the lease term, the company allows the client to either return the equipment, purchase the equipment at the then-current fair
market value or at a pre-stated purchase price, or renew the lease based on mutually agreed upon terms.
When lease arrangements include multiple performance obligations, the company allocates the consideration in the contract between
the lease components and the non-lease components on a relative standalone selling price basis.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
For a sales-type or direct financing lease, the carrying amount of the asset is derecognized from inventory and a net investment in the
lease is recorded. For a sales-type lease, the net investment in the lease is measured at commencement date as the sum of the lease
receivable and the estimated residual value of the equipment less unearned income and allowance for credit losses. Any selling profit
or loss arising from a sales-type lease is recorded at lease commencement. Selling profit or loss is presented on a gross basis when
the company enters into a lease to realize value from a product that it would otherwise sell in its ordinary course of business. For
segment reporting, the net investment in sales-type leases excluding the allowance for credit losses is recognized as hardware revenue
in the Infrastructure segment, while the estimated residual value less related unearned income is recognized as a reduction in revenue
in the Other revenue category and represents the portion of fair value retained by the company. In transactions where the company
enters into a lease for the purpose of generating revenue by providing financing, the selling profit or loss is presented on a net basis.
Under a sales-type lease, initial direct costs are expensed at lease commencement. Over the term of the lease, the company recognizes
finance income on the net investment in the lease and any variable lease payments, which are not included in the net investment in the
lease.
For a direct financing lease, the net investment in the lease is measured similarly to a sales-type lease, however, the net investment in
the lease is reduced by any selling profit. In a direct financing lease, the selling profit and initial direct costs are deferred at
commencement and recognized over the lease term. The company rarely enters into direct financing leases.
The estimated residual value represents the estimated fair value of the equipment under lease at the end of the lease. The company
estimates the future fair value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market for new and used
equipment and obtaining forward-looking product information such as marketing plans and technology innovations. The company
optimizes the recovery of residual values by extending lease arrangements with, or selling leased equipment to existing clients, and
periodically reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Anticipated decreases in specific future residual values that
are considered to be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as adjustments to the
residual value estimate and unearned income, which reduces current period and future period financing income, respectively.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Treasury
stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a weighted-
average basis.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method, which determines EPS for each class of common stock and
participating securities according to dividends and dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights in undistributed
earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common shares
outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of
common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and stock options.
NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES
New Standards to be Implemented
Disclosures of Supplier Finance Program Obligations
Standard/Description–Issuance date: September 2022. This guidance requires an entity to provide certain interim and annual
disclosures about the use of supplier finance programs in connection with the purchase of goods or services.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance was effective January 1, 2023 with certain annual disclosures required
beginning in 2024 and early adoption was permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–As the guidance is a change to disclosures only, the company does not
expect it to have a material impact in the consolidated financial results. The company’s use of supplier finance programs as of
December 31, 2022 was not material.

===== PAGE 68 =====
66 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Troubled Debt Restructurings and Vintage Disclosures
Standard/Description–Issuance date: March 2022. This eliminates the accounting guidance for troubled debt restructurings and
requires an entity to apply the general loan modification guidance to all loan modifications, including those made to customers
experiencing financial difficulty, to determine whether the modification results in a new loan or a continuation of an existing loan. The
guidance also requires presenting current period gross write-offs by year of origination for financing receivables and net investment in
leases.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The amendment was effective January 1, 2023 and early adoption was permitted. The
company adopted the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance is not expected to have a material impact in the
consolidated financial results.
Standards Implemented
Disclosures about Government Assistance
Standard/Description–Issuance date: November 2021. This guidance requires an entity to provide certain annual disclosures about
government assistance received and accounted for by applying a grant or contribution accounting model by analogy.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance was effective for annual disclosures beginning in 2022 and early adoption
was permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial
results. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information.
Lessors–Certain Leases with Variable Lease Payments
Standard/Description–Issuance date: July 2021. This guidance modifies a lessor’s accounting for certain leases with variable lease
payments that resulted in the recognition of a day-one loss even if the lessor expected the arrangement to be profitable overall. The
amendment requires these types of lease contracts to be classified as operating leases which eliminates any recognition of a day-one
loss.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The amendment was effective January 1, 2022 and early adoption was permitted. The
company adopted the guidance on a prospective basis as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial
results.
Revenue Contracts with Customers Acquired in a Business Combination
Standard/Description–Issuance date: October 2021. This guidance requires that an acquirer recognize and measure contract assets
and contract liabilities acquired in a business combination in accordance with revenue guidance, as if it had originated the contracts.
Deferred revenue acquired in a business combination is no longer required to be measured at its fair value, but rather will generally be
recognized at the same basis as the acquiree.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The amendment was effective January 1, 2023 and early adoption was permitted,
including adoption in an interim period. The company adopted the guidance as of October 1, 2021 using the retrospective transition
method whereby the new guidance was applied to all business combinations that occurred on or after January 1, 2021.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial
results. The impact of the guidance in IBM’s future financial results will be dependent on the nature and size of its acquisitions.
Simplifying the Accounting for Income Taxes
Standard/Description–Issuance date: December 2019. This guidance simplifies various aspects of income tax accounting by removing
certain exceptions to the general principle of the guidance and also clarifies and amends existing guidance to improve consistency in
application.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance was effective January 1, 2021 and early adoption was permitted. The
company adopted the guidance on a prospective basis as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance did not have a material impact in the consolidated financial
results.
For all other standards that the company adopted in the periods presented, there was no material impact in the consolidated financial
results.

===== PAGE 69 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE C. SEPARATION OF KYNDRYL
As discussed in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on November 3, 2021, the company completed the separation of its managed
infrastructure services unit into a new public company, Kyndryl.
The historical results of Kyndryl have been presented as discontinued operations and, as such, have been excluded from continuing
operations and segment results for all periods presented. The company’s presentation of discontinued operations excludes general
corporate overhead costs which were historically allocated to Kyndryl, consistent with the company’s management system, that did
not meet the requirements to be presented in discontinued operations. Such allocations include labor and non-labor expenses related
to IBM’s corporate support functions (e.g., finance, accounting, tax, treasury, IT, HR, legal, among others) that historically provided
support to Kyndryl and transferred to Kyndryl at separation. In addition, discontinued operations excludes the historical intercompany
purchases and sales between IBM and Kyndryl that were eliminated in consolidation.
IBM will provide transition services to Kyndryl predominantly consisting of information technology services for a period no longer than
two years after the separation. The impact of these transition services on the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements for the
year ended December 31, 2022 was not material.
At separation, IBM and Kyndryl entered into various commercial agreements pursuant to which Kyndryl will purchase hardware,
software and services from IBM and under which IBM will receive hosting and information infrastructure services from Kyndryl. As part
of the separation, IBM has also committed to provide upgraded hardware at no cost to Kyndryl over a two-year period after the
separation. An estimate of the remaining obligation under the agreement is recorded in other accrued expenses and liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The total net impact to stockholder’s equity from the separation was a reduction of $7,203 million, which was reflected as a reduction
of $8,404 million, $1,264 million and $62 million to retained earnings, accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and
noncontrolling interest, respectively, in the Consolidated Statement of Equity as of December 31, 2021.
The following table presents the major categories of income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 * 2020 *
Revenue $ 7 $14,994 $18,441
Cost of sales 24 11,270 13,651
Selling, general and administrative expense 86 1,869 ** 1,641 **
Kyndryl-related workforce rebalancing charges — 31 ** 884 **
RD&E and Other (income) and expense (84) 80 124
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations before income taxes $ (20) $ 1,744 $ 2,142
Provision for income taxes 124 714  484
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $(143) $ 1,030 $ 1,658
* Excludes intercompany transactions between IBM and Kyndryl and general corporate overhead costs transferred to Kyndryl as discussed above.
** Recast to conform to 2022 presentation.
 Includes tax charges related to the Kyndryl separation.
 Includes $(1) million and $89 million in 2021 and 2020, respectively, related to discontinued operations of Microelectronics, divested in 2015.
Loss from discontinued operations before income taxes for the year ended December 31, 2022 primarily reflects the net impact of
changes in separation-related estimates, the settlement of assets and liabilities in accordance with the separation and distribution
agreement and a gain on sale of a joint venture historically managed by Kyndryl, which transferred to Kyndryl in the first quarter of
2022 upon receiving regulatory approval. The discontinued operations provision for income taxes for the year ended December 31,
2022, primarily reflects the impact of provision to return adjustments on the Kyndryl-related taxes.
Separation costs of $5 million, $1,042 million and $21 million incurred during the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020,
respectively, are included in income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, in the Consolidated Income Statement. These
charges primarily relate to transaction and third-party support costs, business separation and applicable employee retention fees,
pension settlement charges and related tax charges.
The following table presents selected financial information related to cash flows from discontinued operations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Net cash provided by/(used in) operating activities $ — $1,612 * $ 4,403
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities 48 (380) (935)
* Excludes intercompany transactions between IBM and Kyndryl and general corporate overhead costs transferred to Kyndryl as discussed above.

===== PAGE 70 =====
68 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D. REVENUE RECOGNITION
Disaggregation of Revenue
The following tables provide details of revenue by major products/service offerings, hybrid cloud revenue, and revenue by geography.
Revenue by Major Products/Service Offerings
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 17,866 $ 17,036 * $ 15,518 *
Transaction Processing 7,171 6,390 6,606
Total Software $ 25,037 $ 23,426 * $ 22,124 *
Business Transformation $ 8,834 $ 8,284 $ 7,193
Application Operations 6,508 6,095 5,931
Technology Consulting 3,765 3,466 3,133
Total Consulting $ 19,107 $ 17,844 $ 16,257
Hybrid Infrastructure $ 9,451 $ 8,167 $ 8,415
Infrastructure Support 5,837 6,021 6,118
Total Infrastructure $ 15,288 $ 14,188 $ 14,533
Financing** $ 645 $ 774 $ 975
Other $ 453 $ 1,119 * $ 1,291 *
Total Revenue $ 60,530 $ 57,350 $ 55,179
* Recast to reflect segment change.
** Contains lease and loan financing arrangements which are not subject to the guidance on revenue from contracts with customers.
Hybrid Cloud Revenue by Segment
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Software $ 9,321 $ 8,386 * $ 6,517 *
Consulting 9,019 7,852 5,861
Infrastructure 3,895 3,645 4,039
Other 142 328 * 422 *
Total $ 22,377 $ 20,210 $ 16,838
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Revenue by Geography
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Americas $ 31,057 $ 28,299 $27,119
Europe/Middle East/Africa 17,950 17,447 16,767
Asia Pacific 11,522 11,604 11,293
Total $ 60,530 $ 57,350 $55,179
Remaining Performance Obligations
The remaining performance obligation (RPO) disclosure provides the aggregate amount of the transaction price yet to be recognized
as of the end of the reporting period and an explanation as to when the company expects to recognize these amounts in revenue. It is
intended to be a statement of overall work under contract that has not yet been performed and does not include contracts in which the
customer is not committed, such as certain as-a-Service, governmental, term software license and services offerings. The customer is
not considered committed when they are able to terminate for convenience without payment of a substantive penalty. The disclosure
includes estimates of variable consideration, except when the variable consideration is a sales-based or usage-based royalty promised
in exchange for a license of intellectual property. Additionally, as a practical expedient, the company does not include contracts that
have an original duration of one year or less. RPO estimates are subject to change and are affected by several factors, including
terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustment for revenue that has not materialized and
adjustments for currency.
At December 31, 2022, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to RPO related to customer contracts that are
unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied was $59 billion. Approximately 72 percent of the amount is expected to be recognized as revenue
in the subsequent two years, approximately 26 percent in the subsequent three to five years and the balance thereafter.

===== PAGE 71 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue Recognized for Performance Obligations Satisfied (or Partially Satisfied) in Prior Periods
For the year ended December 31, 2022, revenue was reduced by $55 million for performance obligations satisfied or partially satisfied
in previous periods mainly due to changes in estimates on contracts with cost-to-cost measures of progress. Refer to note A,
“Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information on these contracts and estimates of costs to complete.
Reconciliation of Contract Balances
The following table provides information about notes and accounts receivable—trade, contract assets and deferred income balances.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Notes and accounts receivable — trade (net of allowances of $233 in 2022 and $218 in 2021) $ 6,541 $ 6,754
Contract assets* 464 471
Deferred income (current) 12,032 12,518
Deferred income (noncurrent) 3,499 3,577
* Included within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The amount of revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2022 that was included within the deferred income balance
at December 31, 2021 was $10.2 billion and primarily related to services and software.
The following table provides roll forwards of the notes and accounts receivable—trade allowance for expected credit losses for the
years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021.
($ in millions)
January 1, 2022 Additions/(Releases) Write-offs  Foreign currency and Other December 31, 2022
$ 218 $59 $(31) $(14) $233
January 1, 2021 Additions/(Releases) Write-offs  Foreign currency and Other December 31, 2021
$ 260 $(15) $(28) $ 1 $218
The contract assets allowance for expected credit losses was not material in the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Deferred Costs
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Capitalized costs to obtain a contract $ 563 $ 476
Deferred costs to fulfill a contract
Deferred setup costs 456 546
Other deferred fulfillment costs 814 1,000
Total deferred costs* $ 1,833 $ 2,022
* Of the total deferred costs, $967 million was current and $866 million was noncurrent at December 31, 2022 and $1,097 million was current and $924
million was noncurrent at December 31, 2021.
The amount of total deferred costs amortized during the year ended December 31, 2022 was $1,609 million and there were no material
impairment losses incurred. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information on deferred costs to fulfill a
contract and capitalized costs of obtaining a contract.

===== PAGE 72 =====
70 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE E. SEGMENTS
In January 2022, IBM announced the divestiture of its healthcare software assets which closed in the second quarter of 2022. Refer
to note F, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for additional information. The company re-aligned its management structure to manage these
assets outside of the Software segment prior to the divestiture. Beginning in the first quarter of 2022, the financial results of these
assets are presented in Other–divested businesses. This change impacted the company’s reportable segments, but did not impact its
Consolidated Financial Statements. The prior-year periods have been recast to reflect this segment change.
The segments represent components of the company for which separate financial information is available that is utilized on a regular
basis by the chief operating decision maker (the chief executive officer) in determining how to allocate resources and evaluate
performance. The segments are determined based on several factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technology,
delivery channels and similar economic characteristics.
Certain transactions between the segments are recorded to other (income) and expense and are reflected in segment pre-tax income.
These transactions predominately represent loans between Financing and Infrastructure segments to facilitate the acquisition of
equipment and software used in IBM IaaS services arrangements.
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a result,
a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain marketing
functions and support functions such as Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Resources, Chief Information Office, and
Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount. When
a clear and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the
company’s management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the
shared expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments. These expenses are associated with the
elimination of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and
measurement system utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income from continuing operations.
These results are used by the chief operating decision maker, both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to,
each of the segments.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Total
For the year ended December 31: Software Consulting Infrastructure Financing Segments
2022
Revenue $25,037 $19,107 $15,288 $ 645 $60,077
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 6,162 1,677 2,262 340 10,441
Revenue year-to-year change 6.9 % 7.1 % 7.8 % (16.6)% 6.8 %
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 27.1 % 15.7 % 11.7 % (22.9)% 19.1 %
Pre-tax income margin 24.6 % 8.8 % 14.8 % 52.6 % 17.4 %
2021*
Revenue $23,426 $17,844 $14,188 $ 774 $56,231
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 4,849 1,449 2,025 441 8,765
Revenue year-to-year change 5.9 % 9.8 % (2.4)% (20.6)% 4.3 %
Pre-tax income year-to-year change 41.7 % 40.1 % 22.4 % (1.8)% 33.6 %
Pre-tax income margin 20.7 % 8.1 % 14.3 % 57.0 % 15.6 %
2020*
Revenue $22,124 $16,257 $14,533 $ 975 $53,888
Pre-tax income from continuing operations** 3,423 1,034 1,654 449 6,561
* Recast to reflect segment change.
** Includes the impact of a $1.5 billion pre-tax charge for structural actions in the fourth quarter of 2020. The impact by segment was as follows: Software
($0.6 billion), Consulting ($0.4 billion) and Infrastructure ($0.4 billion). The impact to Financing was immaterial.

===== PAGE 73 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 (1) 2020 (1)
Revenue
Total reportable segments $60,077 $ 56,231 $ 53,888
Other—divested businesses 318 785 904
Other revenue 135 335 387
Total revenue $60,530 $ 57,350 $ 55,179
0 0
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 (1) 2020 (1)
Pre-tax income from continuing operations
Total reportable segments $10,441  $8,765 $6,561 (2)
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,747) (1,838) (1,832)
Acquisition-related charges (18) (43) (13)
Non-operating retirement-related (costs)/income (6,548)(3) (1,282) (1,073)
Kyndryl-related impacts (4) (351) 118 —
Elimination of internal transactions (10) (7) (28)
Other—divested businesses 91 (5) (102) (70)
Unallocated corporate amounts and other (702) (774) (973)
Total pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 1,156 $4,837 $2,572
(1) Recast to reflect segment change.
(2) Includes the impact of a $1.5 billion pre-tax charge for structural actions in the fourth quarter of 2020.
(3) Includes a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion. See note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
(4) Refer to note J, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for additional information.
(5) Includes a gain on the sale of the company's healthcare software assets. Refer to note F, "Acquisitions & Divestitures," for additional information.
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and (losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial results of the segments.
Segment Assets and Other Items
Software assets are mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Consulting assets are primarily goodwill and
accounts receivable. Infrastructure assets are primarily goodwill, plant, property and equipment, manufacturing inventory and
accounts receivable. Financing assets are primarily financing receivables, and cash and marketable securities.
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equipment, several segments may share leased or owned plant, property and
equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each
user segment. This is consistent with the company’s management system and is reflected accordingly in the table below. In those
cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
Depreciation expense and capital expenditures that are reported by each segment also are consistent with the landlord ownership
basis of asset assignment.
Financing amounts for interest income reflect the income associated with Financing's external client transactions, as well as the income
from investment in cash and marketable securities. Financing amounts for interest expense reflect the expense associated with
intercompany loans and secured borrowings supporting Financing's external client transactions. These secured borrowings are
included in note P, “Borrowings.” Intercompany financing activities are recorded to other (income) and expense and are reflected in
segment pre-tax income.

===== PAGE 74 =====
72 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Total
For the year ended December 31: Software * Consulting Infrastructure Financing Segments
2022
Assets $57,186 $ 13,481 $12,243 $15,757 $ 98,667
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 968 289 1,403 14 2,674
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 446 33 853 27 1,359
Interest income — — — 582 582
Interest expense — — — 175 175
2021
Assets $58,420 $ 11,914 $11,766 $16,880 $ 98,980
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 983 250 1,399 49 2,681
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 559 55 792 33 1,439
Interest income — — — 628 628
Interest expense — — — 129 129
2020
Assets $57,436 $ 10,548 $12,378 $24,974 $105,336
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles** 1,007 207 1,419 120 2,753
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 538 26 1,093 41 1,699
Interest income — — — 834 834
Interest expense — — — 307 307
* Prior-year periods were recast to reflect segment change.
** Segment pre-tax income from continuing operations does not include the amortization of acquired intangible assets.
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021 * 2020 *
Assets
Total reportable segments $ 98,667 $ 98,980 $ 105,336
Elimination of internal transactions (1,062) (1,608) (4,686)
Other—divested businesses 100 1,109 1,376
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable securities 8,138 6,222 12,463
Notes and accounts receivable 281 1,622 1,655
Deferred tax assets 6,078 7,158 8,175
Plant, other property and equipment 1,760 2,196 2,449
Operating right-of-use assets 1,586 1,945 2,368
Pension assets 8,236 9,848 7,557
Other 3,459 4,530 3,514
Total assets of discontinued operations — — 15,764
Total IBM consolidated assets $ 127,243 $ 132,001 $ 155,971
* Recast to reflect segment change.
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s total revenue in 2022, 2021 or 2020.
Geographic Information
The following tables provide information for those countries that are 10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
United States $25,098 $22,893 $22,258
Japan 5,453 5,648 5,680
Other countries 29,980 28,810 27,241
Total revenue $60,530 $57,350 $55,179
* Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.

===== PAGE 75 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plant and Other Property–Net
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021 2020
United States $ 3,209 $ 3,375 $ 3,452
Other countries 2,100 2,293 2,656
Total* $ 5,308 $ 5,668 $ 6,108
* Balances do not include rental machines.
Operating Right-of-Use Assets–Net
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021 2020
United States $1,074 $1,148 $1,165
Japan 259 398 532
Other countries 1,545 1,676 1,870
Total $2,878 $3,222 $3,566
Revenue by Classes of Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of products or services within the company’s reportable segments.
Client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. For each of the
segments that include services, Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other product-related services are included
as services. For each of these segments, software includes product license charges and ongoing subscriptions.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Software *
Software $21,374 $19,845 $18,771
Services 3,575 3,485 3,253
Systems 88 96 100
Consulting
Services $18,857 $17,563 $15,986
Software 170 173 183
Systems 80 108 89
Infrastructure
Maintenance $ 4,590 $ 4,743 $ 4,804
Servers 4,471 3,483 ** 3,686 **
Services 2,653 2,616 2,656
Storage 1,989 1,919 ** 1,824 **
Software 1,585 1,426 1,563
Financing
Financing $ 582 $ 628 $ 834
Used equipment sales $ 64 $ 145 $ 140
* Prior-year periods were recast to reflect segment change.
** Recast to conform to 2022 presentation to present used equipment sales in servers and storage.

===== PAGE 76 =====
74 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE F. ACQUISITIONS & DIVESTITURES
Acquisitions
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions, except otherwise stated, were for
100 percent of the acquired business and are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, net of acquired cash and cash
equivalents.
2022
In 2022, the company completed eight acquisitions at an aggregate cost of $2,650 million. Each acquisition is expected to enhance
the company’s portfolio of products and services capabilities and further advance IBM’s hybrid cloud and AI strategy.
Acquisition Segment Description of Acquired Business
First Quarter
Envizi Software Data and analytics software provider for
environmental performance
management
Sentaca Consulting Telco consulting services and solutions
provider specializing in automation,
cloud migration, and future networks for
telecommunications providers
Neudesic Consulting Application development and cloud
computing services company
Second Quarter
Randori Software Leading attack surface management
(ASM) and cybersecurity provider
Databand.ai Software Proactive data observability platform
that isolates data errors and issues to
alert relevant stakeholders
Third Quarter
Omnio Software Developer of software connectors used
in the collection of raw data for various
Industrial Internet of Things (IoT)
applications
Fourth Quarter
Dialexa Consulting Digital product engineering services firm
Octo Consulting IT modernization and digital
transformation services provider
exclusively serving the U.S. federal
government
At December 31, 2022, the remaining cash to be remitted by the company related to certain 2022 acquisitions was $238 million, of
which $139 million is expected to be paid in 2023 and the remaining amount is expected to be paid in 2024.

===== PAGE 77 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December
31, 2022.
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Octo Acquisitions
Current assets $ 119 $ 87
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 13 7
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 826 1,062
Client relationships 7 370 204
Completed technology 4—7 30 90
Trademarks 2—3 15 10
Total assets acquired $1,374 $1,460
Current liabilities 54 51
Noncurrent liabilities 57 22
Total liabilities assumed $ 110 $ 73
Total purchase price $1,263 $1,387
N/A–Not applicable
The goodwill generated is primarily attributable to the assembled workforce of the acquired businesses and the increased synergies
expected to be achieved from the integration of the acquired businesses into the company’s various integrated solutions and services
neither of which qualifies as an amortizable intangible asset.
The valuation of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is subject to revision. If additional information becomes available, the
company may further revise the purchase price allocation as soon as practical, but no later than one year from the acquisition date;
however, material changes are not expected.
Octo–The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.0 years. Goodwill of $706
million and $120 million was assigned to the Consulting and Software segments, respectively. It is expected that 24 percent of the
goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
Other acquisitions–The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.7 years.
Goodwill of $624 million and $438 million was assigned to the Consulting and Software segments, respectively. It is expected that 52
percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
The identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives, which approximates the pattern that
the assets’ economic benefits are expected to be consumed over time.
2023 Transactions–In February 2023, the company acquired StepZen, Inc., developer of GraphQL to help build application
programming interfaces (APIs) quickly and with less code. StepZen will be integrated into the Software segment. The financial terms
related to the acquisition were not material. Additionally, in February 2023, the company signed a definitive agreement to acquire NS1,
a leading provider of network automation SaaS solutions. Upon closing, NS1 will be integrated into the Software segment. The
transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2023, subject to customary closing conditions, including regulatory clearance.

===== PAGE 78 =====
76 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2021
In 2021, the company completed fifteen acquisitions at an aggregate cost of $3,341 million.
Acquisition Segment Description of Acquired Business
First Quarter
Nordcloud Consulting Consulting company providing services in
cloud implementation, application
transformation and managed services
Taos Mountain, LLC (Taos) Consulting Leading cloud professional and managed
services provider
StackRox Software Innovator in container and Kubernetes-
native security
Second Quarter
Turbonomic, Inc. (Turbonomic) Software Application Resource Management and
Network Performance Management
software provider
ECX Copy Data Management business Software Smart data protection solution
from Catalogic Software, Inc.
Waeg Consulting Leading Salesforce consulting partner
myInvenio Software Process mining software company
Third Quarter
VEVRE Software business Software Cloud-native virtual routing engine
from Volta, Inc.
BoxBoat Technologies Consulting Premier DevOps consultancy and
enterprise Kubernetes certified service
provider
Bluetab Solutions Group Consulting Data solutions service provider
Fourth Quarter
SXiQ Digital Pty Ltd Consulting Digital transformation services company
specializing in cloud applications, cloud
platforms and cloud cybersecurity
McD Tech Labs from McDonald’s Software Asset purchase to accelerate the
development and deployment of
McDonald’s Automated Order Taking
(AOT) technology
ReaQta Software Provider of endpoint security solutions
designed to leverage AI to automatically
identify and manage threats
Adobe Workfront practice from Rego Consulting Work management software consulting
Consulting Corporation for enterprise clients
Phlyt Software Cloud-native development consultancy

===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December
31, 2022. Net purchase price adjustments recorded in 2022 primarily related to deferred tax assets and liabilities.
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Turbonomic Acquisitions
Current assets $ 115 $ 112
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 11 18
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,390 1,073
Client relationships 4—10 309 196
Completed technology 4—7 117 206
Trademarks 1—6 15 31
Total assets acquired $1,957 $1,636
Current liabilities 73 68
Noncurrent liabilities 55 56
Total liabilities assumed $ 128 $ 124
Total purchase price $1,829 $1,512
N/A–Not applicable
The goodwill generated is primarily attributable to the assembled workforce of the acquired businesses and the increased synergies
expected to be achieved from the integration of the acquired businesses into the company’s various integrated solutions and services
neither of which qualifies as an amortizable intangible asset.
Turbonomic–The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 9.0 years. Goodwill
of $1,325 million and $65 million was assigned to the Software and Consulting segments, respectively. It is expected that none of the
goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
Other acquisitions–The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.6 years.
Goodwill of $633 million and $440 million was assigned to the Consulting and Software segments, respectively. It is expected that
nine percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
The identified intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives, which approximates the pattern that
the assets’ economic benefits are expected to be consumed over time.

===== PAGE 80 =====
78 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2020
In 2020, the company completed seven acquisitions at an aggregate cost of $723 million.
Acquisition Segment Description of Acquired Business
First Quarter
Stratoss Lifecycle Manager business Software Cloud native business designed to deliver
(Stratoss) from Accanto Systems Oy web-scale levels of operational automation
for the cloud-based networking world
Second Quarter
Automated Security Assurance Software Cloud cybersecurity platform, integrated into
Platform business (ASAP) from the IBM public cloud to further meet the
Spanugo Inc. security demands of clients in highly
regulated industries
Third Quarter
WDG Soluções Em Sistemas E Software Provider of robotic process automation
Automação De Processos LTDA (WDG
Automation)
Fourth Quarter
Instana Software Application performance monitoring and
observability company which helps
businesses better manage applications that
span the hybrid cloud landscape
TruQua Enterprises, LLC (TruQua) Consulting IT services provider and SAP development
partner
Expertus Technologies Inc. (Expertus) Consulting Provider of cloud solutions for the financial
services industry
7Summits LLC (7Summits) Consulting Leading Salesforce partner that delivers
transformative digital experiences across
industries
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December
31, 2020.
($ in millions)
Amortization Allocated
Life (in Years) Amount
Current assets $ 35
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 7
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 575
Client relationships 5—7 84
Completed technology 2—7 73
Trademarks 1—7 11
Total assets acquired $784
Current liabilities 19
Noncurrent liabilities 41
Total liabilities assumed $ 61
Total purchase price $723
N/A—Not applicable
The goodwill generated is primarily attributable to the assembled workforce of the acquired businesses and the increased synergies
expected to be achieved from the integration of the acquired businesses into the company’s various integrated solutions and services
neither of which qualifies as an amortizable intangible asset.
The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.8 years. These identified
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives, which approximates the pattern that the assets’
economic benefits are expected to be consumed over time. Goodwill of $362 million, $205 million and $8 million was assigned to the

===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software, Consulting and Infrastructure segments, respectively. The goodwill recorded as a result of these acquisitions was not
deductible for tax purposes.
Divestitures
2022
Healthcare Software Assets–In January 2022, IBM and Francisco Partners (Francisco) signed a definitive agreement in which Francisco
would acquire IBM’s healthcare data and analytics assets reported within Other‒divested businesses for $1,065 million. Refer to note
E, “Segments,” for additional information. The assets included Health Insights, MarketScan, Clinical Development, Social Program
Management, Micromedex, and imaging software offerings. In addition, IBM is providing Francisco with transition services including IT
and other services. The closing completed for the U.S. and Canada on June 30, 2022 and subsequent closings were completed in most
other countries during the second half of 2022. The company expects to close the remaining countries by the first half of 2023.
On June 30, 2022, the company received a cash payment of $1,065 million. The total pre-tax gain recognized on this transaction as of
December 31, 2022 was $258 million and was recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Any
pre-tax gains related to the subsequent wave closings are not expected to be material. The total gain on sale may change in the future
due to changes in transaction estimates however, such changes are not expected to be material.
Other Divestitures–In the first quarter of 2022, the Infrastructure segment completed one divestiture. The financial terms related to
this transaction were not material.
2021
Kyndryl–On November 3, 2021, the company completed the separation of Kyndryl. Refer to note C, “Separation of Kyndryl,” for
additional information.
Other Divestitures–In 2021, the company completed two divestitures reported in the Software segment and one divestiture reported
in Other–divested businesses. In the third quarter of 2021, IBM completed the sale of the company’s remaining OEM commercial
financing capabilities reported within the Financing segment. The financial terms related to each of these transactions did not have a
material impact to IBM's Consolidated Financial Statements.
2020
There were no divestitures completed during the year ended December 31, 2020.
NOTE G. RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT & ENGINEERING
RD&E expense was $6,567 million in 2022, $6,488 million in 2021 and $6,262 million in 2020.
The company incurred total expense of $6,267 million, $6,216 million and $5,968 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, for
scientific research and the application of scientific advances to the development of new and improved products and their uses, as well
as services and their application. Within these amounts, software-related expense was $3,971 million, $3,922 million and $3,682
million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.
Expense for product-related engineering was $299 million, $272 million and $295 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively.

===== PAGE 82 =====
80 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE H. TAXES
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Income/(loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
U.S. operations $ (6,602)* $ (2,654) $ (2,349)
Non-U.S. operations 7,758 7,491 4,921
Total income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 1,156 $ 4,837 $ 2,572
* Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
The income from continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes by geographic operations was as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
U.S. operations $ (2,272) $ (969) $ 1,913
Non-U.S. operations 1,645 1,093 (3,273)
Total continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ (626) $ 124 $ (1,360)
The components of the income from continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes by taxing jurisdiction were as
follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
U.S. federal
Current $ 391 $ 374 $ 312
Deferred (2,645) (1,358) 1,102
$ (2,253) $ (984) $ 1,414
U.S. state and local
Current $ 184 $ 161 $ 345
Deferred (486) (370) (358)
$ (302) $ (209) $ (13)
Non-U.S.
Current $ 1,676 $1,342 $ 1,208
Deferred 252 (25) (3,969)
$ 1,929 $1,317 $ (2,761)
Total continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ (626) $ 124 $ (1,360)
Discontinued operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ 124 $ 714 $ 484
Total provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ (503) $ 838 $ (876)
In addition to the total provision for/(benefit from) income taxes, the company also recorded a provision included in net income for
social security, real estate, personal property and other taxes of approximately $2.8 billion in 2022. The total taxes included in net
income was approximately $2.3 billion in 2022.
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was as follows:
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Statutory rate 21 % 21 % 21 %
Tax differential on foreign income (29) * (10) (31)
Intra-entity IP sale — — (37)
Domestic incentives (24) * (5) (9)
State and local (21) * (3) 0
Other (1) * 0 3
Effective rate (54) % 3 % (53) %
* Includes the impacts of the pension settlement charge on tax differential on foreign income, domestic incentives, state and local, and other of (24) points,
(20) points, (21) points, and (1) point, respectively.
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.

===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconciliation labeled “Tax differential on foreign income” include the effects
of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory rate, U.S. taxes on foreign income and any net impacts of
intercompany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or changes in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits
associated with each of these items.
The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2022 was (54.2) percent compared to 2.6 percent in 2021. The current-year effective
tax rate was primarily driven by the transfer of a portion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan
assets. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information. The prior-year effective tax rate was primarily driven
by tax benefits related to audit settlements in multiple jurisdictions. The 2020 effective tax rate was primarily driven by an intra-entity
sale of certain of the company’s intellectual property which required the recognition of a deferred tax asset.
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities did not have a material impact on the company’s 2022 effective tax
rate.
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Retirement benefits $ 1,954 $ 3,142
Leases 927 1,061
Share-based and other compensation 608 661
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards 1,798 1,619
Deferred income 633 630
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards 845 983
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 383 390
Depreciation 247 249
Restructuring charges 101 216
Accruals 215 305
Intangible assets 2,879 2,929
Capitalized research and development 3,012 2,161
Other 1,157 1,306 *
Gross deferred tax assets 14,759 15,652
Less: valuation allowance 770 883
Net deferred tax assets $ 13,989 $14,769
* Recast to include 2021 hedging losses in other.
*
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Goodwill and intangible assets $ 3,156 $ 3,306 *
GILTI deferred taxes 2,483 3,257
Leases and right-of-use assets 1,174 1,314
Depreciation 505 518
Retirement benefits 1,609 1,971
Deferred transition costs 56 42
Undistributed foreign earnings 87 131
Other 955 817
Gross deferred tax liabilities $ 10,025 $ 11,356
* Recast to conform to 2022 presentation to include software development costs in goodwill and intangible assets.
For financial reporting purposes, the company had foreign and domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which was $722 million,
as well as foreign and domestic credit carryforwards of $1,921 million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least
two years and the majority are available for 10 years or more.
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were $770 million, $883 million and $850 million, respectively.
The amounts principally apply to certain foreign and domestic loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of management, it is more
likely than not that these assets will not be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carryforwards are realized
in the future, the reduction in the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense.

===== PAGE 84 =====
82 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2022 increased by $19 million in 2022 to $8,728 million. A reconciliation of
the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits was as follows:
($ in millions)
2022 2021 2020
Balance at January 1 $ 8,709 $ 8,568 $ 7,146
Additions based on tax positions related to the current year 355 934 1,690
Additions for tax positions of prior years 174 247 159
Reductions for tax positions of prior years (including impacts due to a lapse of statute) (470) (688) (408)
Settlements (41) (352) (19)
Balance at December 31 $ 8,728 $ 8,709 $ 8,568
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current and prior years were primarily attributable to non-U.S. tax matters,
including transfer pricing, as well as U.S. federal and state tax matters, credits and incentives. The settlements and reductions to
unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions of prior years were primarily attributable to non-U.S. audits, U.S. federal and state tax
matters, impacts due to lapse of statute of limitations and foreign currency translation adjustments.
The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2022 of $8,728 million can be reduced by $537 million associated with timing
adjustments, potential transfer pricing adjustments and state income taxes. The net amount of $8,191 million, if recognized, would
favorably affect the company’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2021 and 2020 were $8,163 million and $7,994
million, respectively.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included in income tax expense. During the years ended December 31, 2022,
2021 and 2020, the company recognized $185 million, $125 million and $117 million, respectively, in interest expense and penalties.
The company had $956 million and $935 million for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2022 and
December 31, 2021, respectively.
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is associated
with certain non-U.S. positions that are expected to be recognized due to a lapse in statute of limitations, as well as anticipated
resolution of various non-U.S. audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2022 could be
reduced by $168 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) concluded its examination of the company’s U.S. income tax
returns for 2013 and 2014, which had a specific focus on certain cross-border transactions that occurred in 2013 and issued a final
Revenue Agent’s Report (RAR). The IRS’ proposed adjustments relative to these cross-border transactions, if sustained, would result
in additional taxable income of approximately $4.5 billion. The company strongly disagrees with the IRS on these specific matters and
filed its IRS Appeals protest in the first quarter of 2021. In the third quarter of 2018, the IRS commenced its audit of the company’s
U.S. tax returns for 2015 and 2016. The company anticipates that this audit will be completed in 2023. In the fourth quarter of 2021,
the IRS commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2017 and 2018. With respect to major U.S. state and foreign taxing
jurisdictions, the company is generally no longer subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2015. The company is no longer subject
to income tax examination of its U.S. federal tax return for years prior to 2013. The open years contain matters that could be subject
to differing interpretations of applicable tax laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/or timing of income, deductions, and
tax credits. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes that adequate amounts of tax, interest and
penalties have been provided for any adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
The company is involved in a number of income tax-related matters in India challenging tax assessments issued by the India Tax
Authorities. As of December 31, 2022, the company had recorded $689 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A significant portion
of this balance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to protect the company’s right to appeal various income tax assessments
made by the India Tax Authorities. Although the outcome of tax audits are always uncertain, the company believes that adequate
amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been provided for any adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
Within consolidated retained earnings at December 31, 2022 were undistributed after-tax earnings from certain non-U.S. subsidiaries
that were not indefinitely reinvested. At December 31, 2022, the company had a deferred tax liability of $87 million for the estimated
taxes associated with the repatriation of these earnings. Undistributed earnings of approximately $384 million and other outside basis
differences in foreign subsidiaries were indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations. Quantification of the deferred tax liability, if any,
associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings and outside basis differences was not practicable.

===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 83
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE I. EARNINGS PER SHARE
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share
calculations are based
Basic 902,664,190 895,990,771 890,348,679
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 7,593,455 6,883,290 4,802,940
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 2,011,417 1,766,940 1,412,352
Assuming dilution 912,269,062 904,641,001 896,563,971
Income from continuing operations $1,783 $4,712 $3,932
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (143) 1,030 1,658
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $1,639 $5,743 $5,590
Income from continuing operations $1,783 $4,712 $3,932
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares — — (2)
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per
share is calculated $1,783 $4,712 $3,930
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which
basic and diluted earnings per share is calculated (143) 1,030 1,658
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $1,639 $5,743 $5,588
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 1.95 $ 5.21 $ 4.38
Discontinued operations (0.16) 1.14 1.85
Total $ 1.80 $ 6.35 $ 6.23
Basic
Continuing operations $ 1.97 $ 5.26 $ 4.42
Discontinued operations (0.16) 1.15 1.86
Total $ 1.82 $ 6.41 $ 6.28
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 814,976 common shares in 2022, 980,505 common shares in 2021 and 1,417,665
common shares in 2020 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise
price of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the effect would
have been antidilutive.

===== PAGE 86 =====
84 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE J. FINANCIAL ASSETS & LIABILITIES
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following table presents the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis
at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
($ in millions)
Fair Value 2022 2021
At December 31: Hierarchy Level Assets (8) Liabilities (9) Assets (8) Liabilities (9)
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit (2) 2 $3,712 N/A $2,502 (10) N/A
Money market funds 1 306 N/A 263 N/A
Total cash equivalents $4,018 N/A $2,766 N/A
Equity investments (3) 1 — N/A 0 N/A
Kyndryl common stock (4) 1 — N/A 807 N/A
Debt securities–current (2)(5) 2 852 N/A 600 N/A
Debt securities–noncurrent (2)(6) 2,3 31 N/A 37 N/A
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments
Interest rate contracts 2 3 336 12 —
Foreign exchange contracts 2 184 674 359 117
Derivatives not designated as hedging instruments
Foreign exchange contracts 2 42 16 21 42
Equity contracts (7) 1,2 49 8 6 4
Total $5,179 $1,034 $4,608 $ 162
(1) Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(2) Available-for-sale debt securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(3) Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(4) Refer to “Kyndryl Common Stock” below for additional information.
(5) U.S. treasury bills and term deposits that are reported within marketable securities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(6) Includes immaterial activity related to private company investments reported within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(7) Level 1 includes immaterial amounts related to equity futures contracts.
(8) The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 were $271 million and $7 million, respectively, and at December 31, 2021 were $358 million and $40 million,
respectively.
(9) The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet
at December 31, 2022 were $546 million and $488 million, respectively, and at December 31, 2021 were $60 million and $103 million, respectively.
(10) Recast to conform to 2022 presentation.
N/A–Not applicable
Kyndryl Common Stock
On November 3, 2021, IBM completed the separation of Kyndryl and retained 19.9 percent of the shares of Kyndryl common stock
with the intent to dispose of the shares within twelve months of the separation.
On May 18, 2022, the company borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $357 million under a short-term credit facility with a third-
party financial institution, the proceeds of which were used to repay certain of the company’s existing indebtedness. On May 23, 2022,
the company completed a debt-for-equity exchange where 22.3 million shares of Kyndryl common stock, equal to half of the
company’s 19.9 percent retained interest (the Shares), were exchanged at a strike price of $13.95 per share to extinguish $311 million
of the company’s indebtedness under the short-term credit facility (the May 2022 Exchange). The remaining portion of the short-term
credit facility was repaid with $46 million of cash.
In connection with the May 2022 Exchange, the company entered into a cash-settled swap with the lender of the short-term credit
facility as the counterparty that maintained IBM’s continued economic exposure in the Shares. As a result of the swap, the transfer of
the Shares pursuant to the May 2022 Exchange did not qualify as a true sale, and therefore the Shares and debt remained on the
company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet. Upon settlement of the swap, which occurred on November 2, 2022, IBM paid the lender $83
million, which was derived from the difference between the volume-weighted average price (VWAP) of the Kyndryl shares over the
outstanding term of the swap and the strike price of $13.95 per share. The realized loss of $83 million was reflected in other (income)
and expense within the company’s Consolidated Income Statement for the year ended December 31, 2022. In addition, both the
Shares and debt associated with the May 2022 Exchange were entirely derecognized from the company’s Consolidated Balance Sheet
in the fourth quarter of 2022 upon settlement of the swap. The debt-for-equity exchange associated with the May 2022 Exchange is
reflected as a non-cash financing activity for purposes of the company’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for the year ended
December 31, 2022.

===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 85
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
On August 5, 2022, the company borrowed an aggregate principal amount of $300 million under a short-term credit facility with a third-
party financial institution, the proceeds of which were used to repay certain of the company’s existing indebtedness. On August 11,
2022, the company completed a debt-for-equity exchange through the transfer of the other 22.3 million shares of Kyndryl common
stock to extinguish $229 million of the company’s indebtedness under the short-term credit facility (the August 2022 Exchange). The
remaining portion of the short-term credit facility was repaid with $71 million of cash. The debt-for-equity exchange associated with
the August 2022 Exchange is a non-cash financing activity for purposes of the company’s Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows for
the year ended December 31, 2022.
At December 31, 2022, the company no longer held an ownership interest in Kyndryl. The Kyndryl common stock of $807 million at
December 31, 2021 was included within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. For the year
ended December 31, 2022, the company recognized a total realized loss of $351 million, including $267 million on the Kyndryl shares
and $83 million on the swap, compared to an unrealized gain of $126 million on the Kyndryl shares for the year ended December 31,
2021 which is reflected in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Short-term receivables (excluding the current portion of long-term receivables) and other investments are financial assets with carrying
values that approximate fair value. Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt (excluding the current portion of
long-term debt and including short-term finance lease liabilities) are financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
If measured at fair value in the financial statements, these financial instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value
hierarchy, except for short-term debt which would be classified as Level 2.
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using current interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar credit
ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the difference between the carrying amount and estimated
fair value for loans and long-term receivables was immaterial. If measured at fair value in the financial statements, these financial
instruments would be classified as Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy.
Long-Term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in an
active market. For other long-term debt (including long-term finance lease liabilities) for which a quoted market price is not available,
an expected present value technique that uses rates currently available to the company for debt with similar terms and remaining
maturities is used to estimate fair value. The carrying amount of long-term debt was $46,189 million and $44,917 million, and the
estimated fair value was $42,514 million and $49,465 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. If measured at fair value
in the financial statements, long-term debt (including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
NOTE K. INVENTORY
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Finished goods $ 158 $ 208
Work in process and raw materials 1,394 1,442
Total $ 1,552 $ 1,649

===== PAGE 88 =====
86 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE L. FINANCING RECEIVABLES
Financing receivables primarily consist of client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), investment in sales-type and direct
financing leases (collectively referred to as client financing receivables) and commercial financing receivables. Loans are provided
primarily to clients to finance the purchase of hardware, software and services. Payment terms on these financing arrangements are
for terms up to seven years. Investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relate principally to the company’s Infrastructure
products and are for terms ranging generally from two to six years. Commercial financing receivables, which consist of both held-for-
investment and held-for-sale receivables, relate primarily to working capital financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM products.
Payment terms for working capital financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
A summary of the components of the company’s financing receivables is presented as follows:
($ in millions)
Client Financing Receivables
Client Loan and Investment in
Installment Payment Sales-Type and Commercial Financing Receivables
Receivables Direct Financing Held for Held for
At December 31, 2022: (Loans) Leases Investment Sale * Total
Financing receivables, gross $8,875 $ 4,023 $299 $939 $14,136
Unearned income (439) (351) — — (790)
Unguaranteed residual value — 422 — — 422
Amortized cost $8,437 $ 4,094 $299 $939 $13,769
Allowance for credit losses (108) (60) (5) — (173)
Total financing receivables, net $8,329 $ 4,034 $293 $939 $13,596
Current portion $5,073 $ 1,485 $293 $939 $ 7,790
Noncurrent portion $3,256 $ 2,549 $ — $ — $ 5,806
($ in millions)
Client Financing Receivables
Client Loan and Investment in
Installment Payment Sales-Type and Commercial Financing Receivables
Receivables Direct Financing Held for Held for
At December 31, 2021: (Loans) Leases Investment Sale * Total
Financing receivables, gross $9,303 $ 3,336 $450 $793 $13,881
Unearned income (353) (223) — — (576)
Unguaranteed residual value — 335 — — 335
Amortized cost $8,949 $ 3,448 $450 $793 $13,640
Allowance for credit losses (131) (64) (6) — (201)
Total financing receivables, net $8,818 $ 3,384 $444 $793 $13,439
Current portion $5,371 $ 1,406 $444 $793 $ 8,014
Noncurrent portion $3,447 $ 1,978 $ — $ — $ 5,425
* The carrying value of the receivables classified as held for sale approximates fair value.
The company has a long-standing practice of taking mitigation actions, in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to third parties.
These actions may include credit insurance, financial guarantees, nonrecourse secured borrowings, transfers of receivables recorded
as true sales in accordance with accounting guidance or sales of equipment under operating lease. Sale of receivables arrangements
are also utilized in the normal course of business as part of the company’s cash and liquidity management.
Financing receivables pledged as collateral for secured borrowings were $349 million and $408 million at December 31, 2022 and
2021, respectively. These borrowings are included in note P, “Borrowings.”
Transfer of Financial Assets
The company has an existing agreement with a third-party investor to sell IBM short-term commercial financing receivables on a
revolving basis. The company has expanded this agreement to other countries and geographies since commencement in the U.S. and
Canada in 2020. In addition, the company enters into agreements with third-party financial institutions to sell certain of its client
financing receivables, including both loan and lease receivables, for cash proceeds. In 2022, sales of client financing receivables were
largely focused on credit mitigation. During 2021, sales of client financing receivables were utilized as part of the company’s cash and
liquidity management as well as for credit mitigation.

===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the total amount of commercial and client financing receivables transferred.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021
Commercial financing receivables
Receivables transferred during the period $9,029 $7,359
Receivables uncollected at end of period* $1,561 $1,653
Client financing receivables
Lease receivables $ 15 $ 819
Loan receivables 2 2,224
Total client financing receivables transferred $ 17 $3,043
* Of the total amount of commercial financing receivables sold and derecognized from the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the amounts presented remained
uncollected from business partners as of December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The transfer of these receivables qualified as true sales and therefore reduced financing receivables. The cash proceeds from the sales
are included in cash flows from operating activities. The impacts to the Consolidated Income Statement including fees and net loss
associated with the transfer of commercial financing receivables were $62 million for the year ended December 31, 2022. The fees
and net loss recorded in 2021 associated with the transfer of client and commercial financing receivables were not material.
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following tables present the amortized cost basis for client financing receivables at December 31, 2022 and 2021, further
segmented by three classes: Americas, Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific. The commercial financing receivables
portfolio segment is excluded from the tables in the sections below as the receivables are short term in nature and the current
estimated risk of loss and resulting impact to the company’s financial results are not material.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2022: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Amortized cost $7,281 $3,546 $1,704 $12,531
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2022 $ 111 $ 61 $ 23 $ 195
Write-offs (20) (3) (2) (25)
Recoveries 1 0 4 5
Additions/(releases) (5) 6 (4) (3)
Other* 2 (5) (2) (4)
Ending balance at December 31, 2022 $ 88 $ 60 $ 20 $ 168
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2021: Americas EMEA Asia Pacific Total
Amortized cost $6,573 $3,793 $2,031 $12,397
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at January 1, 2021 $ 141 $ 77 $ 37 $ 255
Write-offs (8) (2) (7) (17)
Recoveries 0 0 1 1
Additions/(releases) (19) (11) (7) (38)
Other* (3) (3) 0 (7)
Ending balance at December 31, 2021 $ 111 $ 61 $ 23 $ 195
* Primarily represents translation adjustments.
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For the company’s
policy on determining allowances for credit losses, refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
Past Due Financing Receivables
The company summarizes information about the amortized cost basis for client financing receivables, including amortized cost aged
over 90 days and still accruing, billed invoices aged over 90 days and still accruing, and amortized cost not accruing.

===== PAGE 90 =====
88 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Amortized Billed Amortized
Total Amortized Cost Invoices Cost
Amortized Cost > 90 Days and > 90 Days and Not
At December 31, 2022: Cost > 90 Days * Accruing * Accruing Accruing **
Americas $ 7,281 $272 $198 $22 $ 74
EMEA 3,546 52 8 1 46
Asia Pacific 1,704 20 3 1 17
Total client financing receivables $12,531 $344 $208 $23 $137
($ in millions)
Amortized Billed Amortized
Total Amortized Cost Invoices Cost
Amortized Cost > 90 Days and > 90 Days and Not
At December 31, 2021: Cost > 90 Days * Accruing * Accruing Accruing **
Americas $ 6,573 $188 $100 $ 6 $ 90
EMEA 3,793 99 7 2 95
Asia Pacific 2,031 25 5 2 20
Total client financing receivables $12,397 $312 $112 $10 $205
* At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for financing receivables aged greater than 90 days.
** Of the amortized cost not accruing, there was a related allowance of $122 million and $153 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Financing income recognized on these receivables was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on rating agency data, publicly available information and information provided
by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system that
maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information provided by Moody’s, where
available, as one of many inputs in its determination of customer credit ratings. The credit quality of the customer is evaluated based
on these indicators and is assigned the same risk rating whether the receivable is a lease or a loan.
The following tables present the amortized cost basis for client financing receivables by credit quality indicator at December 31, 2022
and 2021, respectively. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment grade. All others
are considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators reflect mitigating credit enhancement actions taken by customers
which reduce the risk to IBM.
($ in millions)
Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
At December 31, 2022: Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D
Vintage year
2022 $3,316 $ 1,097 $1,447 $ 704 $ 799 $ 96
2021 1,197 323 451 159 203 65
2020 559 217 258 158 210 49
2019 251 91 161 99 127 22
2018 128 26 42 16 84 21
2017 and prior 32 45 14 38 12 17
Total $5,482 $ 1,800 $2,373 $1,173 $1,434 $ 269
($ in millions)
Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
At December 31, 2021: Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - D
Vintage year
2021 $2,556 $ 1,147 $1,181 $ 778 $ 565 $ 226
2020 1,013 392 506 342 381 86
2019 544 236 287 291 297 51
2018 338 117 189 85 211 64
2017 108 50 15 52 74 17
2016 and prior 20 53 21 46 38 20
Total $4,579 $ 1,994 $2,198 $1,595 $1,567 $ 464
Troubled Debt Restructurings
The company did not have any significant troubled debt restructurings for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021.

===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE M. PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Land and land improvements $ 213 $ 224
Buildings and building and leasehold improvements 5,678 6,049
Information technology equipment 9,643 10,589 *
Production, engineering, office and other equipment 3,161 3,222
Total—gross 18,695 20,085 *
Less: Accumulated depreciation 13,361 14,390 *
Total—net $ 5,334 $ 5,694
* Recast to conform to 2022 presentation to present rental machines within information technology equipment.
NOTE N. LEASES
Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
The following table presents the various components of lease costs.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Finance lease cost $ 67 $ 52 $ 35
Operating lease cost 1,050 1,126 1,181
Short-term lease cost 7 21 28
Variable lease cost 262 336 343
Sublease income (72) (46) (28)
Total lease cost $ 1,315 $ 1,489 $ 1,558
The company recorded net gains on sale and leaseback transactions of $41 million and $7 million for the years ended December 31,
2022 and 2021, respectively. The company had no sale and leaseback transactions in 2020.
The following table presents supplemental information relating to the cash flows arising from lease transactions. Cash payments
related to variable lease costs and short-term leases are not included in the measurement of operating and finance lease liabilities,
and, as such, are excluded from the amounts below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities
Operating cash outflows from finance leases $ 9 $ 8 $ 8
Financing cash outflows from finance leases 55 42 25
Operating cash outflows from operating leases 1,020 1,135 1,212
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new finance lease liabilities* 196 46 50
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new operating lease liabilities* 705 779 785
* Includes the impact of currency.
The following table presents the weighted-average lease term and discount rate for finance and operating leases.
At December 31: 2022 2021
Finance leases
Weighted-average remaining lease term 3.7 yrs. 4.1 yrs.
Weighted-average discount rate 3.57 % 0.88 %
Operating leases
Weighted-average remaining lease term 4.5 yrs. 4.5 yrs.
Weighted-average discount rate 3.77 % 3.01 %

===== PAGE 92 =====
90 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents a maturity analysis of expected undiscounted cash flows for operating and finance leases on an annual
basis for the next five years and thereafter.
($ in millions)
Imputed
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Thereafter Interest * Total **
Finance leases $ 88 $ 74 $ 54 $ 24 $ 22 $ 19 $ (43) $ 239
Operating leases 960 788 555 430 285 313 (267) 3,064
* Imputed interest represents the difference between undiscounted cash flows and discounted cash flows.
** The company entered into lease agreements for certain facilities and equipment with payments totaling approximately $691 million that have not yet
commenced as of December 31, 2022, and therefore are not included in this table.
The following table presents information on the company’s finance leases recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
ROU Assets—Property, plant and equipment $223 $86
Lease Liabilities
Short-term debt 75 36
Long-term debt 164 63
Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
The following table presents amounts included in the Consolidated Income Statement related to lessor activity.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Lease income—sales-type and direct financing leases
Sales-type lease selling price $1,636 $ 1,355 $ 1,321
Less: Carrying value of underlying assets* (385) (300) (410)
Gross profit 1,251 1,055 911
Interest income on lease receivables 200 179 249
Total sales-type and direct financing lease income 1,451 1,234 1,160
Lease income—operating leases 116 169 255
Variable lease income 87 120 115
Total lease income $1,653 $ 1,523 $ 1,530
* Excludes unguaranteed residual value.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the unguaranteed residual values of sales-type and direct financing leases were $422 million and
$335 million, respectively. Refer to note L, “Financing Receivables,” for additional information on the company’s net investment in
leases.
For the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, impairment of residual values was immaterial.
The following table presents a maturity analysis of the lease payments due to IBM on sales-type and direct financing leases over the
next five years and thereafter, as well as a reconciliation of the undiscounted cash flows to the financing receivables recognized in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022.
($ in millions)
Total
2023 $1,692
2024 1,173
2025 738
2026 330
2027 87
Thereafter 3
Total undiscounted cash flows $4,023
Present value of lease payments (recognized as financing receivables) 3,672 *
Difference between undiscounted cash flows and discounted cash flows $ 351
* The present value of the lease payments will not equal the financing receivables balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheet due to certain items
including IDCs, allowance for credit losses and residual values, which are included in the financing receivable balance, but are not included in the future
lease payments.

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE O. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
Intangible Assets
The following table presents the company’s intangible asset balances by major asset class.
($ in millions)
Gross Carrying Accumulated Net Carrying
At December 31, 2022: Amount Amortization Amount *
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $ 1,650 $ (705) $ 945
Client relationships 8,559 (2,951) 5,608
Completed technology 5,220 (2,045) 3,175
Patents/trademarks 2,140 (688) 1,452
Other** 19 (15) 4
Total $17,588 $(6,404) $11,184
* Includes a decrease in net intangible asset balance of $198 million due to foreign currency translation.
** Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.
($ in millions)
Gross Carrying Accumulated Net Carrying
At December 31, 2021: Amount Amortization Amount *
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $ 1,696 $ (751) $ 945
Client relationships 9,021 (2,889) 6,132
Completed technology 6,074 (2,259) 3,815
Patents/trademarks 2,196 (586) 1,610
Other** 44 (35) 9
Total $19,031 $(6,520) $12,511
* Includes a decrease in net intangible asset balance of $221 million due to foreign currency translation.
** Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business processes, methodologies and systems.
There was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2022 and 2021. The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased
$1,327 million during the year ended December 31, 2022, primarily due to intangible asset amortization, partially offset by additions
of acquired intangibles and capitalized software. The aggregate intangible amortization expense was $2,397 million and $2,506
million for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. In addition, in 2022 and 2021, respectively, the company
retired $1,301 million and $904 million of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross carrying amount and
accumulated amortization by this amount. The company also derecognized intangible assets with a gross carrying amount of $1,313
million and $1,149 million of accumulated amortization as part of the divestiture of its healthcare software assets on June 30, 2022.
The future amortization expense relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet is estimated to be
the following at December 31, 2022:
Capitalized Acquired
($ in millions) Software Intangibles Total
2023 $514 $1,571 $2,085
2024 328 1,554 1,881
2025 103 1,535 1,639
2026 0 1,512 1,512
2027 — 1,493 1,493
Thereafter — 2,574 2,574

===== PAGE 94 =====
92 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2022 and 2021 are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Purchase Translation
Balance at Goodwill Price and Other Balance at
Segment January 1, 2022 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments * December 31, 2022
Software $43,966 $ 568 $(118) $ — $(760) $43,657
Consulting 6,797 1,366 (42) — (192) 7,928
Infrastructure 4,396 — — (1) (32) 4,363
Other** 484 — — (484) — —
Total $55,643 $1,934 $(159) $(485) $(984) $55,949
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
** The company derecognized $484 million of goodwill related to the divestiture of its healthcare software assets. Refer to note F, “Acquisitions &
Divestitures,” for additional information.
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Purchase Translation
Balance at Goodwill Price and Other Balance at
Segment January 1, 2021 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments * December 31, 2021
Software** $42,665 $1,836 $ 23 $(13) $(545) $ 43,966
Consulting 6,145 713 (21) — (40) 6,797
Infrastructure 4,436 — 0 — (39) 4,396
Other** 520 — - (37) 1 484
Total $53,765 $2,549 $ 2 $(50) $(623) $ 55,643
* Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
** Recast to conform to 2022 presentation.
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during 2022 or 2021 and the company has no accumulated impairment losses.
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2022 and 2021 were related to acquisitions that were still subject to the measurement period
that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date or when information becomes available. Net purchase price adjustments
recorded in 2022 primarily related to deferred tax assets and liabilities associated with the Turbonomic acquisition. Net purchase price
adjustments recorded in 2021 were not material.
NOTE P. BORROWINGS
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Short-term loans $ 8 $ 22
Long-term debt—current maturities 4,751 6,764
Total $4,760 $6,787
The weighted-average interest rate for short-term loans was 7.6 percent and 6.7 percent at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2022 2021
U.S. dollar debt (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2022):*
2.6% 2022 $ — $ 5,673
3.4% 2023 1,529 1,573
3.3% 2024 5,009 5,016
5.1% 2025 1,603 608
3.3% 2026 4,351 4,356
3.1% 2027 3,620 2,221
6.5% 2028 313 313
3.5% 2029 3,250 3,250
2.0% 2030 1,350 1,350
4.4% 2032 1,850 600
8.0% 2038 83 83
4.5% 2039 2,745 2,745
2.9% 2040 650 650
4.0% 2042 1,107 1,107
7.0% 2045 27 27
4.7% 2046 650 650
4.3% 2049 3,000 3,000
3.0% 2050 750 750
4.2% 2052 1,400 —
7.1% 2096 316 316
$33,605 $34,290
Other currencies (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2022, in parentheses):*
Euro (1.1%) 2023-2040 $17,087 $ 15,903
Pound sterling 2022 — 406
Japanese yen (0.3%) 2024-2026 694 1,263
Other (16.0%) 2023-2026 361 378
$51,747 $52,240
Finance lease obligations (3.5%) 2023-2030 239 99
$51,986 $52,339
Less: net unamortized discount 835 839
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 138 130
Add: fair value adjustment** (73) 311
$50,940 $51,681
Less: current maturities 4,751 6,764
Total $46,189 $44,917
* Includes notes, debentures, bank loans and secured borrowings.
** The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as an amount equal to the sum of the
debt’s carrying value and a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in
benchmark interest rates.
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which obligate the
company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback transactions
to 10 percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to merge or consolidate unless certain
conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be
less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
The company is in compliance with all of its debt covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The failure to comply with its
debt covenants could constitute an event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. If certain events of default
were to occur, the principal and interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would become immediately due and payable.
In the first quarter of 2021, IBM Credit LLC early redeemed all of its outstanding fixed-rate debt in the aggregate amount of $1.75 billion
with maturity dates ranging from 2021 to 2023 and deregistered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. The notes were
redeemed at a price equal to 100 percent of the aggregate principal plus a make-whole premium and accrued interest. The company
incurred a loss of approximately $22 million upon redemption that was recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income
Statement.
In the first quarter of 2022, the company issued $2.3 billion of Euro fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 8 to 12 years
and coupons ranging from 0.875 to 1.25 percent, and $1.8 billion of U.S. dollar fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 5

===== PAGE 96 =====
94 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
to 30 years and coupons ranging from 2.20 to 3.43 percent. In the third quarter of 2022, the company issued $3.25 billion of U.S. dollar
fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 3 to 30 years and coupons ranging from 4.00 to 4.90 percent.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2022 2021
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
At December 31: Amount Interest Rate Amount Interest Rate
Fixed-rate debt $ 43,898 2.7 % $ 49,976 2.8 %
Floating-rate debt* 7,042 5.9 % 1,705 2.6 %
Total $ 50,940 $ 51,681
* Includes $6,525 million and $425 million in 2022 and 2021, respectively, of notional interest-rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into
floating-rate debt. Refer to note T, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
Pre-swap annual contractual obligations of long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 2022, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Total
2023 $ 4,754
2024 6,367
2025 4,875
2026 4,700
2027 4,705
Thereafter 26,585
Total $ 51,986
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Cost of financing $ 346 $ 392 $ 451
Interest expense 1,216 1,155 1,288
Interest capitalized 5 3 5
Total interest paid and accrued $ 1,566 $ 1,550 $ 1,743
Refer to the related discussion in note E, “Segments,” for interest expense of the Financing segment. Refer to note T, “Derivative Financial
Instruments,” for a discussion of the use of foreign currency denominated debt designated as a hedge of net investment, as well as a
discussion of the use of currency and interest-rate swaps in the company’s debt risk management program.
Lines of Credit
On June 30, 2022, the company amended its existing $2.5 billion Three-Year Credit Agreement and $7.5 billion Five-Year Credit
Agreement (the Credit Agreements) to extend the maturity dates to June 20, 2025 and June 22, 2027, respectively, and to replace the
London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) interest rate provisions with customary provisions based on the Secured Overnight Financing
Rate (SOFR). The Credit Agreements permit the company and its subsidiary borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion on a revolving basis.
The total expense recorded by the company related to these agreements was $11 million, $12 million, and $12 million in 2022, 2021,
and 2020, respectively. Subject to certain conditions stated in the Credit Agreements, the borrower may borrow, prepay and re-borrow
amounts under the Credit Agreements at any time during the term of such agreements. Funds borrowed may be used for the general
corporate purposes of the borrower.
Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agreements will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further described in the
Credit Agreements. The Credit Agreements contain customary representations and warranties, covenants, events of default, and
indemnification provisions. The company believes that circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants or an event of
default, as specified in the Credit Agreements, are remote. As of December 31, 2022, there were no borrowings by the company under the
Credit Agreements.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest rates
and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions. As of
December 31, 2022, there were no material borrowings by the company under these credit facilities.

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE Q. OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Income tax reserves* $ 6,404 $ 6,179
Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 1,307 1,686
Disability benefits 303 359
Derivative liabilities 488 103
Workforce reductions 524 752
Deferred taxes 2,292 3,956
Other taxes payable 90 72
Environmental accruals 243 224
Warranty accruals 36 29
Asset retirement obligations 82 92
Acquisition related 152 218
Divestiture related 49 47
Other 273 278
Total $ 12,243 $ 13,996
* Refer to note H, “Taxes,” for additional information.
In response to changing business needs, the company periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost
competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent contractually obligated future payments associated with these activities are
reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the previous table. The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals primarily related
to terminated employees who are no longer working for the company and who were granted annual payments to supplement their
incomes in certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these required payments will continue until
the former employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes away. The total amounts accrued for workforce reductions, including
amounts classified as other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, were $701 million and $1,359 million
at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The decrease is primarily due to cash payments made in 2022 for the workforce
reduction action in the fourth quarter of 2020. The company recorded a charge of $1,472 million in selling, general and administrative
expense in the Consolidated Income Statement in the year ended December 31, 2020 for severance and employee related benefits in
accordance with the accounting guidance for ongoing benefit arrangements.
The company employs extensive internal environmental protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company also
participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned
facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts
have been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO
environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, that do not reflect actual or
anticipated insurance recoveries, were $271 million and $248 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Estimated
environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated results of the company’s
operations in future periods. However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup periods, changing
environmental remediation regulations and changes in assumptions.
As of December 31, 2022, the company was unable to estimate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain
asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject
to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate only if it
performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have indeterminate settlement dates,
the company could not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will continue to assess its ability to estimate
fair values at each future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once sufficient additional information becomes
available. The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet,
were $107 million and $119 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.

===== PAGE 98 =====
96 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE R. COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities include unused amounts of $1.6 billion and $1.7 billion at December 31,
2022 and 2021, respectively. A portion of these amounts was available to the company’s business partners to support their working
capital needs. In addition, the company has committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection with client purchase
agreements for $2.1 billion and $3.2 billion at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The reduction in the future financing
commitments is primarily due to lower services financing in the current year. The company collectively evaluates the allowance for
these arrangements using a provision methodology consistent with the portfolio of the commitments. Refer to note A, “Significant
Accounting Policies,” for additional information. The allowance for these commitments is recorded in other liabilities in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet and was not material at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of requiring
the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a description of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect to
certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of contracts entered into by the company, under which the company
customarily agrees to hold the party harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations and covenants related to such
matters as title to the assets sold, certain intellectual property rights, specified environmental matters, third-party performance of
nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned
on the other party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract, the procedures of which typically
allow the company to challenge the other party’s claims. While indemnification provisions typically do not include a contractual
maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or
nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may have recourse against third parties for certain payments made by the
company.
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these or similar agreements due to the conditional
nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Historically,
payments made by the company under these agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s business, financial condition
or results of operations.
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these
financial guarantees and the fair value of these guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and
2021 was not material.
Changes in the company’s warranty liability for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities and
other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and for extended warranty contracts, which are included in deferred income in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, are presented in the following tables.
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2022 2021
Balance at January 1 $77 $83
Current period accruals 84 82
Accrual adjustments to reflect experience (2) (1)
Charges incurred (81) (86)
Balance at December 31 $79 $77
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2022 2021
Balance at January 1 $ 350 $ 425
Revenue deferred for new extended warranty contracts 100 133
Amortization of deferred revenue (163) (198)
Other* (15) (10)
Balance at December 31 $ 272 $ 350
Current portion $ 137 $ 163
Noncurrent portion $ 135 $ 186
* Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff
or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time to time
in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader in the information technology industry and, as such, has been and will
continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and associated products and offerings, including claims of copyright and patent
infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the company enforces its own IP against infringement,
through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Further, given the rapidly evolving external landscape of cybersecurity, privacy and
data protection laws, regulations and threat actors, the company and its clients have been and will continue to be subject to actions or
proceedings in various jurisdictions. Also, as is typical for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to actions and
proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide range of labor and employment issues (including matters related to contested
employment decisions, country-specific labor and employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and other benefit plans),
as well as actions with respect to contracts, product liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environmental matters.
These actions may be commenced by a number of different parties, including competitors, clients, current or former employees,
government and regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in which the company does business. Some of
the actions to which the company is party may involve particularly complex technical issues, and some actions may raise novel
questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these matters arise.
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has been
incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such liabilities for
the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of material
loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the company also discloses matters based on its consideration of other matters and
qualitative factors, including the experience of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee relations
considerations.
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time that
the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this
note, except as specifically discussed herein, the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible losses or range of
losses, including losses in excess of amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations and proceedings
are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s experience that
damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful
indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of other
factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status of the
matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of information
important to the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are made
with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or in the
aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews by
counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter.
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of variables,
including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of the impact
any such losses, damages or remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and circumstances of
the particular matter that may give rise to additional factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, it is possible
that the company’s business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period by the
resolution of one or more of these matters.
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters involving the company.
In December 2017, CIS General Insurance Limited (CISGIL) sued IBM UK regarding a contract entered into by IBM UK and CISGIL in
2015 to implement and operate an IT insurance platform. The contract was terminated by IBM UK in July 2017 for non-payment by
CISGIL. CISGIL alleges wrongful termination, breach of contract and breach of warranty. In February 2021, the Technology &
Construction Court in London rejected the majority of CISGIL’s claims and ruled in IBM’s favor on its counterclaim. The court’s decision
required IBM to pay approximately $20 million in damages, plus interest and litigation costs. In April 2022, the Court of Appeal awarded
CISGIL additional damages of approximately $89 million, plus interest and litigation costs. IBM filed an application for permission to
appeal with the UK Supreme Court, which was denied in December 2022.
On June 8, 2021, IBM sued GlobalFoundries U.S. Inc. (GF) in New York State Supreme Court for claims including fraud and breach of
contract relating to a long-term strategic relationship between IBM and GF for researching, developing, and manufacturing advanced

===== PAGE 100 =====
98 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
semiconductor chips for IBM. GF walked away from its obligations and IBM is now suing to recover amounts paid to GF, and other
compensatory and punitive damages, totaling more than $1.5 billion. On September 14, 2021, the court ruled on GF’s motion to
dismiss. On April 7, 2022, the Appellate Division unanimously reversed the lower court’s dismissal of IBM’s fraud claim. IBM’s claims
for breaches of contract, promissory estoppel, and fraud are proceeding.
On April 5, 2022, a putative securities law class action was commenced in the United States District Court for the Southern District of
New York alleging that during the period from April 4, 2017 through October 20, 2021, certain strategic imperatives revenues were
misclassified. The company, two current IBM senior executives, and two former IBM senior executives are named as defendants. On
June 23, 2022, the court entered an order appointing Iron Workers Local 580 Joint Funds as lead plaintiff. On September 21, 2022,
the plaintiff voluntarily dismissed the case, without prejudice. On January 13, 2023, a putative securities law class action making
allegations substantially similar to those in the dismissed case was filed in the same court. On March 25, 2022, the Board of Directors
received a shareholder demand letter making similar allegations and demanding that the company’s Board of Directors take action to
assert the company’s rights. A special committee of independent directors was formed to investigate the issues raised in the letter.
The special committee has completed its investigation and recommended that no claims should be asserted on behalf of the company.
The independent directors of the company’s Board of Directors unanimously adopted that recommendation.
On June 2, 2022, a putative class action lawsuit was filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
alleging that the IBM Pension Plan miscalculated certain joint and survivor annuity pension benefits by using outdated actuarial tables
in violation of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. IBM, the Plan Administrator Committee, and the IBM Pension
Plan are named as defendants.
As disclosed in the Kyndryl Form 10 and subsequent Kyndryl public filings, in 2017 BMC Software, Inc. (BMC) filed suit against IBM in
the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas in a dispute involving IBM’s former managed infrastructure services
business. On May 30, 2022, the trial court awarded BMC $718 million in direct damages and $718 million in punitive damages, plus
interest and fees. IBM filed a notice of appeal, and BMC cross appealed. IBM does not believe it has any material exposure relating to
this litigation. No material liability or related indemnification asset has been recorded by IBM.
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to CERCLA.
Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership of sites.
The company is also conducting environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity of several current or
former operating sites globally pursuant to permits, administrative orders or agreements with country, state or local environmental
agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or former operating sites.
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many
other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities regarding
non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters. The total potential amount related to all these matters for all
applicable years is approximately $400 million. The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is not a
meaningful indicator of liability.
NOTE S. EQUITY ACTIVITY
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of (i) 4,687,500,000 shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which
906,091,977 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2022, and (ii) 150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par
value, whereby 75,000,000 shares have been designated as Series A Preferred Stock, of which 57,916,244 shares of Series A Preferred
Stock were issued to a wholly owned subsidiary of the company but were not outstanding at December 31, 2022. The company does
not intend to issue or transfer any shares of Series A Preferred Stock to any third parties.
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM common stock. The company suspended its share repurchase
program at the time of the Red Hat acquisition in 2019. At December 31, 2022, $2,008 million of Board common stock repurchase
authorization was available.
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock
purchase plan: 8,539,072 shares in 2022, 5,608,845 shares in 2021, and 4,972,028 shares in 2020. The company issued 2,512,300
treasury shares in 2022, 2,093,243 treasury shares in 2021, and 2,934,907 treasury shares in 2020, as a result of restricted stock unit
releases and exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, as part of the
company’s stock-based compensation plans, 3,027,994 common shares at a cost of $407 million, 2,286,912 common shares at a cost
of $319 million, and 2,363,966 common shares at a cost of $302 million in 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, were remitted by
employees to the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding requirements. These amounts are included in the
treasury stock balance in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and the Consolidated Statement of Equity.

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2022: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 176 $ (406) $ (229)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (1) $ 0 $ (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (1) $ 0 $ (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 241 $ (64) $ 178
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (24) 6 (18)
Cost of sales (99) 28 (70)
Cost of financing 24 (6) 18
SG&A expense (38) 11 (28)
Other (income) and expense (349) 88 (261)
Interest expense 86 (22) 64
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (158) $ 41 $ (117)
Retirement-related benefit plans*
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 463 $ (99) $ 364
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 878 (183) 695
Curtailments and settlements 5,970 (1,490) 4,480
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs 12 (3) 9
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,596 (304) 1,293
Total retirement-related benefit plans $8,919 $(2,078) $6,841
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $8,936 $(2,442) $6,494
* These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost and include the impact of a one-time, non-cash pension
settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax). Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2021: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 987 $ (414) $ 573
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 344 $ (89) $ 256
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (43) 11 (32)
Cost of sales 16 (3) 13
Cost of financing 22 (6) 17
SG&A expense 24 (6) 19
Other (income) and expense 157 (40) 118
Interest expense 65 (16) 49
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 587 $ (149) $ 438
Retirement-related benefit plans*
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (51) $ (1) $ (52)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 2,433 (601) 1,832
Curtailments and settlements 94 (11) 83
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs 9 0 9
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,484 (528) 1,956
Total retirement-related benefit plans $4,969 $(1,140) $3,828
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $6,542 $(1,703) $4,839
* These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.

===== PAGE 102 =====
100 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2020: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ (1,500) $535 $ (965)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (1) $ 0 $ 0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (1) $ 0 $ 0
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (349) $ 89 $ (261)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (23) 6 (18)
Cost of sales (2) 1 (2)
Cost of financing 27 (7) 20
SG&A expense 0 0 0
Other (income) and expense (101) 25 (75)
Interest expense 78 (20) 58
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (370) $ 94 $ (277)
Retirement-related benefit plans*
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (37) $ 7 $ (29)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (1,678) 295 (1,383)
Curtailments and settlements 52 (14) 38
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs 13 (1) 12
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 2,314 (451) 1,863
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 664 $(163) $ 501
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (1,206) $466 $ (740)
* These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments * Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2019 $(179) $(3,700) $(24,718) $0 $(28,597)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications (261) (965) (1,412) 0 (2,638)
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (16) — 1,914 — 1,898
Total change for the period (277) (965) 501 0 (740)
December 31, 2020 (456) (4,665) (24,216) 0 (29,337)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 256 573 1,780 0 2,608
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income 183 — 2,049 — 2,231
Separation of Kyndryl — 730 534 — 1,264
Total change for the period 438 1,303 4,362 0 6,103
December 31, 2021 (18) (3,362) (19,854) (1) (23,234)
Other comprehensive income before reclassifications 178 (229) 1,059 (1) 1,007
Amount reclassified from accumulated other
comprehensive income (295) — 5,782 ** — 5,487
Total change for the period (117) (229) 6,841 (1) 6,494
December 31, 2022 $(135) $(3,591) $(13,013) $(1) $(16,740)
* Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
** Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax). Refer to note V, “Retirement-Related
Benefits,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE T. DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the normal
course of business, the company is exposed to the impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a lesser
extent equity and commodity price changes and client credit risk. The company limits these risks by following established risk
management policies and procedures, including the use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the currencies
in which assets are denominated. For interest rate exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate movements between the interest
rates associated with the company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest rates associated with its financing debt.
Derivatives are also used to manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives are used to better manage
the cash flow volatility arising from foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
In the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master netting arrangements
nor does it offset receivables or payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the fair values of the related
derivative instruments. The amount recognized in other accounts receivable for the right to reclaim cash collateral was $140 million
and $2 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The amount recognized in accounts payable for the obligation to return
cash collateral was $8 million and $38 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. The company restricts the use of cash
collateral received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it in restricted cash in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The amount
rehypothecated was $8 million and $2 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively. Additionally, if derivative exposures
covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2022 and 2021,
the total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by $220 million and $60 million, respectively.
On May 19, 2022, in connection with the disposition of 22.3 million shares of Kyndryl common stock, the company entered into a cash-
settled swap with the lender of the short-term credit facility as the counterparty that maintained IBM’s continued economic exposure
in those shares pursuant to the May 2022 Exchange. Refer to note J, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for additional information. The
notional value of the swap was $311 million. Upon settlement of the swap, which occurred on November 2, 2022, IBM recognized a
loss and paid $83 million derived from the difference between the VWAP of the Kyndryl common stock over the outstanding term of
the swap and the strike price of $13.95 per share.
In its hedging programs, the company may use forward contracts, futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps, equity
swaps and options depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective financing
can result in interest rate mismatches with the underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce overall interest cost,
the company may use interest-rate swaps to convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., fair value hedges)
and to convert specific variable-rate debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
total notional amount of the company’s interest-rate swaps was $6.5 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively. The weighted-average
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2022 and 2021 was approximately 6 years and 1.2 years, respectively. These
interest-rate contracts were accounted for as fair value hedges. The company did not have any cash flow hedges relating to this
program outstanding at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use instruments
such as forward starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest payments related to the forecasted debt issuances. There
were no instruments outstanding at December 31, 2022 and 2021.
In connection with cash flow hedges of forecasted interest payments related to the company’s borrowings, the company recorded net
losses (before taxes) of $139 million and $157 million at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively, in AOCI. The company estimates
that $18 million of the deferred net losses (before taxes) on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2022 will be reclassified to net income
within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying interest payments.

===== PAGE 104 =====
102 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries (Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign
subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional
currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. dollar. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the carrying value of debt
designated as hedging instruments was $13.4 billion and $14.1 billion, respectively. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and
foreign exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the total notional amount of
derivative instruments designated as net investment hedges was $4.7 billion and $6.8 billion, respectively. At both December 31, 2022
and 2021, the weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.1 years.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments for
royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the company. In anticipation of these foreign
currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange forward
contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. At December 31, 2022, the
maximum remaining length of time over which the company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash flows is
approximately two years. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow
hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $8.1 billion and $7.2 billion, respectively. At both December 31, 2022 and
2021, the weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.6 years.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, in connection with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the company
recorded net gains (before taxes) of $66 million and $315 million, respectively, in AOCI. The company estimates that $7 million of
deferred net gains (before taxes) on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2022 will be reclassified to net income within the next
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company employs
cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional
currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for as cash flow hedges. At December 31, 2022, the maximum length of
time remaining over which the company has hedged its exposure was approximately five years. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the
total notional amount of cross-currency swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency denominated debt was $3.1 billion
and $2.0 billion, respectively.
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, in connection with cash flow hedges of foreign currency denominated borrowings, the company
recorded net losses (before taxes) of $101 million and $174 million, respectively, in AOCI. The company estimates that $10 million of
deferred net gains (before taxes) on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2022 will be reclassified to net income within the next
12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying exposure.
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to
convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income
Statement. At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign
currency exposure was $5.9 billion and $6.8 billion, respectively.

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to
certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Although not designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market indices or the total return on the company’s common stock, and are
recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. At December 31,
2022 and 2021, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of these compensation obligations was $1.1
billion and $1.4 billion, respectively.
Cumulative Basis Adjustments for Fair Value Hedges
At December 31, 2022 and 2021, the following amounts were recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet related to cumulative basis
adjustments for fair value hedges:
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2022 2021
Short-term debt
Carrying amount of the hedged item $ (199) $ (227)
Cumulative hedging adjustments included in the carrying amount—assets/(liabilities) 1 (2)
Long-term debt
Carrying amount of the hedged item (6,216) (508)
Cumulative hedging adjustments included in the carrying amount—assets/(liabilities)* 72 (309)
* Includes ($250) million and ($302) million of hedging adjustments on discontinued hedging relationships at December 31, 2022 and 2021, respectively.
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Income Statement
The total amounts of income and expense line items presented in the Consolidated Income Statement in which the effects of fair value
hedges, cash flow hedges, net investment hedges and derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are recorded and the total
effect of hedge activity on these income and expense line items are as follows:
($ in millions)
Gains/(Losses) of
Total Total Hedge Activity
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Cost of services $21,062 $19,147 $17,689 $ 24 $ 43 $ 23
Cost of sales 6,374 6,184 6,048 99 (16) 2
Cost of financing 406 534 577 2 1 12
SG&A expense 18,609 18,745 20,561 (211) 176 141
Other (income) and expense 5,803 873 802 (225) (205) 101
Interest expense 1,216 1,155 1,288 6 3 35

===== PAGE 106 =====
104 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement
Consolidated Recognized on Attributable to Risk
Income Statement Derivatives Being Hedged (2)
For the year ended December 31: Line Item 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (1)
Cost of
Interest rate contracts
financing $ (73) $ (1) $ 20 $ 85 $ 18 $ 4
Interest
expense (257) (2) 58 299 53 11
Derivative instruments not designated as hedging
instruments
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (492) (48) 1 N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense (249) 201 142 N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
and expense (83) — — N/A N/A N/A
Total $ (1,153) $ 150 $ 220 $ 384 $ 71 $ 14
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement and Other Comprehensive Income
Consolidated Reclassified Amounts Excluded from
For the year ended Recognized in OCI Income Statement from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (3)
December 31: 2022 2021 2020 Line Item 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Derivative instruments in cash
flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Cost of financing $ (4) $ (4) $ (5) $ — $ — $—
Interest
expense (14) (13) (13) — — —
Foreign exchange contracts 241 344 (349) Cost of services 24 43 23 — — —
Cost of sales 99 (16) 2 — — —
Cost of financing (21) (18) (23) — — —
SG&A expense 38 (24) 0 — — —
Other (income)
and expense 349 (157) 101 — — —
Interest
expense (72) (52) (65) — — —
Instruments in net investment
hedges (4)
Foreign exchange contracts 1,613 1,644 (2,127) Cost of financing — — — 14 6 16
Interest
expense — — — 50 17 45
Total $ 1,854 $ 1,989 $ (2,477) $ 400 $ (243) $ 21 $64 $23 $60
(1) The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon
payments required under these derivative contracts.
(2) The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(3) The company’s policy is to recognize all fair value changes in amounts excluded from effectiveness testing in net income each period.
(4) Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments with the amounts recognized in OCI providing an offset to the
translation of foreign subsidiaries.
N/A–Not applicable
For the years ending December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, there were no material gains or losses excluded from the assessment of
hedge effectiveness (for fair value or cash flow hedges), or associated with an underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to
occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course of business.

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE U. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
The following table presents total stock-based compensation cost included in income from continuing operations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
Cost $ 164 $ 145 $ 126
SG&A expense 566 555 550
RD&E expense 258 218 197
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost 987 919 873
Income tax benefits (249) (223) (198)
Net stock-based compensation cost $ 738 $ 695 $ 675
The company’s total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested awards at December 31, 2022 was $1.5 billion and is
expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.6 years.
Capitalized stock-based compensation cost was not material at December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the Plans).
The Plans are administered by the Executive Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the Board of Directors. Awards
available under the Plans principally include restricted stock units, performance share units, stock options or any combination thereof.
There were 293 million shares originally authorized to be awarded under the company's existing Plans and 66 million shares granted
under previous plans that, if and when those awards were cancelled, could be reissued under the existing Plans. At December 31,
2022, 65 million unused shares were available to be granted.
Stock Awards
Stock awards for the periods presented were made in the form of Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock
Units (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs).
The following table summarizes RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020.
RSUs PSUs
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
Grant Price Number of Units Grant Price Number of Units
Balance at January 1, 2020 $ 123 11,326,628 $126 2,856,450
Awards granted 115 10,651,955 117 1,582,666
Awards released 126 (3,781,240) 137 (630,974)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 121 (1,300,639) 125 (256,642)*
Balance at December 31, 2020 $ 117 16,896,704 $120 3,551,500 **
Awards granted 125 9,566,307 129 1,561,120
Awards released 120 (4,582,159) 129 (581,397)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 119 (2,072,800) 124 (453,178)*
Kyndryl separation - adjustment — 660,089 — 120,428
Kyndryl separation - cancellation 119 (1,429,661) 119 (469,616)
Balance at December 31, 2021 $ 116 19,038,480 $118 3,728,857 **
Awards granted 112 11,447,966 110 1,237,019
Awards released 114 (7,013,530) 114 (679,601)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted 116 (2,420,002) 116 (720,197)*
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 115 21,052,914 $117 3,566,078 **
* Includes adjustments of (362,247), (223,397) and (70,089) PSUs for 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively, because final performance metrics were above
or below specified targets.
** Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued
will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.

===== PAGE 108 =====
106 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The total fair value of RSUs and PSUs granted and vested during the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020
RSUs
Granted $ 1,288 $ 1,195 $ 1,220
Vested 801 549 478
PSUs
Granted $ 136 $ 201 $ 186
Vested 77 75 86
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended December 31,
2022, 2021 and 2020 were $249 million, $175 million and $139 million, respectively.
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are
granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high and low stock price on the date of grant. These awards generally vest
in four equal increments on the first four anniversaries of the grant date and have a contractual term of 10 years. The company
estimates the fair value of stock options at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and assumptions used
to estimate the fair value of stock options include the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of the company’s
stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend yield. For the stock options granted for the year ended December 31, 2022, the
expected option term was determined from historical exercise patterns, volatility was based on an analysis of the company’s historical
stock prices over the expected option term, the risk-free rate was obtained from the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of
grant and the dividend yield was based on the company’s expectation of paying dividends in the foreseeable future. Estimates of fair
value are not intended to predict actual future events or the value ultimately realized by employees who receive equity awards, and
subsequent events are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value made by the company. During the
years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, the company did not grant stock options and no material stock options were exercised,
forfeited or cancelled. In 2022, stock options were primarily granted by the company as part of its executive compensation programs.
The weighted-average fair value of stock options granted for the year ended December 31, 2022 was $14.29. The fair value was
estimated based on the following weighted-average assumptions:
For the year ended December 31: 2022
Expected term (years) 6.3
Expected volatility 25.5 %
Risk-free rate 2.0 %
Dividend yield 5.3 %
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the year ended December 31, 2022.
Weighted-Average Number of Shares
Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1, 2022 $135 1,549,732
Options granted 125 5,044,353
Options exercised — —
Options forfeited/cancelled/expired 125 (319,560)
Balance at December 31, 2022 $128 6,274,525
Vested and exercisable at December 31, 2022 $135 1,549,732
The weighted-average remaining contractual term and the aggregate intrinsic value of stock options outstanding was 7.7 years and
$87 million, respectively, at December 31, 2022. The weighted-average remaining contractual term and the aggregate intrinsic value
of stock options vested and exercisable was 3.1 years and $12 million, respectively, at December 31, 2022. The total intrinsic value of
stock options exercised for the years ended December 31, 2022, 2021 and 2020 was immaterial.
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury
shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2022 and 2021 were approximately 1,351 million shares.

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Acquisitions
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there were 0.4 million stock options outstanding at December 31, 2022, as a result
of the company’s conversion of stock-based awards previously granted by acquired entities. The weighted-average exercise price of
these stock options was $20 per share. No material stock awards were outstanding at December 31, 2022.
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
Effective April 1, 2022, the company increased the discount for eligible participants to purchase shares of IBM common stock under
its Employee Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) from 5 percent to 15 percent off the average market price on the date of purchase. With this
change, the ESPP is considered compensatory under the accounting requirements for stock-based compensation. The ESPP enables
eligible participants to purchase shares of IBM common stock through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensation.
Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by the employee during the year. The ESPP provides for semi-annual
offering periods during which shares may be purchased and continues as long as shares remain available under the ESPP, unless
terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted from purchasing more than
$25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
Employees purchased approximately 2.4 million, 1.0 million and 1.1 million shares under the ESPP during the years ended December
31, 2022, 2021 and 2020, respectively. For the year ended December 31, 2022, the average market price of shares purchased was
$114 per share and the total stock-based compensation cost was $43 million. Cash dividends declared and paid by the company on
its common stock also include cash dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are paid on full and
fractional shares and can be reinvested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered outstanding and is included in
the weighted-average outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
Approximately 14.4 million shares were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2022.

===== PAGE 110 =====
108 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE V. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors the following retirement-related plans/benefits:
Plan Eligibility Funding Benefit Calculation Other
U.S. Defined Qualified U.S. regular, full- Company contributes to Vary based on the participant: Benefit accruals ceased
Benefit (DB) Personal time and part-time irrevocable trust fund, December 31, 2007.
Pension Plans Pension Plan employees hired held for sole benefit of Five-year, final pay formula
(Qualified PPP) prior to January 1, participants and based on salary, years of Certain defined benefit
2005 beneficiaries service, mortality and other pension obligations and
participant-specific factors related plan assets were
transferred in 2022, as
Excess Personal Unfunded, provides Cash balance formula based described below
Pension Plan benefits in excess of IRS on percentage of employees’
(Excess PPP) limitations for qualified annual salary, as well as an
plans interest crediting rate
Supplemental Eligible U.S. Unfunded Based on average
Executive executives earnings, years of service and
Retention Plan age at termination of
(Retention Plan) employment
U.S. Defined 401(k) Plus U.S. regular, full- All contributions are Dollar-for-dollar match, Employees generally
Contribution (DC) time and part-time made in cash and generally 5 or 6 percent of receive contributions after
Plans* employees invested in accordance eligible compensation and one year of service
with participants’ automatic matching of 1, 2 or
investment elections 4 percent of eligible
compensation, depending on
date of hire
Excess 401(k) U.S. employees Unfunded, non-qualified Company match and automatic Employees generally
Plus whose eligible amounts deferred are contributions (at the same rate receive contributions after
compensation is record-keeping under 401(k) Plus Plan) on one year of service.
expected to exceed (notional) accounts and eligible compensation deferred Amounts deferred into the
IRS compensation are not held in trust for and on compensation earned Plan, including company
limit for qualified the participants, but may in excess of the IRC pay limit. contributions, are
plans be invested in The percentage varies recorded as liabilities
accordance with depending on eligibility
participants’ investment and years of service
elections (under the
401(k) Plus Plan options)
U.S. Nonpension Nonpension Medical and dental Company contributes to Varies based on plan design Since January 1, 2004,
Postretirement Postretirement benefits for eligible irrevocable trust fund, formulas and eligibility new hires are not eligible
Benefit Plan Plan U.S. retirees and held for the sole benefit requirements for these benefits
eligible dependents, of participants and
as well as life beneficiaries
insurance for eligible
U.S. retirees
Non-U.S. Plans DB or DC Eligible regular Company deposits funds Based either on years of In certain countries,
employees in certain under various fiduciary- service and the employee’s benefit accruals have
non-U.S. type arrangements, compensation (generally ceased and/or have been
subsidiaries or purchases annuities during a fixed number of years closed to new hires as of
branches under group contracts or immediately before various dates
provides reserves for retirement) or on annual
these plans credits
Nonpension Medical and dental Primarily unfunded Varies based on plan design Most non-U.S. retirees are
Postretirement benefits for eligible except for a few select formulas and eligibility covered by local
Plan non-U.S. retirees countries where the requirements by country government sponsored
and eligible company contributes to and administered
dependents, as well irrevocable trust funds programs
as life insurance for held for the sole benefit
certain eligible non- of participants and
U.S. retirees beneficiaries
* Matching and automatic contributions are made once at the end of the year for employees that are employed as of December 15 of the plan year.
Contributions may be made for certain types of separations that occur prior to December 15. Beginning in 2023, matching and automatic contributions
are made each pay period instead of annually.

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the
Consolidated Income Statement.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Defined benefit pension plans $ 5,849 * $ 303 $ 167 $ 836 $ 1,119 $ 1,057 $ 6,685 $ 1,422 $ 1,224
Retention Plan 8 16 11 — — — 8 16 11
Total defined benefit pension plans
(income)/cost $ 5,857 * $ 319 $ 178 $ 836 $ 1,119 $ 1,057 $ 6,693 $ 1,438 $ 1,235
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and non-U.S. plans $ 530 $ 561 $ 585 $ 369 $ 409 $ 403 $ 899 $ 971 $ 988
Excess 401(k) 25 21 27 — — — 25 21 27
Total defined contribution plans cost $ 555 $ 582 $ 612 $ 369 $ 409 $ 403 $ 924 $ 992 $ 1,015
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans cost $ 85 $ 127 $ 145 $ 30 $ 44 $ 57 $ 115 $ 172 $ 202
Total retirement-related benefits net
periodic cost $ 6,497 * $ 1,029 $ 934 $ 1,235 $ 1,573 $ 1,517 $ 7,732 $ 2,601 $ 2,451
* Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion related to the Qualified PPP, as described below.
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement benefit
plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status*
At December 31: 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP $20,091 ** $ 46,458 $25,094 ** $51,852 $ 5,002 $ 5,395
Underfunded plans
Excess PPP $ 1,173 $ 1,441 $ — $ — $ (1,173) $ (1,441)
Retention Plan 228 283 — — (228) (283)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 2,369 3,404 10 8 (2,359) (3,395)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 3,771 $ 5,128 $ 10 $ 8 $ (3,761) $ (5,119)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans+ $15,443 $ 21,617 $18,677 $26,071 $ 3,234 $ 4,454
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 7 — 7 — 0 —
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $15,450 $ 21,617 $18,684 $26,071 $ 3,234 $ 4,454
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans+ $11,361 $ 17,360 $ 9,694 $13,908 $ (1,667) $ (3,452)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans+ 4,457 6,120 — — (4,457) (6,120)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 524 638 22 31 (502) (607)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $16,342 $ 24,118 $ 9,716 $13,939 $ (6,626) $(10,179)
Total overfunded plans $35,541 $ 68,075 $43,778 $77,924 $ 8,236 $ 9,850
Total underfunded plans $20,113 $ 29,246 $ 9,726 $13,947 $(10,387) $(15,300)
* Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Statement as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as
compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
** Year-to-year reduction includes the transfer of $16 billion of pension benefit obligations and assets to the Insurers as discussed below.
+ Non-U.S. qualified plans represent plans funded outside of the U.S. Non-U.S. nonqualified plans are unfunded.
At December 31, 2022, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 114 percent funded compared to the
benefit obligations, with the U.S. Qualified PPP 125 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualified plans, the company’s defined
benefit pension plans worldwide were 101 percent funded.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 112 represent financial information for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. Plans consist of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the
Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-U.S. Plans consist of all
plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan.

===== PAGE 112 =====
110 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the
Consolidated Income Statement, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Service cost $ — $ — $ — $ 237 $ 300 $ 328
Interest cost* 1,129 1,109 1,501 493 424 541
Expected return on plan assets* (1,729) (1,802) (2,169) (1,016) (1,115) (1,229)
Amortization of transition assets* — — — — — —
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)* 8 16 16 14 (12) (9)
Recognized actuarial losses* 527 996 829 1,031 1,392 1,336
Curtailments and settlements* 5,923 ** — — 47 94 49
Multi-employer plans — — — 15 17 23
Other costs/(credits) — — — 15 18 18
Total net periodic (income)/cost $ 5,857 * $ 319 $ 178 $ 836 $ 1,119 $ 1,057
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Service cost $ 5 $ 7 $ 9 $ 3 $ 4 $ 4
Interest cost* 85 65 103 24 27 35
Expected return on plan assets* — — — (2) (3) (4)
Amortization of transition assets* — — — — — —
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)* (10) 4 4 0 0 0
Recognized actuarial losses* 5 52 29 4 15 21
Curtailments and settlements* — — — 0 0 0
Other costs/(credits) — — — 0 0 0
Total net periodic cost $ 85 $ 127 $145 $30 $44 $57
* These components of net periodic pension costs are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
** Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion related to the Qualified PPP, as described below.
IBM U.S. Pension and Nonpension Postretirement Plan Changes
Over the past several years, the company has taken actions to reduce the risk profile of its worldwide retirement-related plans, while
at the same time increasing the funded status of the plans. As described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” in September
2022, the Qualified PPP irrevocably transferred to the Insurers approximately $16 billion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension
obligations and related plan assets, thereby reducing the company’s pension obligations and assets by the same amount. This
transaction further de-risks the company’s retirement-related plans by eliminating the potential for the company to make future cash
contributions to fund this portion of pension obligations being transferred to the Insurers.
Upon issuance of the group annuity contracts, the Qualified PPP’s benefit obligations and administration for approximately 100,000 of
the company’s retirees and beneficiaries (the Transferred Participants) were transferred to the Insurers. Under the group annuity
contracts, each Insurer has made an irrevocable commitment, and will be solely responsible, to pay 50 percent of the pension benefits
of each Transferred Participant that are due on and after January 1, 2023. The transaction resulted in no changes to the benefits to be
received by the Transferred Participants. The company recognized a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9
billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2022 primarily related to the accelerated recognition of actuarial losses included
within AOCI in the Consolidated Statement of Equity.
In September 2022, the company amended its U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan to transition coverage for Medicare-eligible
participants to a new IBM-sponsored group Medicare Advantage program administered by UnitedHealthcare, starting January 1, 2023.
The changes are intended to provide an enhanced member experience, better value and more comprehensive benefits to IBM
participants. This change resulted in a decrease in nonpension postretirement benefit obligations and a corresponding decrease in
AOCI.

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans,
excluding DC plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
Change in benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at January 1 $48,182 $52,237 $45,097 $50,447 $3,404 $3,791 $638 $756
Service cost — — 237 300 5 7 3 4
Interest cost 1,129 1,109 493 424 85 65 24 27
Plan participants' contributions — — 14 19 43 50 — —
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (45) (70) — — — 6
Actuarial losses/(gains) (7,849) (1,582) (8,819) (876) (780) (141) (87) (78)
Benefits paid from trust* (3,133) (3,181) (1,572) (1,736) (385) (369) (6) (6)
Direct benefit payments (123) (125) (418) (516) (2) (1) (32) (28)
Foreign exchange impact — — (3,463) (2,548) — — (10) (42)
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other* (16,712) ** (276) (262) (347) 0 3 (1) (1)
Benefit obligation at December 31 $21,493 $48,182 $31,261 $45,097 $2,369 $3,404 $531 $638
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1 $51,852 $54,386 $39,979 $42,308 $ 8 $ 15 $ 31 $ 40
Actual return on plan assets (6,914) 924 (6,737) 1,686 — — 3 (14)
Employer contributions — — 103 86 344 313 — 6
Acquisitions/divestitures, net — — (20) (87) — — — —
Plan participants' contributions — — 14 19 43 50 — —
Benefits paid from trust* (3,133) (3,181) (1,572) (1,736) (385) (369) (6) (6)
Foreign exchange impact — — (3,154) (1,939) — — 2 6
Amendments/curtailments/
settlements/other* (16,712) ** (276) (243) (358) 0 0 0 0
Fair value of plan assets at
December 31 $25,094 $51,852 $28,371 $39,979 $ 10 $ 8 $ 29 $ 31
Funded status at December 31 $ 3,600 $ 3,671 $(2,891) $(5,118) $(2,359) $(3,395) $(501) $(607)
Accumulated benefit obligation+ $21,493 $48,182 $30,961 $44,628 N/A N/A N/A N/A
* Prior period amounts for defined benefit pension plans have been recast to conform to 2022 presentation.
** Primarily represents the transfer of Qualified PPP pension obligations and related plan assets to the Insurers pursuant to group annuity contracts.
+ Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A–Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
Prepaid pension assets $ 5,002 $ 5,395 $3,234 $ 4,455 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities—compensation and
benefits (121) (123) (347) (359) (307) (364) (16) (19)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and
nonpension postretirement benefit
obligations (1,281) (1,601) (5,777) (9,215) (2,052) (3,031) (486) (588)
Funded status—net $ 3,600 $ 3,671 $(2,891) $ (5,118) $ (2,359) $ (3,395) $ (501) $ (607)

===== PAGE 114 =====
112 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI and
the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the retirement-
related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021 2022 2021
Net loss at January 1 $ 14,273 $ 15,972 $ 13,412 $ 16,310 $464 $656 $ 183 $263
Current period loss/(gain) 794 (704) (1,115) (1,411) (365) (141) (93) (65)
Curtailments and settlements (5,923)* — (47) (94) — — 0 0
Amortization of net loss included in net
periodic (income)/cost (527) (996) (1,031) (1,392) (5) (52) (4) (15)
Net loss at December 31 $ 8,617 $ 14,273 $ 11,219 $ 13,412 $ 94 $464 $ 86 $183
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 8 $ 24 $ 397 $ 325 $ 26 $ 30 $ (4) $ (4)
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — (53) 60 (415) — 5 0
Curtailments, settlements and other — — — — — — — —
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost (8) (16) (14) 12 10 (4) 0 0
Prior service costs/(credits) at
December 31 $ 0 $ 8 $ 330 $ 397 $(379) $ 26 $ 0 $ (4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Amortization of transition
assets/(liabilities) included in net periodic
(income)/cost — — — — — — — 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at
December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated
other comprehensive income/(loss)** $ 8,617 $ 14,281 $ 11,549 $ 13,809 $(285) $490 $ 86 $179
* Includes the impact of a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion related to the Qualified PPP, as described above.
** Refer to note S, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations use
participant-specific information such as salary, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of which
include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and
mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables present the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for
retirement-related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net periodic
(income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.30 %* 2.20 % 3.10 % 1.26 % 0.87 % 1.20 %
Expected long-term returns on plan assets 4.33 %* 3.75 % 4.50 % 2.97 % 2.85 % 3.36 %
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 3.02 % 2.59 % 2.32 %
Interest crediting rate 2.07 %* 1.10 % 2.70 % 0.26 % 0.26 % 0.28 %
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure benefit
obligations at December 31
Discount rate 5.30 % 2.60 % 2.20 % 3.80 % 1.26 % 0.87 %
Rate of compensation increase N/A N/A N/A 4.00 % 3.02 % 2.59 %
Interest crediting rate 4.40 % 1.10 % 1.10 % 0.34 % 0.26 % 0.26 %
* The Qualified PPP discount rate, expected long-term return on plan assets and interest crediting rate of 2.60 percent, 4.00 percent and 1.10 percent,
respectively, for the period January 1, 2022 through August 31, 2022, changed to 4.70 percent, 5.00 percent and 4.00 percent, respectively, for the
period September 1, 2022 through December 31, 2022 due to remeasurement of the plan as a result of the changes described on page 110.
N/A–Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2022 2021 2020 2022 2021 2020
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net periodic
cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate 3.05 %* 1.80 % 2.80 % 5.35 % 4.55 % 5.08 %
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 6.64 % 6.62 % 7.73 %
Interest crediting rate 2.16 %* 1.10 % 2.70 % N/A N/A N/A
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure benefit
obligations at December 31
Discount rate 5.30 % 2.30 % 1.80 % 7.25 % 5.35 % 4.55 %
Interest crediting rate 4.40 % 1.10 % 1.10 % N/A N/A N/A
* The U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan discount rate and interest credi tin g rate o f 2.30 percent and 1 .10 perc ent, re spectiv ely, fo r the per iod
January 1, 2022 through July 31, 2022, changed to 4.10 percent and 3.65 percent, respectively, for the period August 1, 2022 through December 31,
2022 due to remeasurement of the plan as a result of the changes described on page 110.
N/A–Not applicable

===== PAGE 116 =====
114 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Item Description of Assumptions
Discount Rate Changes in discount rate assumptions impact net periodic (income)/cost and the PBO.
For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds is used to construct a
yield curve. Cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation payments are matched to the yield
curve to derive the discount rates.
In other non-U.S. countries where the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not as well developed, a
portfolio of long-term government bonds is used as a base, and a credit spread is added to simulate corporate
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan. This is the benchmark for developing the
respective discount rates.
Expected Represents the expected long-term returns on plan assets based on the calculated market-related value of
Long-Term plan assets and considers long-term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and strategies
Returns on discussed on pages 114 to 115. These rates of return are developed and tested for reasonableness against
Plan Assets historical returns by the company.
The use of expected returns may result in pension income that is greater or less than the actual return of those
plan assets in a given year. Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed to approximate
the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income or loss recognition that more closely
matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees.
The difference between actual and expected returns is recognized as a component of net loss or gain in AOCI,
which is amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life expectancy of the
plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds provided by
accounting standards. The market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan
assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic
(income)/cost.
The projected long-term rate of return on plan assets for 2023 is 5.50 percent for U.S. and 4.44 percent for
non-U.S. DB Plans.
Rate of Compensation rate increases are determined based on the company’s long-term plans for such increases.
Compensation These rate increases are not applicable to the U.S. DB pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31,
Increases and 2007.
Mortality
Assumptions Mortality assumptions are based on life expectancy and death rates for different types of participants and are
periodically updated based on actual experience.
Interest Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a cash balance formula. An assumption
Crediting Rate underlying this formula is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/cost and the
PBO. This provides the basis for projecting the expected interest rate that plan participants will earn on the
benefits that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based on the average from August to
October of the one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
Healthcare For nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company determines healthcare cost trend rates based on
Cost Trend medical cost inflation expectations in each market and IBM’s plan characteristics. The healthcare cost trend
Rate rate is an important consideration when setting future expectations for plan costs or benefit obligations, taking
into account the terms of the plan which limit the company’s future obligations to the participants.
The company’s U.S. healthcare cost trend rate assumption for 2023 is 5.40 percent and is expected to
decrease to 4.15 percent over approximately 14 years.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations,
these fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market transactions.
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future
obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations will be settled depends on future events, including the retirement dates
and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the current
economic environment and other pertinent factors described above. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strategy balances the
requirement to generate returns, using potentially higher yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to control risk in the
portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity values and
changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on contributions from
the company. To mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio among industry
sectors, companies and geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, currency and other

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
factors that affect investment returns. There were no significant changes to investment strategy made in 2022 and none are planned
for 2023. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 8 percent equity securities, 83 percent fixed-income securities, 4 percent
real estate and 5 percent other investments.
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and investment professionals who are employees of the company. They are
bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s management and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies.
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $3,159 million of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2022 invested in
private market assets consisting of private equities and private real estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded
securities. In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $1,137 million in commitments for future investments in private markets to be
made over a number of years. These commitments are expected to be funded from plan assets.
Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed income management, including duration, interest rate management
and credit exposure, cash equitization and to manage currency strategies.
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those described previously, subject to local regulations. The weighted-
average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 17 percent equity securities, 62 percent fixed-income securities, 3 percent real
estate, 13 percent insurance contracts and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation decisions made by the
company’s management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation to fixed income is required to manage solvency and funding
risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent of
members elected by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences compared with the strategies previously described.
The percentage of non-U.S. plans investment in assets that are less liquid is consistent with the U.S. plan. The use of derivatives is also
consistent with the U.S. plan and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management, credit exposure and alternative
investment strategies.
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains a
nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit payments.

===== PAGE 118 =====
116 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
December 31, 2022. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s
subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $518 $ — $ — $ 518 $247 $ — $ — $ 247
Equity mutual funds ( 2) 114 — — 114 0 — — 0
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 9,074 — 9,074 — 6,837 — 6,837
Corporate bonds (4) — 6,885 721 7,606 — 2,546 — 2,546
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 238 — 238 — 2 — 2
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 234 — — 234 — — 9 9
Insurance contracts (6) — — — — — 3,654 — 3,654
Cash and short-term investments (7) 72 570 — 643 286 263 — 549
Private equity — — 421 421 — — — —
Real estate — 8 — 8 — — 145 145
Derivatives (8) — — — — 32 262 — 294
Other mutual funds(9) — — — — 25 — — 25
Subtotal 937 16,776 1,142 18,855 590 13,563 155 14,308
Investments measured at net asset
value using the NAV practical
expedient (10) — — — 6,242 — — — 14,141
Other (11) — — — (4) — — — (78)
Fair value of plan assets $937 $ 16,776 $1,142 $ 25,094 $590 $13,563 $155 $28,371
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $1 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $2
million.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $6 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $3 million.
(5) Invests predominantly in fixed-income securities.
(6) Primarily represents insurance policy contracts (Buy-In) in certain non-U.S. plans.
(7) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Includes interest-rate derivatives, forwards, exchange-traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(9) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(10) Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled funds,
hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(11) Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $10 million were invested primarily in cash equivalents, categorized as Level
1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $29 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a
lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate
bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
December 31, 2021. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s
subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $2,023 $ 0 $ — $ 2,023 $485 $ — $ — $ 485
Equity mutual funds (2) 133 — — 133 0 — — 0
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 21,751 — 21,751 — 9,900 — 9,900
Corporate bonds (4) — 16,246 598 16,844 — 3,842 — 3,842
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 660 — 660 — 3 — 3
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 281 — — 281 — — — —
Insurance contracts (6) — — — — — 5,662 — 5,662
Cash and short-term investments (7) 104 1,269 — 1,373 324 403 — 728
Real estate — — — — — — 174 174
Derivatives (8) 3 3 — 5 61 489 — 550
Other mutual funds (9) — — — — 30 — — 30
Subtotal 2,543 39,930 598 43,070 900 20,300 174 21,374
Investments measured at net asset
value using the NAV practical
expedient (10) — — — 9,078 — — — 18,652
Other (11) — — — (296) — — — (47)
Fair value of plan assets $2,543 $ 39,930 $598 $ 51,852 $900 $ 20,300 $174 $ 39,979
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $2 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of $2
million.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $19 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million.
(5) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(6) Primarily represents insurance policy contracts (Buy-In) in certain non-U.S. plans.
(7) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Includes interest-rate derivatives, forwards, exchange-traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(9) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(10)Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled funds,
hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(11)Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $8 million were invested in cash equivalents, categorized as Level 1 in the
fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $31 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser
extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate bonds,
categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2022 and 2021 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Corporate Private
Bonds Equity Total
Balance at January 1, 2022 $598 $ — $ 598
Return on assets held at end of year (114) — (114)
Return on assets sold during the year (2) — (2)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 206 — 206
Transfers, net 33 421 454
Balance at December 31, 2022 $721 $421 $1,142

===== PAGE 120 =====
118 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Corporate
Bonds
Balance at January 1, 2021 $ 542
Return on assets held at end of year (15)
Return on assets sold during the year 1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 63
Transfers, net 6
Balance at December 31, 2021 $ 598
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31,
2022 and 2021 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government Private
and Related Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2022 $ — $174 $ 174
Return on assets held at end of year 0 6 6
Return on assets sold during the year — (1) (1)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 10 (16) (7)
Transfers, net — 0 0
Foreign exchange impact 0 (18) (19)
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 9 $145 $ 155
($ in millions)
Government Private
and Related Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2021 $ 2 $298 $ 300
Return on assets held at end of year 0 (43) (43)
Return on assets sold during the year 0 58 58
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (2) (138) (140)
Transfers, net — — —
Foreign exchange impact 0 (1) (1)
Balance at December 31, 2021 $ — $174 $ 174
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valuation
techniques during 2022 and 2021.
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued based on
quoted market prices. These assets are generally classified as Level 1.
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price
reported on the major market on which the individual securities are traded.
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. Short-
term investments represent securities with original maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2.
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the
long-term nature of such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant
market data, including appraisals, to determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These assets are classified as
Level 3.
Exchange-traded derivatives are valued at the closing price reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are traded,
while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing models. The
models require a variety of inputs, including, for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign exchange rates.
These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient.
These investments, which include commingled funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are typically valued

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
using the NAV provided by the administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the value of the underlying
assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding.
Contributions and Direct Benefit Payments
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable
employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
The following table presents the contributions made to the non-U.S. DB plans, nonpension postretirement benefit plans, multi-
employer plans, DC plans and direct benefit payments for 2022 and 2021. The cash contributions to the multi-employer plans
represent the annual cost included in the net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated Income Statement. The company’s
participation in multi-employer plans has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
($ in millions)
For the years ended December 31: 2022 2021
Non-U.S. DB plans $ 103 $ 86
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 344 319
Multi-employer plans 15 17
DC plans 924 992
Direct benefit payments 576 671
Total $1,962 $2,085
In 2022 and 2021, $349 million and $416 million, respectively, of contributions to the non-U.S. DB plans and nonpension
postretirement benefit plans were made in U.S. Treasury securities. Additionally, in 2022 and 2021, contributions of $557 million and
$424 million, respectively, were made to the Active Medical Trust in U.S. Treasury securities. Contributions made with U.S. Treasury
securities are considered a non-cash transaction.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
In 2023, the company is not legally required to make any contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, depending
on market conditions, or other factors, the company may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP during the year.
In 2023, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately $200
million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined benefit pension plans in India and Spain. This amount generally represents
legally mandated minimum contributions.
Financial market performance in 2023 could increase the legally mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors.
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants subsequent to the
transfer of Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan assets, as described above. These payments have been
estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2022 and include benefits attributable to
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2023 $1,757 $124 $1,893 $ 342 $ 4,115
2024 1,791 123 1,869 323 4,106
2025 1,813 121 1,879 324 4,137
2026 1,765 119 1,866 328 4,077
2027 1,712 116 1,846 321 3,996
2028-2032 7,792 538 8,876 1,548 18,754

===== PAGE 122 =====
120 Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The 2023 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These
payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2022.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2023 $ 326 $ 17 $ 23 $ 367
2024 253 18 23 294
2025 238 19 23 280
2026 229 20 22 272
2027 220 21 22 263
2028-2032 1,043 122 106 1,271
The 2023 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of
plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on
page 111.
($ in millions)
2022 2021
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $17,220 $ 9,694 $25,204 $13,908
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 16,979 9,694 24,853 13,908
Plans with plan assets in excess of PBO 35,534 43,770 68,075 77,924
The following table presents information for the nonpension postretirement benefit plan with APBO in excess of plan assets. For a more
detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans, see the table on page 111.
($ in millions)
2022 2021
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with APBO in excess of plan assets $2,893 $32 $ 4,042 $40
Plans with plan assets in excess of APBO 7 7 — —
NOTE W. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 31, 2023, the company announced that the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.65 per common share.
The dividend is payable March 10, 2023 to shareholders of record on February 10, 2023.
On January 27, 2023, the company issued $0.7 billion of Japanese yen floating-rate syndicated bank loans with a maturity of 5 years.
On February 6, 2023, the company issued $4.6 billion of Euro fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 4 to 20 years
and coupons ranging from 3.375 to 4 percent; $0.9 billion of Pound sterling fixed-rate notes with a maturity of 15 years and a coupon
of 4.875 percent; and $3.25 billion of U.S. dollar fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 3 to 30 years and coupons
ranging from 4.5 to 5.1 percent.

===== PAGE 123 =====
Performance Graphs 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF ONE-, THREE- AND FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM, S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graphs compare the one-, three- and five-year cumulative total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable
cumulative returns of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock
Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index used for
comparison may be a published industry or line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index. IBM is also
included in this index.
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested on
the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons assume that all dividends are reinvested. On November 3, 2021, we
completed the separation of Kyndryl. IBM stockholders received one share of common stock in Kyndryl for every five shares of IBM
common stock held at the close of business on October 25, 2021, the record date for the distribution. The effect of the Kyndryl
transaction is reflected in the cumulative total return as reinvested dividends.
One-Year Three-Year
120 250
100
200
80
150
60
100
40
50
20
0 0
12/21 3/22 6/22 9/22 12/22 12/19 12/20 12/21 12/22
Five-Year
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
12/17 12/18 12/19 12/20 12/21 12/22
One-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 12/2021 3/2022 6/2022 9/2022 12/2022
International Business Machines $ 100.00 $98.47 $108.24 $ 92.25 $ 110.70
• • • • S & P 500 100.00 95.40 80.04 76.13 81.89
- - - - S & P Information Technology 100.00 91.64 73.09 68.56 71.81
Three-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2019 2020 2021 2022
International Business Machines $ 100.00 $ 99.04 $ 115.88 $ 128.29
• • • • S & P 500 100.00 118.40 152.39 124.79
- - - - S & P Information Technology 100.00 143.89 193.58 139.00
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022
International Business Machines $ 100.00 $ 77.62 $ 96.13 $ 95.21 $ 111.40 $ 123.32
• • • • S & P 500 100.00 95.62 125.72 148.85 191.58 156.89
- - - - S & P Information Technology 100.00 99.71 149.86 215.63 290.08 208.30

===== PAGE 124 =====
122 Stockholder Information
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078, (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call
(781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products, services and
other activities can also be found at that website.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on
Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant amount of information about IBM, including the company’s annual report
on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports filed or furnished
pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as soon as reasonably practicable after such material is
electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. These materials are available free of charge on or through IBM’s website.
The SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information regarding
issuers that file electronically with the SEC.
Computershare Investment Plan (CIP)
(formerly IBM Investor Services Program)
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM
investors, including the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for safekeeping. The
brochure is available at www.computershare.com/ibmcip or by calling (888) IBM-6700. Investors residing outside the United
States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and the NYSE Chicago under the symbol “IBM”.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results and voting results from the Annual Meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending an
e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday, April 25, 2023, at 10 a.m. (ET).
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078, (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business.
The 10-K report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2022 Annual Report will be available for sight-impaired stockholders in June 2023.
The IBM ESG Report reflects IBM’s belief that corporate responsibility drives long-term value not just in our business, but also for IBM
stakeholders. Our 2021 ESG Report, IBM Impact, and the related addendum are available online at https://www.ibm.com/impact.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive account information and answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements
online through this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United
States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.

===== PAGE 125 =====
123
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Thomas Buberl Arvind Krishna Peter R. Voser
Chief Executive Officer Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Retired Chief Executive Officer
AXA S.A. IBM Royal Dutch Shell plc
Chairman
David N. Farr Andrew N. Liveris ABB Ltd.
Retired Chairman and Retired Chairman and Chief
Chief Executive Officer Executive Officer Frederick H. Waddell
Emerson Electric Co. The Dow Chemical Company Retired Chairman and
Chief Executive Officer
Alex Gorsky Frederick William McNabb III Northern Trust Corporation
Former Chairman and Retired Chairman and Chief
Chief Executive Officer Executive Officer Alfred W. Zollar
Johnson & Johnson The Vanguard Group, Inc. Executive Advisor
Siris Capital Group, LLC
Michelle J. Howard Martha E. Pollack
Retired Admiral President
United States Navy Cornell University
Joseph R. Swedish
Retired Chairman, President
and Chief Executive Officer
Anthem, Inc.
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Jonathan H. Adashek Darío Gil Dinesh Nirmal
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Director Senior Vice President
Marketing and Communications IBM Research Product Engineering
Simon J. Beaumont John Granger Paul Papas
Vice President, Treasurer Senior Vice President Senior Vice President
and General Manager, IBM Consulting IBM Consulting, Americas
IBM Financing
James J. Kavanaugh Thomas W. Rosamilia*
Howard Boville Senior Vice President and Senior Vice President and Senior Advisor
Senior Vice President Chief Financial Officer
and Head of IBM Cloud Platform and Frank Sedlarcik
Technology Lifecycle Services Sebastian Krause Vice President
Senior Vice President and Assistant General Counsel and Secretary
Michelle H. Browdy Chief Revenue Officer
Senior Vice President Alex Stern
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, Arvind Krishna Senior Vice President
and General Counsel Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Strategy, Corporate Development
and Investor Relations
Kelly C. Chambliss Nickle J. LaMoreaux
Senior Vice President and Senior Vice President and Chief Human Robert D. Thomas
Chief Operating Officer Resources Officer Senior Vice President
IBM Consulting Software and Chief Commercial Officer
Ric Lewis
Gary D. Cohn Senior Vice President Joanne Wright
Vice Chairman IBM Infrastructure Senior Vice President
Transformation and Operations
Nicolás Fehring Robert W. Lord
Vice President and Controller Senior Vice President Kareem Yusuf
The Weather Company and Alliances Senior Vice President
Product Management and Growth
*Retiring by June 30, 2023.

===== PAGE 126 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road
Armonk, New York 10504
914-499-1900
Db2, Global Business Services, Expertus, IBM, IBM
Cloud, IBM Cloud for Financial Services, IBM Cloud for
Telecommunications, IBM Cloud Pak, IBM Garage, IBM Q
Network, IBM Z, Instana, Nordcloud, Power, 7Summits, Taos,
Turbonomic, Waeg, Watson, WebSphere, z15, z/OS and Z
Systems are trademarks of International Business Machines
Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Kyndryl is a
trademark of Kyndryl, Inc. Azure and Microsoft Edge are
(cid:26)(cid:24)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:25)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:45)(cid:15)(cid:7)(cid:24)(cid:21)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:26)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:52)(cid:14)(cid:9)(cid:904)(cid:24)(cid:9)(cid:11)(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:26)(cid:9)(cid:24)(cid:9)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:24)(cid:4)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:27)(cid:30)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:25)(cid:3)
used pursuant to a sublicense from the Linux Foundation, the
exclusive licensee of Linus Torvalds, owner of the mark on a
worldwide basis. Red Hat, Red Hat Enterprise Linux, Ansible,
OpenShift and StackRox are trademarks of Red Hat, Inc. or its
subsidiaries in the United States and other countries. UNIX is a
registered trademark of The Open Group in the United States
and other countries. Other company, product and service
names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on papers harvested to
sustainable standards.
Printed in U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-21

===== PAGE 127 =====


===== PAGE 128 =====
