

===== PAGE 1 =====
Let’s Create
2024 Annual Report

===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
In 2024, IBM made significant
progress in becoming a higher growth,
higher margin business. We made this
progress by combining technology
innovation and consulting expertise
to drive growth, improve productivity,
and enhance operational efficiency --
for our clients, and our own company.
Arvind Krishna
Our strategy continues to build upon the two technological
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
foundations of AI and hybrid cloud, which clients need to
unlock the full value of their data. We have made a series of
investments to accelerate the delivery of that value to our
clients, from transforming the way we work to reorienting our
portfolio around powerful, AI-based solutions.
As this report demonstrates, these investments are paying
off, delivering meaningful returns for our shareholders,
clients, and partners. Today, IBM is a software-led, fully
integrated platform company, built to grow sustainably. This
is the ROI of IBM.
2024 Performance
For the year, IBM generated $62.8 billion in revenue, up 3%
at constant currency, and $12.7 billion in free cash flow — an
increase of $1.5 billion year-over-year. Our generative AI
book of business now stands at more than $5 billion since
inception. This revenue growth and cash generation enabled
us to make significant investments in the business and deliver
value to our shareholders. In 2024, we allocated more than $7
billion to research and development, closed 11 acquisitions
to enhance our capabilities, and returned more than $6 billion
IBM 2024 Annual Report 1

===== PAGE 4 =====
Software Consulting Infrastructure
to shareholders through dividends. IBM expanded operating IBM has established an early leadership position in this
gross profit margin by 130 basis points in 2024, driven by a regard, building a portfolio of enterprise AI offerings focused
focus on high-value offerings and productivity initiatives. on generating ROI through productivity improvements and
automation. IBM watsonx provides a robust portfolio of
Software revenue grew 9% at constant currency, reflecting AI products for developing AI apps, managing data, and
strong demand for our advanced capabilities in hybrid cloud, governing the entire lifecycle of AI models. AI assistants
data and AI, automation, transaction processing, and security. manage key tasks, including customer service and writing
Red Hat performed well as clients embraced its open hybrid code. We are developing pre-built AI agents that deliver
cloud platform. multitask reasoning for specific business domains. And our
Granite family of fit-for-purpose AI models, when tuned with
Consulting revenue increased 1% at constant currency, proprietary data, can deliver enterprise-grade generative AI
demonstrating our clients’ continued need for expertise in AI with up to 90% improved cost efficiency. Granite allows clients
deployment, digital transformation, and cloud modernization, to bring their own data into the models, and can be trained on
despite a dynamic market environment. that data in weeks, not months.
Infrastructure revenue declined 3% at constant currency, in Deploying AI at scale across an enterprise requires seamless
line with product cycle expectations. IBM z16 is now the most access to the data that feeds it. In this way, hybrid cloud
successful mainframe program in our history, highlighting its is an essential ingredient for maximizing the return of AI
enduring value to clients. investments. That is why 75% of AI deployments are expected
to use containers by 2027, and demand for our hybrid cloud
Technology innovation and consulting expertise solutions remains strong.
IBM’s mission to help businesses leverage technology
to scale and grow profitably is more critical than ever. Already, more than 90% of Fortune 500 companies are using
Technology is now the key to sustainable growth and business IBM’s hybrid cloud products and solutions. And last year,
transformation. we launched two new offerings to give clients a consistent,
open-source foundation for AI: Red Hat Enterprise Linux AI
At the core of these transformations is artificial intelligence. and OpenShift AI. Together, our AI and hybrid cloud platforms
Our clients have moved beyond experimentation and are now bring together the data, models, governance and monitoring
looking to scale AI in their businesses and generate return capabilities needed to automate workflows and drive
from their investments. To achieve that return, they need productivity. And they create a flywheel of growth for IBM,
access to effective, affordable, and efficient enterprise AI. with each offering pulling through demand for the others.
2

===== PAGE 5 =====
A driving force behind this flywheel of growth is IBM opportunities presented by hybrid cloud and AI. We recognize
Consulting, which fuels approximately 80% of our AI bookings. that no single company can provide all the technology and
IBM is the only technology company with a consulting skill needed to drive digital transformation. So, we have
business at scale, which is a unique differentiator, especially strengthened our strategic partnerships with key industry
when it comes to helping clients deploy AI. Our 160,000 leaders like AWS, Microsoft, Salesforce, SAP, Palo Alto
consultants apply their data, AI and hybrid cloud expertise Networks, and Oracle. These partnerships serve our clients
to guide business transformation for our clients. In 2024, we better and create a multiplier effect for IBM.
augmented that expertise with a new platform called IBM
Consulting Advantage. By equipping our consultants with role Additionally, IBM has adopted a “client zero” philosophy,
and domain-specific AI assistants, agents, and applications, meaning we benefit from the same technology solutions
IBM Consulting Advantage enables deeper insights, faster we offer to our clients. In particular, we have aggressively
time-to-value, and improved efficiency compared to adopted AI-powered automation to drive productivity. For
traditional consultancy approaches. example, 94% of IBM’s basic HR queries are now answered
by an AI assistant. Our contract drafting process is now 80%
Supporting this work is a powerful combination of processing faster. Overall, we have delivered approximately $3.5 billion in
and storage infrastructure built to handle data-intensive productivity savings since the beginning of 2023. These efforts
workloads with security and reliability. In 2024, we announced are not just about efficiency. They are the engine of innovation
architecture details for the Telum II processor and the Spyre and growth that allows us to invest in our business and serve
AI Accelerator, designed for next-generation IBM Z mainframe our clients better.
systems that power generative AI at scale. And our storage
business continued to grow as a premier data management A new era of innovation
platform for hybrid cloud and enterprise AI, while also helping The mission of IBM Research has always been to invent
to prevent cyber-attacks. what’s next in computing – creating solutions that meet the
needs of our clients, thereby defining the future of information
In addition to these offerings, we continue to remix our technology. Today, Research is driving powerful innovations
portfolio through strategic acquisitions – such as Neural across hardware, software, hybrid cloud, AI, and quantum
Magic, StreamSets and webMethods – to bolster our software- computing, all of which creates value for our clients and
based AI and hybrid cloud capabilities. growth opportunities for our company.
Our go-to-market approach For example, to better serve clients who told us that the
Over the last five years, we have improved the way IBM goes to large, unwieldy generative AI models on the market were
market, embracing a broad ecosystem of partners, developing too unreliable and expensive, IBM Research developed the
experiential and technical sales methods, and adopting our own open and trusted Granite family of models, released under
technology first, before we deploy it with clients. the permissive Apache 2.0 license. The models deliver
strong performance across many academic and enterprise
We are also pioneering the model of a software-led, integrated benchmarks at a fraction of the cost.
enterprise that is driving value for our clients and growth for
IBM. At the end of 2024, software represented approximately Quantum computing is another example of IBM Research’s
45% of IBM’s total revenue. These solutions, in turn, leadership. We have deployed more than 70 quantum
generated demand for our full suite of integrated offerings: systems, with more than 250 organizations joining our
approximately 80% of IBM’s revenue is generated by clients IBM Quantum Network. We have also scaled the industry’s
that buy across all three of our business segments (Software, best-performing quantum software with Qiskit. In 2024, we
Consulting, and Infrastructure). introduced the IBM Quantum Heron processor, with reduced
error rates, 16 times better performance, and a 25-fold
Increasingly, clients come to IBM through a thriving partner increase in speed over previous systems. We expanded
ecosystem, which has been essential in helping our clients our IBM Quantum Data Center in Poughkeepsie, New York
capitalize on the massive growth and transformation and opened the first IBM Quantum Data Center in Europe
IBM 2024 Annual Report 3

===== PAGE 6 =====
(Ehningen, Germany). We also announced a partnership with For the IBMers around the world who invest their time and
the State of Illinois to build the National Quantum Algorithm talent in serving our clients and partners, the return is evident
Center in Chicago and deploy a next-generation IBM Quantum in our culture. The vast majority of our workforce recommend
System Two, supporting the future of quantum-centric IBM as a great place to work and say they are proud to be
supercomputing. IBMers. That culture is fueled, in part, by IBM’s commitment
to develop the skills our workforce requires to lead the next
Going forward, IBM Research will continue to build and eras of technology.
optimize computing architectures that allow enterprises to
move and process data seamlessly between GPUs, CPUs, and As we look ahead, we will continue to drive returns and deliver
QPUs, solving previously unsolvable problems for businesses on our commitment to be the catalyst that makes the world
and the world. work better. We extend this simple invitation for you to join us
on this journey: Let’s Create.
The ROI of IBM
At IBM, we expect all investments to yield a return. That
is evident in the increasing value we are delivering for our
shareholders, clients, and employees.
For shareholders, we have delivered 29 consecutive years of Arvind Krishna
dividend increases. And from 2022 through the end of 2024, Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
we created greater than $100 billion in shareholder value and
outperformed the S&P 500 by 58 points.
The returns we generate for clients are based on the value
we deliver to them, and the trust they place in IBM. For
example, NatWest Bank used a virtual agent built with
watsonx to improve satisfaction in key areas of customer
service by 150%. With the help of IBM Consulting, Cathay
Pacific migrated more than 90 critical applications to the
cloud with zero downtime, achieving a 70% faster time-to-
market, all while improving scalability and security. And
Water Corporation modernized its computing infrastructure
with a hybrid cloud model built around Red Hat, reducing
operation costs by 40% and saving 1,500 hours of manual
labor per year.
In an effort to provide additional and useful information regarding the company’s financial results and other financial information, as determined by generally
accepted accounting principles (GAAP), this letter contains non-GAAP financial measures, including revenue growth rates adjusted for constant currency, free
cash flow and operating gross profit margin. The rationale for management’s use of this non-GAAP information is included on page 6, 7 and 35 of the company’s
2024 Annual Report, which is Exhibit 13 to the Form 10-K submitted with the SEC on February 25, 2025. For reconciliation of these non-GAAP financial measures
to GAAP and other information, please refer to pages 16, 28 and 35 of the company’s 2024 Annual Report. For generative AI, book of business includes Software
transactional revenue, SaaS Annual Contract Value and Consulting signings. For more information regarding generative AI book of business, refer to Exhibit 99.2 of
the Form 8-K submitted with the SEC on January 29, 2025.
4

===== PAGE 7 =====
Report of Financials 5
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Overview 6 Basis & Policies
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements 7 A Significant Accounting Policies 52
Management Discussion Snapshot 8 B Accounting Changes 66
Description of Business 11 Performance & Operations
Year in Review 16 C Revenue Recognition 67
Prior Year in Review 29 D Segments 69
Other Information 33 E Acquisitions & Divestitures 74
Looking Forward 33 F Other (Income) and Expense 78
Liquidity and Capital Resources 34 G Taxes 79
Critical Accounting Estimates 37 H Earnings Per Share 82
Currency Rate Fluctuations 39 Balance Sheet & Liquidity
Market Risk 40 I Financial Assets & Liabilities 83
Financing 41 J Inventory 84
K Financing Receivables 84
Report of Management 43 L Property, Plant & Equipment 87
Report of Independent Registered M Leases 87
Public Accounting Firm 44 N Intangible Assets Including Goodwill 90
O Borrowings 91
CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS P Other Liabilities 94
Income Statement 46 Q Commitments & Contingencies 95
Comprehensive Income 47 R Equity Activity 98
Balance Sheet 48 Risk Management, Compensation/Benefits & Other
Cash Flows 49 S Derivative Financial Instruments 100
Equity 50 T Stock-Based Compensation 105
U Retirement-Related Benefits 108
V Subsequent Events 121
Performance Graphs 122
Stockholder Information 123
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership 124

===== PAGE 8 =====
6 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OVERVIEW
The financial section of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or “the company”) 2024 Annual Report includes the
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements. This Overview
is designed to provide the reader with some perspective regarding the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
• The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers with an overview of the business and a narrative on our financial
results and certain factors that may affect our future prospects from the perspective of management. The “Management
Discussion Snapshot” presents an overview of the key performance drivers in 2024.
• Beginning with the “Year in Review,” the Management Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable segment
of the business, a discussion of our financial position and a discussion of cash flows as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows. “Prior Year in Review,” provides a summary of our reportable segment results and year-to-year comparisons
between 2023 and 2022. These segment results have been recast to conform to our organizational structure and management
system changes described below. Management Discussion also includes: “Looking Forward” and “Liquidity and Capital
Resources,” the latter of which includes a description of management’s definition and use of free cash flow.
• The Consolidated Financial Statements provide an overview of income and cash flow performance and financial position.
• The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among other items, the Notes contain our accounting policies, revenue
information, acquisitions and divestitures, certain commitments and contingencies and retirement-related plans information.
• In the first quarter of 2024, we made changes to our organizational structure and management system to better align our
portfolio to the market, increase transparency and improve segment comparability to peers. These changes did not impact our
Consolidated Financial Statements, but did impact our reportable segments. The segments are reported on a comparable basis
for all periods. In addition, due to the removal of certain components of segment profitability we also updated the title of our
segment performance metric from pre-tax income from continuing operations to segment profit. Refer to note D, “Segments” for
additional information on our reportable segments.
• Over the past several years, we have taken actions to reduce the risk profile of our worldwide retirement-related plans, while at
the same time increasing the funded status of the plans. In 2022 and 2024, non-participating single group annuity contracts
were purchased from insurers which irrevocably transferred to the insurers certain defined benefit (“DB”) pension obligations
and related plan assets. There were no changes to the amount of benefits payable to the participants and beneficiaries of the
plans transferred. These pension transfers reduced our pension obligations and assets by approximately the same amount and
were purchased using assets from their respective retirement plans with no additional funding contributions required from IBM.
Each transaction resulted in the recognition of a one-time, non-operating, non-cash, pre-tax pension settlement charge
(“pension settlement charge”) in the respective period of the pension transfer. In September 2022, the IBM Personal Pension
Plan (“Qualified PPP”) irrevocably transferred to insurers approximately $16 billion of the Qualified PPP’s DB pension obligations
and related plan assets, resulting in a pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of
2022. In September 2024, the Qualified PPP irrevocably transferred to an insurer approximately $6 billion of the Qualified PPP’s
DB pension obligations and related plan assets, resulting in a pension settlement charge of $2.7 billion ($2.0 billion net of tax) in
the third quarter of 2024. In October 2024, IBM Canada LTD (“IBMC”) irrevocably transferred to insurers approximately $1.2
billion of the IBMC IBM Retirement Plan DB pension obligations and related plan assets, resulting in a pension settlement charge
of $0.4 billion in the fourth quarter of 2024. These pension settlement charges were primarily related to the accelerated
recognition of accumulated actuarial losses of the plans and, given they were non-operating and non-cash, they did not impact
our operating (non-GAAP) earnings or cash flow results. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.
• The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant currency” in the Management Discussion do not include operational
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency rates. When we refer to growth rates at constant currency or adjust
such growth rates for currency, it is done so that certain financial results can be viewed without the impact of fluctuations in
foreign currency exchange rates, thereby facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance. Financial results
adjusted for currency are calculated by translating current period activity in local currency using the comparable prior-year
period’s currency conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the functional currency is the local currency.
Generally, when the dollar either strengthens or weakens against other currencies, the growth at constant currency rates or
adjusting for currency will be higher or lower than growth reported at actual exchange rates. Refer to “Currency Rate
Fluctuations” for additional information.
• Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of
rounded numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.
Certain prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in current year presentation. This is annotated where
applicable.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Management Discussion 7
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results of the business, supplementally, management separates
business results into operating and non-operating categories. Operating earnings from continuing operations is a non-GAAP
measure that excludes the effects of certain acquisition-related charges and intangible asset amortization, expense resulting from
basis differences on equity method investments, retirement-related costs, certain impacts from the Kyndryl separation and their
related tax impacts. Due to the unique, non-recurring nature of the enactment of the U.S. Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (U.S. tax reform),
management characterizes the one-time provisional charge recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 and adjustments to that charge
as non-operating. Adjustments primarily include true-ups, accounting elections and any changes to regulations, laws or audit
adjustments that affect the recorded one-time charge. Management characterized direct and incremental charges incurred related
to the Kyndryl separation as non-operating given their unique and non-recurring nature. In 2022, these charges primarily related to
any net gains or losses on the Kyndryl common stock and the related cash-settled swap with a third-party financial institution,
which were recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. As of November 2, 2022, the company
no longer held an ownership interest in Kyndryl. For acquisitions, operating (non-GAAP) earnings exclude the amortization of
purchased intangible assets and acquisition-related charges such as in-process research and development, transaction costs,
applicable retention, restructuring and related expenses, tax charges related to acquisition integration and pre-closing charges,
such as financing costs. These charges are excluded as they may be inconsistent in amount and timing from period to period and are
significantly impacted by the size, type and frequency of our acquisitions. Management has also characterized as non-operating
expense, given its unique and temporary nature, the mark-to-market impact on the foreign exchange derivative contracts entered
into prior to the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods from Software AG, beginning in December 2023, to economically hedge
the foreign currency exposure related to the purchase price of this acquisition. These derivative contracts expired by June 28, 2024.
This impact was recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement and reflects the changes in fair
value of these derivative contracts. All other spending for acquired businesses is included in both earnings from continuing
operations and in operating (non-GAAP) earnings. For retirement-related costs, management characterizes certain items as
operating and others as non-operating, consistent with GAAP. We include defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement
benefit plan service costs, multi-employer plan costs and the cost of defined contribution plans in operating earnings. Non-
operating retirement-related costs include defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit plan amortization of prior
service costs, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan curtailments/
settlements including the impact of the pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion ($2.4 billion net of tax) and $5.9 billion ($4.4
billion net of tax) in 2024 and 2022, respectively. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information. Non-
operating retirement-related costs are primarily related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are tied to financial
market performance, and we consider these costs to be outside of the operational performance of the business.
Overall, management believes that supplementally providing investors with a view of operating earnings as described above
provides increased transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the business and the performance of our pension
plans; improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts on operational performance; enables better comparison to
peer companies; and allows us to provide a long-term strategic view of the business going forward. In addition, these non-GAAP
measures provide a perspective consistent with areas of interest we routinely receive from investors and analysts.
FORWARD-LOOKING AND CAUTIONARY STATEMENTS
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking statement in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it
is made; IBM assumes no obligation to update or revise any such statements except as required by law. Forward-looking
statements are based on IBM’s current assumptions regarding future business and financial performance; these statements, by
their nature, address matters that are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking statements involve a number of risks,
uncertainties and other factors that could cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed more fully elsewhere in this
Annual Report and in the company’s filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including IBM’s 2024 Form 10-K
filed on February 25, 2025.

===== PAGE 10 =====
8 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
MANAGEMENT DISCUSSION SNAPSHOT
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/Margin
For year ended December 31: 2024 (2) 2023 Change
Revenue (1) $ 62,753 $ 61,860 1.4 %
Gross profit margin 56.7 % 55.4 % 1.2 pts.
Total expense and other (income) $ 29,754 $ 25,610 16.2 %
Income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 5,797 $ 8,690 (33.3) %
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes from continuing operations $ (218) $ 1,176 NM
Income from continuing operations $ 6,015 $ 7,514 (19.9) %
Income from continuing operations margin 9.6 % 12.1 % (2.6) pts.
Income/(Loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax $ 8 $ (12) NM
Net income $ 6,023 $ 7,502 (19.7) %
Earnings per share from continuing operations–assuming dilution $ 6.42 $ 8.15 (21.2) %
Consolidated earnings per share–assuming dilution $ 6.43 $ 8.14 (21.0) %
Weighted-average shares outstanding–assuming dilution $ 937.2 $ 922.1 1.6 %
Assets (3) $ 137,175 $ 135,241 1.4 %
Liabilities (3) $ 109,783 $ 112,628 (2.5) %
Equity (3) $ 27,393 $ 22,613 21.1 %
(1)Year-to-year revenue growth of 3 percent adjusted for currency.
(2)2024 includes the impact of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion ($2.4 billion net of tax) resulting in an impact of ($2.57) to diluted earnings per
share from continuing operations and an impact of ($2.56) to consolidated diluted earnings per share. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,”
for additional information.
(3)At December 31.
NM–Not meaningful
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) earnings for 2024 and 2023. Refer to page 28 for additional
information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Yr.-to-Yr.
For year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Percent Change
Net income as reported (1) $ 6,023 $ 7,502 (19.7) %
Income/(Loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax 8 (12) NM
Income from continuing operations (1) $ 6,015 $ 7,514 (19.9) %
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges 1,456 1,292 12.7 %
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) (1) 2,668 (30) NM
U.S. tax reform impacts (455) 95 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings $ 9,684 $ 8,870 9.2 %
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share $ 10.33 $ 9.62 7.4 %
(1)2024 includes the impact of pension settlement charges of $2.4 billion net of tax. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.
NM–Not meaningful

===== PAGE 11 =====
Management Discussion 9
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Macroeconomic Environment
Our business portfolio underpinned by advanced technology and deep consulting expertise positions us uniquely to deliver end-to-
end business transformations. Our diversification across geographies, industries, clients and business mix and our recurring revenue
base provides some stability in revenue, profit and cash generation. Clients and partners continue to leverage technology to allow
businesses to scale, drive efficiencies and fuel sustainable and profitable growth. The economic headwinds driven by factors such
as geopolitical tensions, interest rate volatility, supply chain vulnerabilities, demographic shifts and evolving cyber threats are
leading clients to manage their discretionary spending, which has impacted certain areas of our Consulting business during 2024.
For the year ended December 31, 2024, movements in global currencies continued to impact our reported year-to-year revenue and
profit. We execute hedging programs which defer, but do not eliminate, the impact of currency. The (gains)/losses from these
hedging programs are reflected primarily in other (income) and expense. Refer to “Currency Rate Fluctuations,” for additional
information.
Financial Performance Summary
In 2024, we reported $62.8 billion in revenue, income from continuing operations of $6.0 billion, which includes the impact of the
pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion ($2.4 billion net of tax), and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of $9.7 billion, which
excludes the impact of the pension settlement charges. Refer to “Organization of Information,” for additional information. Diluted
earnings per share from continuing operations was $6.42 as reported, including an impact of $2.57 from the pension settlement
charges, and diluted earnings per share was $10.33 on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. We generated $13.4 billion in cash from
operations and $12.7 billion in free cash flow, and returned $6.1 billion to shareholders in dividends. We are pleased with the
progress we made in 2024, delivering revenue growth in our re-positioned business and strong cash flow generation. Our 2024
performance demonstrates the success of our focused strategy, enhanced portfolio and sustainable revenue growth. We increased
our investment in innovation and talent and completed eleven acquisitions in 2024, strengthening our hybrid cloud and AI
capabilities, all while continuing to return value to shareholders through our dividend.
Total revenue grew 1.4 percent year to year as reported and 3 percent adjusted for currency compared to the prior year, led by our
Software performance. Software revenue increased 8.3 percent as reported and 9.0 percent adjusted for currency, with strength
across our portfolio. Hybrid Platform & Solutions increased 8.1 percent as reported and 8.7 percent adjusted for currency, reflecting
growth across all lines of business with double-digit revenue growth in Red Hat and Automation. Transaction Processing increased
8.7 percent as reported and 9.6 percent adjusted for currency, with growth in both recurring and transactional revenue. Consulting
revenue decreased 0.9 percent as reported but grew 0.6 percent adjusted for currency, and continued to be impacted by a dynamic
market environment as clients reprioritized spending. Infrastructure decreased 3.9 percent year to year as reported and 2.7 percent
adjusted for currency, reflecting product cycle dynamics.
From a geographic perspective, Americas revenue decreased 1.3 percent year to year as reported (0.7 percent adjusted for
currency). Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) increased 5.1 percent as reported (4.7 percent adjusted for currency). Asia Pacific
grew 3.0 percent as reported (7.9 percent adjusted for currency).
Gross margin of 56.7 percent increased 1.2 points year to year, with continued margin expansion driven by portfolio mix and
ongoing productivity initiatives. Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin of 57.8 percent increased 1.3 points versus the prior year, due
to the same dynamics.
Total expense and other (income) increased 16.2 percent in 2024 versus the prior year primarily driven by the pension settlement
charges of $3.1 billion in 2024, higher spending reflecting our continued investment in portfolio innovation to drive our strategy and
higher workforce rebalancing charges. This was partially offset by a gain from the sale of certain QRadar Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS) assets, the gain on the divestiture of The Weather Company assets, the benefits from productivity and the actions taken to
transform our operations, and the effects of currency. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased 1.8
percent year to year, driven primarily by the factors described above, excluding the pension settlement charges.
Pre-tax income from continuing operations was $5.8 billion in 2024 compared with $8.7 billion in the prior year and pre-tax margin
was 9.2 percent, a decrease of 4.8 points versus 2023. The year-to-year performance was primarily driven by the pension
settlement charges in 2024 partially offset by our gross margin expansion and the benefits from productivity and the actions taken
to transform our operations which enabled investments to drive innovation. The continuing operations effective tax rate for 2024
was (3.8) percent compared to 13.5 percent in 2023. The current-year effective tax rate was primarily driven by the tax impact of
the pension settlement charges and the resolution of certain tax audit matters. Net income from continuing operations was $6.0
billion in 2024 compared with $7.5 billion in the prior year and net income from continuing operations margin was 9.6 percent, a
decrease of 2.6 points year to year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income from continuing operations of $11.2 billion increased 8.7
percent year to year and the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin from continuing operations increased 1.2 points to 17.9 percent.
Our revenue growth, portfolio mix and productivity initiatives resulted in strong operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income growth in
2024 compared to the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate for 2024 was 13.6 percent compared to 14.0 percent

===== PAGE 12 =====
10 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in 2023. Operating (non-GAAP) income from continuing operations of $9.7 billion increased 9.2 percent and the operating (non-
GAAP) income margin from continuing operations of 15.4 percent was up 1.1 points year to year.
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations, which included an impact of $2.57 from the pension settlement charges, was
$6.42 in 2024 compared with $8.15 in 2023. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted earnings per share of $10.33 increased 7.4 percent
versus 2023.
At December 31, 2024, the balance sheet remained strong with financial flexibility to support and invest in the business. Cash and
cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities at year end were $14.8 billion, an increase of $1.3 billion from
December 31, 2023. During 2024, we invested $3.3 billion in acquisitions and returned $6.1 billion to shareholders through
dividends. Total debt of $55.0 billion at December 31, 2024 decreased $1.6 billion driven by maturities partially offset by debt
issuances.
Total assets increased $1.9 billion ($5.2 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2023 primarily driven by an increase in
goodwill mainly related to the StreamSets and webMethods acquisition, and higher cash and cash equivalents. Total liabilities
decreased $2.8 billion (increased $0.5 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2023 primarily driven by a decrease in debt
and postretirement benefit obligations partially offset by an increase in deferred income. Total equity of $27.4 billion increased $4.8
billion from December 31, 2023, primarily driven by net income, common stock issuances and a decrease in accumulated other
comprehensive loss; partially offset by dividends.
During 2024, we generated $13.4 billion in cash from operating activities, compared to $13.9 billion in 2023. While cash provided
by financing receivables declined year to year from business variability, we had performance-related improvements within net
income driving an increase within cash from operating activities. Our free cash flow was $12.7 billion, an increase of $1.5 billion
versus the prior year. Refer to page 35 for additional information on free cash flow. Net cash used in investing activities of $4.9
billion decreased $2.1 billion compared to the prior year, mainly driven by a decrease in cash used in acquisitions, higher cash
provided by divestitures and the proceeds from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets; partially offset by higher net purchases of
marketable securities and other investments. Net cash used in financing activities of $7.1 billion increased $5.3 billion compared to
2023, mainly due to a lower level of debt issuances and a higher level of maturities in the current year.

===== PAGE 13 =====
Management Discussion 11
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
DESCRIPTION OF BUSINESS
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the SEC on February 25, 2025, for Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
IBM is addressing the hybrid cloud and AI opportunity with a platform-centric approach, focused on providing client value through a
combination of technology and business expertise. We provide integrated solutions and products that leverage: data, information
technology, deep expertise in industries and business processes, with trust and security and a broad ecosystem of partners and
alliances. Our hybrid cloud platform and AI technology and services capabilities support clients’ digital transformations and help
them engage with their customers and employees in new ways. These solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of
capabilities in software, consulting services and a deep incumbency in mission-critical systems, all bolstered by one of the world’s
leading research organizations.
IBM Strategy
Over the past 5 years, IBM has shifted to higher growth areas, with approximately 75 percent of our business mix in Software and
Consulting. Our strategic focus is hybrid cloud and artificial intelligence (AI), today’s most transformative technologies. As clients
drive business growth using their existing technology and investing in new ones, they seek flexibility across distributed technology
environments and the need to realize value from AI. We have shaped our business to focus on those client needs.
Our strategy aligns with the needs of our clients
Companies are increasingly deploying technology workloads across environments where the business runs, with over 90 percent of
executives reporting moving to hybrid cloud architectures (IBM IBV). As organizations continue to face innovation challenges,
including increased technical complexity, rapidly growing costs, and scarcity of expertise, AI is an opportunity to unlock unrealized
value. However, AI brings similar challenges, including costs of AI models, complexity of AI solutions and its governance, and
expertise gaps in integrating AI solutions into business workflows.
To solve these innovation challenges, leading organizations are embracing a hybrid ‘by design’ platform approach. It allows them to
take advantage of hybrid multi-cloud by minimizing cost and complexity which simplifies innovation and operations. IBM Consulting
has quantified the value of a hybrid by design approach and shown it delivers over three times higher return on investment.
Companies continue to invest in AI and are looking for better approaches to drive enterprise AI adoption. AI is inherently hybrid as it
needs to inference, govern, and manage across multiple environments. Conversely, AI simplifies the complexity of hybrid cloud
environments through visibility, resource optimization, and automation across platforms and processes.
IBM is strategically positioned to help clients unlock their next chapter of technology-led business growth. It will be built across
hybrid multi-cloud and leverage AI. With our portfolio of technology and consulting capabilities, we uniquely help deliver that
growth.
IBM’s differentiated portfolio value
IBM Software makes technology that delivers innovation and productivity with capabilities to enable end-to-end enterprise use
cases, client usage, consumption, and expansion. We deliver this value in four major areas: Transaction Processing, powering IBM Z
to deliver unmatched scalability, security, availability and real-time fraud detection for our client’s mission-critical workloads;
Automation, boosting application performance and optimizing costs across clients’ technology operations and reducing overall
complexity; Data, accelerating productivity by infusing AI at scale into applications and business processes to drive decisions in
real-time; Hybrid cloud platform (Red Hat), unifying on-prem, public and private clouds, and the edge to scale applications and AI
models across environments. All capabilities support hybrid cloud deployment and have security and AI embedded throughout.
IBM Consulting provides strategy & technology and intelligent operations services to address clients’ most challenging business
goals – including how to be more productive, accelerate growth, and drive innovation. We deliver domain expertise to drive client
adoption through our offerings, leveraging hybrid cloud and AI technologies from IBM Software and with strategic partners including
AWS, Microsoft, Oracle, SAP, and many others across the ecosystem. IBM Consulting brings speed and scale to innovative solutions
that combine industry, domain, and hybrid cloud knowledge together with AI-powered assets, such as IBM Consulting Advantage, a
first of its kind AI delivery platform designed to deliver solutions at scale and realize faster time to value, transforming how our
consultants work.
IBM Infrastructure enables hybrid cloud environments for mission-critical transactions and AI workloads, while maintaining the
highest security and availability. The business is anchored by IBM Z which excels at delivering transaction processing capability with
an industry-first integrated on-chip AI accelerator designed for high-speed, latency-optimized inferencing to deliver unmatched
throughput, availability, and security. Our distributed infrastructure offerings, Power, Storage, and Cloud, accelerate client’s digital
transformations while our Infrastructure Support delivers lifecycle services enhanced with AI to optimize hybrid cloud
environments.

===== PAGE 14 =====
12 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In support for each business segment, our AI strategy focuses on four key differentiators to help address adoption and challenges:
Open, Cost Efficient, Hybrid and Domain Expertise, which we deliver across our portfolio. We enable cheaper inferencing built for
hybrid cloud architectures with our Red Hat AI portfolio. We provide small, open Granite models that deliver better performance at a
fraction of the price. We embed domain expertise in our models, technologies, and consulting offerings to speed client adoption and
value.
IBM Research continues to demonstrate the ability to transition research to market-ready solutions; reinventing how work gets
done and building on its legacy of transforming innovation in computing into client-grade solutions. In 2024, we continued to
innovate around hybrid cloud and AI which created new business opportunities for IBM, including Granite 3.0 models and
InstructLab. In quantum computing, we continue to progress along our Quantum Development & Innovation Roadmap, including the
release of the Heron quantum chip and launch of Qiskit 1.0 software development kit.
In addition to organic innovation, we accelerate our strategy and client value with inorganic investments. Areas of focus include
hybrid cloud, data, and AI technology along with strategic consulting capabilities. In 2024 IBM closed multiple deals, the most
material being the acquisition of assets from Software AG to bolster our automation, data and AI portfolios, and Neural Magic to fuel
optimized generative AI innovation across hybrid cloud. Additionally, we announced our intention to acquire HashiCorp, adding
advanced capabilities in hybrid multi-cloud infrastructure automation and orchestration.
Hybrid cloud and AI together have the power to unleash business productivity. IBM can bring hybrid cloud and AI to life for
clients through our portfolio across the various business segments. Each of our business segments contribute to and benefit from
the hybrid cloud and AI strategy. Clients realize greater value when complementary parts of the portfolio come together. For
example, within Consulting, we have the world’s largest Red Hat practice differentiated with hybrid by design methodologies, with
Consulting Advantage used to leverage AI across every stage of the project lifecycle. In IBM Z, watsonx code assistant for Z uses AI
to accelerate modernization journeys, delivering more value to clients.
Collaborating to create value with clients and ecosystem partners
Building our ecosystem is core to our overall strategy, focusing on helping clients transform their core operations and create new
sources of competitive advantage through the application of AI and hybrid cloud technologies. Our approach to client engagement
allows us to meet clients where they are. We bring our next-generation innovations and core platforms to a wide range of clients and
partners through our signature THINK event tour and IBM TechXchange conference. The Partner Plus program makes it easy for
partners to deepen technical expertise on IBM products, allowing clients more choice on who to partner with. Additionally, we
continue to co-invest with our strategic partners – Adobe, AWS, Microsoft, Oracle, Palo Alto Networks, Salesforce, SAP, ServiceNow
– to amplify joint impact for our clients by embedding IBM technology into core platforms that run their businesses.
We also bring product innovations to clients through use cases, our internal “client zero” productivity proof points, and technical
experiences to demonstrate the value of our technology as a source of competitive advantage. For example, we have resolved 94
percent of low-level HR inquiries with our AskHR assistant, built on watsonx, freeing up HR professionals to focus on more complex
issues. We believe that being a client zero exemplar accelerates our product roadmap and commercial success in addition to
delivering productivity to the business.
Business Segments and Capabilities
IBM operates in more than 175 countries around the world. Our platform-centric hybrid cloud and AI strategy is executed through
our operations and consists of four business segments: Software, Consulting, Infrastructure and Financing.
In the first quarter of 2025, we announced changes to the reported revenue categories within our Software and Consulting
reportable segments effective January 1, 2025. These changes will not impact our Consolidated Financial Statements or our
reportable segments. Refer to “Looking Forward,” for additional information.
Software
Software provides software solutions that address client needs for a hybrid cloud platform, data and AI, automation, and security on
their journey to hybrid cloud. It includes all software, except operating system software reported in the Infrastructure segment.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Management Discussion 13
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software comprises two business areas – Hybrid Platform & Solutions and Transaction Processing, which have the following
capabilities:
Hybrid Platform & Solutions: includes software, infused with AI, to help clients operate, manage and optimize their IT resources and
business processes within hybrid, multi-cloud environments. It includes the following:
Red Hat: provides enterprise open-source solutions, for hybrid, multi-cloud environments, which includes Red Hat Enterprise Linux
(RHEL), OpenShift, our hybrid cloud platform, as well as Ansible.
Automation: optimizes processes from business workflows to IT operations with AI-powered automation. Automation includes
software for business automation, IT automation, integration and application runtimes.
Data & AI: accelerates data-driven agendas by infusing AI throughout the enterprise, empowering intelligent decision making. The
portfolio includes capabilities that simplify data consumption through data fabric with data management, optimize lifecycle
management, and make better predictions through business analytics. Data & AI capabilities facilitate sustainable, resilient
businesses and enable intelligent management of enterprise assets and supply chains with environmental intelligence.
Security: creates a risk-aware, secure business by gaining real-time threat insights, orchestrating actions and automating responses
across all touchpoints, in line with a zero-trust security strategy. Security includes software for data security, identity and access
management, and threat management.
Transaction Processing: supports clients’ mission-critical, on-premise workloads in industries such as banking, airlines and retail.
This includes transaction processing software such as Customer Information Control System and storage software, as well as the
analytics and integration software running on IBM operating systems such as DB2 and WebSphere running on z/OS.
Consulting
Consulting provides deep domain, technical, and industry expertise and market-leading capabilities in business transformation,
technology implementation and managed services, including cloud managed and application services. Consulting designs, builds
and operates technology and business processes based on open, hybrid cloud architectures leveraging the power of generative AI,
with IBM technology and ecosystem partner technologies. Consulting uses its IBM Garage method and assets deployed through
IBM Consulting Advantage to convene experts to co-create solutions with clients to accelerate their digital transformations through
AI and automation.
Consulting comprises three business areas – Business Transformation, Technology Consulting and Application Operations, which
have the following capabilities:
Business Transformation: provides strategy, process design, system implementation and operations services to improve and
transform key experiences and business processes. These services deploy AI and automation in business processes to exploit the
value of data and include an ecosystem of partners alongside IBM technology, including strategic partnerships with Adobe, Oracle,
Salesforce and SAP, among others.
Technology Consulting: helps clients architect and implement solutions securely across cloud platforms, including Amazon,
Microsoft, Palo Alto Networks, and IBM, and deploy strategies to transform the enterprise experience and enable innovation,
including data transformation for AI with watsonx and application modernization for hybrid cloud with Red Hat OpenShift.
Application Operations: focuses on managing, optimizing, orchestrating, and securing custom application and ISV packages for
clients. Services include application management, platform engineering, and security services across hybrid cloud environments.
Infrastructure
Infrastructure provides trusted and secure solutions for hybrid cloud and is optimized for infusing AI into mission-critical
transactions.
Infrastructure comprises two business areas – Hybrid Infrastructure and Infrastructure Support, which have the following
capabilities:
Hybrid Infrastructure: provides clients with innovative infrastructure platforms to help meet the new requirements of hybrid multi-
cloud and enterprise AI workloads leveraging flexible and as-a-service consumption models. Hybrid Infrastructure includes IBM Z
and Distributed Infrastructure.

===== PAGE 16 =====
14 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Z:the premier transaction processing platform with leading security, resilience and scale, highly optimized for mission-critical,
high-volume transaction workloads and enabled for enterprise AI and hybrid cloud. It includes IBM Z and LinuxONE, with a range of
high-performance systems designed to address enterprise computing capacity, security and performance needs, z/OS, a security-
rich, high-performance enterprise operating system, as well as Linux and other operating systems.
Distributed Infrastructure: includes Power, Storage and IBM Cloud Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). Power consists of high-
performance servers, designed and engineered for data intensive and AI-enabled workloads and optimized for hybrid cloud and
Linux. The Storage portfolio consists of a broad range of storage hardware and software-defined offerings, including Z-attach and
distributed flash, tape solutions, software-defined storage controllers, data protection software and network-attach storage. IBM
Cloud IaaS is built on enterprise-grade hardware with leading security and compliance capabilities and offers flexible computing
options across architectures to meet client workload needs.
Infrastructure Support: delivers comprehensive, proactive and AI-enabled maintenance and support services to maintain and
improve the availability and value of clients’ IT infrastructure (hardware and software) both on-premises and in the cloud including
maintenance for IBM products and other technology products.
Financing
Financing facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of hardware, software and services through its financing solutions. The financing
arrangements are predominantly for products or services that are critical to the end users’ business operations and support IBM’s
hybrid cloud and AI strategy. Financing conducts a comprehensive credit evaluation of its clients prior to extending financing. As a
captive financier, Financing has the benefit of both deep knowledge of its client base and a clear insight into the products and
services financed. These factors allow the business to effectively manage two of the primary risks associated with financing, credit
and residual value, while generating strong returns on equity.
Financing comprises the following two business areas – Client Financing and Commercial Financing:
Client Financing: lease, installment payment plan and loan financing to end-user clients for terms generally up to seven years.
Assets financed are primarily new and used IBM hardware, software and services.
Commercial Financing: short-term working capital financing to business partners and distributors primarily of IBM products and
services. The company has an existing agreement with a third-party investor to sell IBM short-term commercial financing
receivables on a revolving basis. Refer to note K, “Financing Receivables,” for additional information.
Human Capital
Employees and Related Workforce
(In thousands)
For the year ended December 31: 2024
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries 270.3
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries 8.9
Complementary (1) 14.2
(1)The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited-term employment
arrangements to meet specific business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
As a globally integrated enterprise, IBM operates in more than 175 countries. Our highly skilled global workforce is reflective of the
work we do for clients in support of their digital transformations and mission-critical operations through our focus on hybrid cloud
and AI. Our employees are among the world’s leading experts in hybrid cloud, AI, quantum computing, cybersecurity and industry-
specific solutions. We believe our success depends on the caliber of our talent and the engagement and inclusion of IBMers in the
workplace.
Talent, Skills and Culture
At IBM, we’re committed to attracting, developing and retaining top talent in a dynamic and competitive environment. Our employee
value proposition offers a compelling combination of competitive compensation and exciting career opportunities in the
development and delivery of innovative technologies that transform businesses worldwide. Our value proposition and talent
strategy are designed to retain our talented professionals.
We are continuously transforming and developing our talent through a combination of learning and hiring. In 2024, we focused on
adding skills in key areas such as consulting and technical expertise, while also scaling our capacity in strategically important
markets. We’re committed to upskilling and reskilling our workforce, and our digital learning and career platforms are designed to
provide employees with the resources they need to build strategic skills and advance their careers. We believe that sharing candid

===== PAGE 17 =====
Management Discussion 15
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
feedback is essential to helping our employees develop their skills and elevate their performance, which is critical to our ability to
transform and evolve.
Employee engagement is a key indicator of employee well-being and dedication to our mission, purpose and values. We conduct an
annual engagement survey to assess the health of our growth culture and employee sentiment. In 2024, over 200,000 employees
globally participated in the survey, providing valuable insights that we are using to enhance the employee experience, transform our
culture, and improve our interactions with clients and partners. For the fourth year in a row, more than eight out of ten employees
who participated in the survey responded that they felt engaged at work, a testament to our industry-leading talent practices.
An inclusive workplace serves as a catalyst for heightened innovation, agility, and overall performance. This environment fuels
business growth, sustainable business outcomes and differentiated value to our clients. This is evident in our ability to attract and
retain some of the industry's most skilled and talented individuals. Our goal is to ensure individuals from all backgrounds feel a
sense of belonging, nurture their talents and advance in their careers. We strive to help all employees build new capabilities, explore
various career paths, and engage with mentors to progress in their professional journeys. Once again, our efforts have resulted in
nearly nine out of ten of employees who participated in the engagement survey feeling empowered to be their authentic selves at
work.
We are committed to pay equity and transparency, fostering an environment of equal pay for equal work regardless of gender, race,
or other personal characteristics. Statistical pay equity assessments are conducted across all countries with IBM employees,
reinforcing our dedication to our longstanding pay equity practice.
Health, Safety and Well-Being
IBM demonstrates an unwavering commitment to fostering a culture of health, safety, and well-being for its employees. This
commitment is reflected in our comprehensive Health & Safety Management System (HSMS), which is externally certified and aims
to create a healthy and safe work environment, minimize work-related injuries and illnesses, and empower our workforce to take an
active role in managing health and safety risks.
Recognizing employees as our most valuable asset, we have seamlessly integrated well-being into every facet of our business
operations. We believe that our employees perform best at work, at home and in the communities where they live and work when
their well-being is supported. We believe in not taking a one-size-fits-all approach and strive to provide programs that are culturally
relevant and inclusive to address the needs of a global employee population. We take a holistic approach to well-being, not only
focusing on fundamental safety items but also addressing physical, mental and financial health.
Access to well-being services and resources are offered through onsite activities and partnerships with external vendors, among
other methods of delivery. IBMers worldwide have confidential, 24/7 access to critical mental health support through employee
assistance programs and supplemental resources. Other programs include training for employees on resilience, ergonomics, and
financial well-being.
In 2024, a resilience-building tool and a digital well-being solution were made available to all IBM employees worldwide. These
resources offer a personalized approach to assist IBMers with making small changes – with big results. These resources foster
healthier habits focused on physical, mental, and emotional well-being.

===== PAGE 18 =====
16 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
YEAR IN REVIEW
Results of Continuing Operations
Segment Details
As discussed in the “Organization of Information” section, we made changes to our organizational structure and management
system in the first quarter of 2024. With these changes, we revised our reportable segments and updated the title of our segment
performance metric from pre-tax income from continuing operations to segment profit. Prior-year results have been recast to reflect
the January 2024 segment changes as described in note D, “Segments.”
The table below presents each reportable segment’s revenue and gross margin results, followed by an analysis of the 2024 versus
2023 reportable segment results. The segment details below are presented under our historical reported revenue categories. Refer
to “Looking Forward” for changes to the revenue categories reported within our Software and Consulting reportable segments
effective in the first quarter of 2025. These changes will not impact our Consolidated Financial Statements or our reportable
segments.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change Currency
Revenue
Software $ 27,085 $ 25,011 8.3 % 9.0 %
Gross margin 83.7 % 82.9 % 0.8 pts.
Consulting 20,692 20,884 (0.9) % 0.6 %
Gross margin 27.0 % 26.8 % 0.3 pts.
Infrastructure 14,020 14,593 (3.9) % (2.7) %
Gross margin 55.8 % 56.1 % (0.3) pts.
Financing 713 741 (3.7) % (2.5) %
Gross margin 47.9 % 48.1 % (0.3) pts.
Other 243 632 (61.6) % (61.7) %
Gross margin (352.8) % (87.4) % (265.3) pts.
Total revenue $ 62,753 $ 61,860 1.4 % 2.5 %
Total gross profit $ 35,551 $ 34,300 3.6 %
Total gross margin 56.7 % 55.4 % 1.2 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 724 631 14.6 %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 36,275 $ 34,931 3.8 %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 57.8 % 56.5 % 1.3 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change Currency
Software revenue $ 27,085 $ 25,011 8.3 % 9.0 %
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 18,808 $ 17,396 8.1 % 8.7 %
Red Hat 11.4 12.0
Automation 14.2 14.8
Data & AI 1.6 2.2
Security 0.8 1.5
Transaction Processing 8,277 7,615 8.7 9.6
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Management Discussion 17
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software revenue of $27,085 million increased 8.3 percent as reported (9.0 percent adjusted for currency) in 2024 compared to the
prior year, reflecting growth across all lines of business with double-digit growth in Red Hat and Automation and high single-digit
growth in Transaction Processing. This revenue performance reflects the investments we have been making in Software, both
organically and through acquisitions. Our investments in generative AI are contributing to growth, as we had strong demand for our
generative AI products such as watsonx, Concert and our AI assistants.We also launched new products in the fourth quarter of
2024 including our next generation of watsonx Code Assistant and Guardium Quantum Safe. In 2024, we also had increased
revenue contribution from acquisitions compared to the prior year, including Apptio and StreamSets and webMethods.In addition,
we had solid growth in our recurring revenue and double-digit growth in our transactional software revenue in 2024, as we
accelerated growth through innovation across our Software portfolio.
Hybrid Platform & Solutions revenue of $18,808 million increased 8.1 percent as reported (8.7 percent adjusted for currency) in
2024 compared to the prior year. Within Hybrid Platform & Solutions, Red Hat revenue increased 11.4 percent as reported (12.0
percent adjusted for currency), which reflects the continued demand for our hybrid cloud solutions as clients are prioritizing
application modernization on OpenShift containers and Ansible automation to optimize their IT spending and reduce operational
complexity. In 2024, we had double-digit revenue growth in OpenShift and Ansible, and high single-digit revenue growth in RHEL.
The growth in OpenShift revenue reflects increased volume in OpenShift Virtualization engagements, and we exited 2024 with
OpenShift annual recurring revenue of $1.4 billion.Automation revenue increased 14.2 percent as reported (14.8 percent adjusted
for currency), driven by our SaaS subscription offerings such as AIOps and Management, which includes the higher revenue
contribution from Apptio. Data & AI revenue increased 1.6 percent as reported (2.2 percent adjusted for currency), with strong
growth in Data Fabric and our AI assistant for Customer Care, driven by client demand for our watsonx platform offerings, and
strength in asset and supply chain management software which helps clients run sustainable operations. Security revenue
increased0.8 percent as reported (1.5 percent adjusted for currency), with revenue growth in data security and identity and access
management, partially offset by a revenue decline in security threat management.
Across Hybrid Platform & Solutions, our annual recurring revenue (ARR) was $15.3 billion exiting 2024, growing at a double-digit
rate compared to the prior year. ARR is a key performance metric management uses to assess the health and growth trajectory of
our Hybrid Platform & Solutions business within the Software segment. The metric was updated in the first quarter of 2024 to
reflect the organizational changes described in the “Organization of Information” section above, and to simplify the calculation. ARR
is calculated by using the current quarter’s recurring revenue and then multiplying that value by four. This value includes the
following consumption models: (1) software subscription agreements, including committed term licenses, (2) as-a-service
arrangements such as SaaS and PaaS, and (3) maintenance and support contracts. ARR should be viewed independently of revenue
as this performance metric and its inputs may not represent revenue that will be recognized in future periods.
Transaction Processing revenue of $8,277 million increased 8.7 percent as reported (9.6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2024
compared to the prior year. The performance in 2024 is the result of the combination of clients' growing capacity demands, solid
renewal rates, and increased contribution from our generative AI products, including watsonx code assistant for Z. This growth
reflects the innovation and value of our transaction processing software, which helps our clients manage their most mission-critical
workloads.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change
Software
Gross profit $ 22,658 $ 20,721 9.3 %
Gross profit margin 83.7 % 82.9 % 0.8 pts.
Segment profit $ 8,684 $ 7,499 15.8 %
Segment profit margin 32.1 % 30.0 % 2.1 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Software gross profit margin of 83.7 percent in 2024 increased 0.8 points compared to the prior year. Segment profit of $8,684
million increased 15.8 percent and pre-tax margin of 32.1 percent increased 2.1 points compared to the prior year. The year-to-year
increases in segment profit and profit margin reflect our operating leverage driven by our revenue performance and the benefits of
the productivity actions taken in 2024; partially offset by key investments across our software portfolio.

===== PAGE 20 =====
18 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consulting
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change Currency
Consulting revenue $ 20,692 $ 20,884 (0.9) % 0.6 %
Business Transformation $ 9,347 $ 9,179 1.8 % 3.2 %
Technology Consulting 3,653 3,775 (3.2) (1.5)
Application Operations 7,692 7,930 (3.0) (1.5)
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Consulting revenue of $20,692 million decreased 0.9 percent as reported, but increased 0.6 percent adjusted for currency in 2024
compared to the prior year. We had year-to-year revenue growth in Business Transformation, while revenue declined in Technology
Consulting and Application Operations in 2024. During 2024, we operated in a dynamic macroeconomic environment following our
strong performance in 2023, as clients reprioritized their IT spend toward digital transformation and AI initiatives for cost
optimization and operational efficiency. We continued to focus on rapidly evolving our offerings and enhancing investments in skills
and capabilities to align with these priorities. Our ability to address client demands contributed to Consulting signings growth in
2024 compared to the prior year. Our generative AI offerings contributed to this signings growth, as clients recognized the value we
bring in accelerating their digital transformations through our extensive industry and enterprise AI expertise. Our Red Hat consulting
practice grew at a double-digit rate in 2024, with revenue contribution across Consulting and ended the year with total revenue of
approximately $3 billion. In addition, Consulting revenue and signings generated through our strategic partnerships continued to
grow, contributing double-digit revenue growth year to year. We are actively investing to enhance our skills and capabilities to
address our clients’ top priorities, including our fourth-quarter 2024 acquisition of Accelalpha, a global Oracle services provider.
Business Transformation revenue of $9,347 million increased 1.8 percent as reported (3.2 percent adjusted for currency) compared
to the prior year, driven by revenue growth in transformation projects for finance, supply chain, and data.
Technology Consulting revenue of $3,653 million decreased 3.2 percent as reported (1.5 percent adjusted for currency), driven by a
decline in client spending on application development; partially offset by revenue growth in cloud-based application modernization
projects.
Application Operations revenue of $7,692 million decreased 3.0 percent as reported (1.5 percent adjusted for currency), as clients
reprioritized spending away from on-premise customized services.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change
Consulting
Gross profit $ 5,589 $ 5,588 0.0 %
Gross profit margin 27.0 % 26.8 % 0.3 pts.
Segment profit $ 2,054 $ 2,130 (3.6) %
Segment profit margin 9.9 % 10.2 % (0.3) pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Consulting gross profit margin increased 0.3 points to 27.0 percent compared to the prior year. Segment profit of $2,054 million
decreased 3.6 percent and segment profit margin decreased 0.3 points to 9.9 percent compared to the prior year. The segment
profit and profit margin performance reflects the investment in skills and capabilities we have made to meet the priorities of our
clients, partially offset by the benefits from the productivity actions we took in 2024.

===== PAGE 21 =====
Management Discussion 19
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consulting Signings and Book-to-Bill
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change Currency
Total Consulting signings $ 25,103 $ 24,305 3.3 % 4.7 %
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Consulting signings grew 3.3 percent as reported (4.7 percent adjusted for currency) in 2024, driven by our strong performance in
signings in the fourth quarter of 2024. This performance reflects our ability to address client demands and the contribution of our
generative AI solutions that help clients accelerate their digital transformations. Our book-to-bill ratio over the trailing twelve
months was 1.21. Book-to-bill represents the ratio of IBM Consulting signings to its revenue over the same period and is a useful
indicator of the demand for our business over time.
Signings are management’s initial estimate of the value of a client’s commitment under a services contract within IBM Consulting.
There are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation of signings. The calculation used by management
involves estimates and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commitment, including the type and duration of the agreement
and the presence of termination charges or wind-down costs.
Contract extensions and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of the incremental new value. Total signings
can vary over time due to a variety of factors including, but not limited to, the timing of signing a small number of larger contracts.
Signings associated with an acquisition will be recognized on a prospective basis.
Management believes the estimated values of signings disclosed provide an indication of our forward-looking revenue. Signings are
used to monitor the performance of the business and viewed as useful information for management and shareholders. The
conversion of signings into revenue may vary based on the types of services and solutions, contract duration, customer decisions,
and other factors, which may include, but are not limited to, the macroeconomic environment.
Infrastructure
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change Currency
Infrastructure revenue $ 14,020 $ 14,593 (3.9) % (2.7) %
Hybrid Infrastructure $ 8,913 $ 9,215 (3.3) % (2.3) %
IBM Z (10.0) (8.9)
Distributed Infrastructure 1.6 2.6
Infrastructure Support 5,107 5,377 (5.0) (3.4)
Infrastructure revenue of $14,020 million decreased 3.9 percent as reported (2.7 percent adjusted for currency) as compared to the
prior year, reflecting product cycle dynamics within Hybrid Infrastructure and Infrastructure Support.
Hybrid Infrastructure revenue of $8,913 million decreased 3.3 percent as reported (2.3 percent adjusted for currency) as compared
to the prior year. Within Hybrid Infrastructure, IBM Z revenue decreased 10.0 percent as reported (8.9 percent adjusted for
currency) on a year-to-year basis. At the end of 2024, z16 was in its eleventh quarter of availability, and the combination of
resiliency, reliability, and security of this platform continues to resonate with clients. The total revenue performance from the z16
program has outpaced prior Z cycles, and program-to-date installed MIPS have increased more than 30 percent as clients’ capacity
needs continued to grow. IBM Z remains an enduring platform for mission-critical workloads, driving hardware adoption as well as
related software, storage and services. Distributed Infrastructure revenue increased 1.6 percent as reported (2.6 percent adjusted
for currency), driven primarily by double-digit growth in Storage systems, partially offset by a decline in cloud platform revenue.
Storage revenue performance was driven by growth in high-end storage tied to the z16 platform and solutions tailored to protect,
manage and access data for generative AI. In the fourth quarter of 2024, we introduced new innovation within Storage designed to
give clients the ability to scale storage capacity to meet the growing data demands to support the next generation of AI workloads
and projects.
Infrastructure Support revenue of $5,107 million decreased 5.0 percent as reported (3.4 percent adjusted for currency), driven by
volume declines in support of non-IBM equipment and IBM product cycle dynamics.

===== PAGE 22 =====
20 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) Change
Infrastructure
Gross profit $ 7,819 $ 8,187 (4.5) %
Gross profit margin 55.8 % 56.1 % (0.3) pts.
Segment profit $ 2,450 $ 2,828 (13.4) %
Segment profit margin 17.5 % 19.4 % (1.9) pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Infrastructure gross profit margin decreased 0.3 points to 55.8 percent in 2024 compared to the prior year, reflecting product cycle
dynamics within both Hybrid Infrastructure and Infrastructure Support. Segment profit of $2,450 million decreased 13.4 percent
and segment profit margin decreased 1.9 points to 17.5 percent primarily driven by product cycle dynamics and the investments in
innovation we continued to make across IBM Z, Power and Storage systems in support of our clients’ increasing demand for
capacity, reliability and security, and the integration of generative AI across their enterprises. The impact to segment profit from
these increased investments was partially offset by a year-to-year increase in intellectual property and custom development
income in 2024.
Financing
Refer to pages 41 through 42 for a discussion of Financing’s segment results.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, we also measure revenue performance on a geographic basis.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change Currency
Total revenue $ 62,753 $ 61,860 1.4 % 2.5 %
Americas $ 31,266 $ 31,666 (1.3) % (0.7) %
Europe/Middle East/Africa 19,429 18,492 5.1 4.7
Asia Pacific 12,058 11,702 3.0 7.9
Geographic revenue performance for 2024 as compared to 2023:
Americas revenue decreased 1.3 percent as reported and 0.7 percent adjusted for currency. The U.S. decreased 0.5 percent.
Canada decreased4.5 percent as reported and 2.9 percent adjusted for currency. Latin America decreased3.5 percent as reported,
but was flat adjusted for currency. Within Latin America, Brazil revenue decreased9.4 percent as reported and 5.0 percent adjusted
for currency.
EMEA revenue increased 5.1 percent as reported and 4.7 percent adjusted for currency. Germany increased 14.5 percent as
reported and 15.1 percent adjusted for currency. The UK increased4.3 percent as reported and 1.8 percent adjusted for currency.
Italy increased3.5 percent as reported and 3.9 percent adjusted for currency. France was flat both as reported and adjusted for
currency.
Asia Pacific revenue increased3.0 percent as reported and 7.9 percent adjusted for currency. Japan revenue increased7.6 percent
as reported and 16.2 percent adjusted for currency. China decreased7.2 percent as reported and 6.1 percent adjusted for currency.
Australia decreased3.6 percent as reported and 2.6 percent adjusted for currency. India decreased1.5 percent as reported, but
was flat adjusted for currency.

===== PAGE 23 =====
Management Discussion 21
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total Expense and Other (Income)
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Total expense and other (income) (1) $ 29,754 $ 25,610 16.2 %
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,107) (996) 11.1
Acquisition-related charges (122) (33) 271.1
Non-operating retirement-related (costs)/income (1) (3,457) 39 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) $ 25,068 $ 24,620 1.8 %
Total expense-to-revenue ratio 47.4 % 41.4 % 6.0 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP) expense-to-revenue ratio 39.9 % 39.8 % 0.1 pts.
(1)2024 includes the impact of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
NM–Not meaningful
Our expense dynamics in 2024 reflect our continued investment to execute our hybrid cloud and AI strategy. We remain focused on
our productivity initiatives as we digitally transform our business processes and scale AI within IBM. This includes simplifying our
application and infrastructure environments, aligning our teams by workflow and enabling a higher value-add workforce through
automation and AI-driven efficiencies. These productivity initiatives allowed for continued investments to drive innovation in our
portfolio.
Total expense and other (income) increased 16.2 percentin 2024 versus the prior year primarily driven by the pension settlement
charges of $3.1 billion in 2024, higher spending reflecting our continued investment in portfolio innovation to drive our strategy and
higher workforce rebalancing charges; partially offset by the benefits from productivity and the actions taken to transform our
operations, higher gains from divestitures, and the effects of currency.
Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) increased 1.8 percent year to year, driven primarily by the factors
described above, excluding the pension settlement charges.
For additional information regarding total expense and other (income) for both expense presentations, refer to the following
analyses by category.
Selling, General and Administrative Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Selling, general and administrative expense
Selling, general and administrative–other $ 16,047 $ 15,706 2.2 %
Advertising and promotional expense 1,173 1,237 (5.2)
Workforce rebalancing charges 696 438 58.8
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 1,105 995 11.0
Stock-based compensation 690 616 12.0
Provision for/(benefit from) expected credit loss expense (21) 10 NM
Total selling, general and administrative expense $ 19,688 $ 19,003 3.6 %
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,105) (995) 11.0
Acquisition-related charges (55) (44) 23.8
Operating (non-GAAP) selling, general and administrative expense $ 18,529 $ 17,964 3.1 %
NM–Not meaningful

===== PAGE 24 =====
22 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense increased 3.6 percent in 2024 versus 2023, driven primarily by the
following factors:
• Higher net spending (3 points), including expenses of acquired businesses (1 point), as a result of our continued investment to
drive our hybrid cloud and AI strategy; partially offset by benefits from productivity and the actions taken to transform our
operations; and
• Higher workforce rebalancing charges (1 point) to address stranded costs and accelerate our productivity initiatives; partially
offset by
• The effects of currency (1 point).
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense increased 3.1 percent year to year primarily driven by the same factors.
Expected credit loss was a benefit of $21 million in 2024 as compared to a provision of $10 million in 2023. The year-to-year
change was primarily driven by lower specific reserve requirements in the current year. Refer to “Receivables and Allowances”
section on page 25 for additional information.
Research, Development and Engineering Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Total research, development and engineering $ 7,479 $ 6,775 10.4 %
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 10.4 percent in 2024 versus 2023, primarily driven by
investments to drive innovation in AI, hybrid cloud and quantum, as well as in Infrastructure ahead of our next IBM Z cycle in 2025.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Intellectual property income (1) (2) $ 329 $ 374 (12.1) %
Custom development income 667 485 37.5
Total $ 996 $ 860 15.9 %
(1)Includes licensing, royalty-based fees and sales.
(2)Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024 presentation.
Total Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income increased 15.9 percent in 2024 compared to 2023. The increase was
primarily driven by joint development and licensing agreements with a Japanese consortium to leverage our intellectual property
and expertise on advanced semiconductors.
The timing and amount of licensing, sales or other transfers of IP may vary significantly from period to period depending upon the
timing of licensing agreements, economic conditions, industry consolidation and the timing of new patents and know-how
development.

===== PAGE 25 =====
Management Discussion 23
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Other (income) and expense
(Gains)/losses on foreign currency transactions $ (458) $ 116 NM
(Gains)/losses on derivative instruments (1) 515 (17) NM
Interest income (747) (670) 11.4 %
Net (gains)/losses from securities and investment assets (20) (39) (49.4)
Retirement-related costs/(income) 3,457 (39) NM
Other (877) (266) 230.3
Total other (income) and expense $ 1,871 $ (914) NM
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (2) (1) 144.6
Acquisition-related charges (1) (68) 11 NM
Non-operating retirement-related costs/(income) (3,457) 39 NM
Operating (non-GAAP) other (income) and expense $ (1,656) $ (866) 91.3 %
(1)2024 and 2023 include the impact of a $68 million loss and $12 million gain, respectively, recognized on foreign exchange derivative contracts
entered into by the company prior to the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods from Software AG. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial
Instruments,” for additional information.
NM–Not meaningful
Total other (income) and expense was $1,871 million of expense in 2024 compared to income of $914 million in 2023. The year-to-
year change was primarily driven by:
• Non-operating retirement-related cost of $3,457 million in the current-year period versus $39 million of income in the prior-year
period primarily driven by the impact of the pension settlement charges of $3,113 million in 2024 and an increase in recognized
actuarial losses due to the change in amortization period of the Qualified PPP, effective January 1, 2024. Refer to note U,
“Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information; and
• Lower gains on land/building dispositions ($126 million) included in “Other”; partially offset by
• A gain of $349 million from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets in 2024, included in “Other”. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions &
Divestitures,” for additional information; and
• Higher gains on divestitures ($206 million) primarily driven by the divestiture of The Weather Company assets ($243 million),
included in “Other”. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for additional information; and
• Higher gains on sales of intangibles ($87 million) included in “Other”; and
• Higher interest income ($77 million) primarily driven by a higher average cash balance in the current year.
Operating (non-GAAP) other (income) and expense was income of $1,656 million in 2024 and increased $790 million compared to
the prior year. The year-to-year change was primarily driven by the gain recognized from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets in
the current year, higher gains on divestitures and sales of intangibles and higher interest income.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Total interest expense $ 1,712 $ 1,607 6.5 %
Interest expense of $1,712 million in 2024 increased $105 million compared to 2023. Interest expense is presented in cost of
financing in the Consolidated Income Statement only if the related external borrowings are to support the Financing external
business. Overall interest expense (excluding capitalized interest) in 2024 was $2,048 million, an increase of $108 million year to
year primarily driven by higher average interest rates.

===== PAGE 26 =====
(cid:56)(cid:58) (cid:39)(cid:2)i(cid:2)dbhbio(cid:1)y(cid:10)napnn(cid:10)(cid:16)i
Diobmi(cid:2)ofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)wpnfibnn(cid:1)(cid:40)(cid:2)aefibn(cid:1)xjmkjm(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)Np nf(cid:5)f(cid:2)mt(cid:1)xjhk(cid:2)ifbn
No(cid:16)a(cid:12)(cid:60)(cid:29)(cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)x(cid:16)(cid:14)kbin(cid:2)o(cid:10)(cid:16)i
(cid:43)mb5o(cid:2)s(cid:1)noja(cid:12)5 (cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)ajhkbin(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:85)W&(cid:57)WW(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)fiamb(cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)W(cid:61)1’hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)8(cid:1)Oefn(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)pb(cid:1)oj(cid:1)
fiamb(cid:2)nbn(cid:1)cmjh(cid:1)mbnomfaob(cid:5)(cid:1)noja(cid:12)(cid:1)pifon(cid:1).(cid:85)W(cid:54)1(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)&(cid:1)kbmcjmh(cid:2)iab(cid:1)ne(cid:2)mb(cid:1)pifon(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)&(cid:1)noja(cid:12)(cid:1)jkofjin(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
bhk(cid:13)jtbbn(cid:1)noja(cid:12)(cid:1)kpmae(cid:2)nb(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1).(cid:85)WW(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)fiamb(cid:2)nbn(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)mfqbi(cid:1) t(cid:1)noja(cid:12)5 (cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)ajhkbin(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)(cid:2)r(cid:2)m(cid:5)n(cid:1)dm(cid:2)iob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)
k(cid:2)mo(cid:1)jc(cid:1)jpm(cid:1)(cid:2)iip(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)ata(cid:13)bn(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)bsbapofqbn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)bhk(cid:13)jtbbn8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)tb(cid:2)m5oj5tb(cid:2)m(cid:1)ae(cid:2)idb(cid:1)fi(cid:1)noja(cid:12)5 (cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)ajhkbin(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)
mbc(cid:13)baob(cid:5)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)cj(cid:13)(cid:13)jrfid(cid:1)a(cid:2)obdjmfbn9(cid:1)xjno9(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)pk(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:72)(cid:1)NB3v(cid:1)bskbinb9(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:60)2(cid:54)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)pk(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:61)(cid:58)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:72)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)My3z(cid:1)
bskbinb9(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)21(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)pk(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:61)(cid:54)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji8
Mbo(cid:10)mb(cid:14)bio(cid:60)Mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)in
Oeb(cid:1)cj(cid:13)(cid:13)jrfid(cid:1)o(cid:2) (cid:13)b(cid:1)kmjqf(cid:5)bn(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)ojo(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)kmb5o(cid:2)s(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:1)mbofmbhbio5mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in8(cid:1)Ojo(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)ajnon:.fiajhb(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1)fia(cid:13)p(cid:5)b(cid:5)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)
oeb(cid:1)xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)Diajhb(cid:1)No(cid:2)obhbio(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)a(cid:2)kofji(cid:1).b8d8&(cid:1)xjno&(cid:1)NB3v&(cid:1)My3z(cid:79)(cid:1)mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)oj(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)gj (cid:1)cpiaofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)k(cid:2)mofafk(cid:2)ion8
.(cid:85)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fjin(cid:79) (cid:1)
Rm3(cid:61)o(cid:16)(cid:61)Rm3
(cid:42)bmabio(cid:1)
A(cid:16)m(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)tb(cid:2)m(cid:1)bi(cid:5)b(cid:5)(cid:1)ybabh bm(cid:1)VT4 (cid:53)S(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:1) (cid:53)S(cid:53)V (cid:30)e(cid:2)idb
Lbo(cid:10)mbhbio(cid:61)mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)in1a(cid:16)no
Nbmqfab(cid:1)ajno (cid:85)(cid:1) 0(cid:60)1(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) W1(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)281(cid:1),
(cid:40)p(cid:13)of5bhk(cid:13)jtbm(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in (cid:1) W(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) W(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1).(cid:57)8(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1)
xjno(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bcfib(cid:5)(cid:1)ajiomf pofji(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) 22W(cid:1) (cid:1).008(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1)
N(cid:16)o(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:17)bm(cid:2)o(cid:10)id(cid:1)a(cid:16)non(cid:70)7(cid:10)ia(cid:16)hb(cid:69) (cid:85)(cid:1) W&(cid:54)(cid:56)W(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) W&W11(cid:1) (cid:1).W(cid:58)8(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1),
Diobmbno(cid:1)ajno (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)&W(cid:57)0(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)&(cid:58)W0(cid:1) (cid:1).WW8(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1),
zskbaob(cid:5)(cid:1)mbopmi(cid:1)ji(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon (cid:1) .(cid:56)&1(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) .(cid:56)&2(cid:61)W(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1).08(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1)
Mbajdifub(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)aop(cid:2)mf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)jnnbn (cid:1) 2(cid:60)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) 0(cid:54)1(cid:1) (cid:1)2(cid:54)8(cid:56)(cid:1)
vhjmofu(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)kmfjm(cid:1)nbmqfab(cid:1)ajnon:.amb(cid:5)fon(cid:79) (cid:1) .(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) .2(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1).W(cid:61)82(cid:79)(cid:1)
xpmo(cid:2)f(cid:13)hbion:nboo(cid:13)bhbion(cid:1).W(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:57)&W02(cid:1) (cid:1) 0(cid:1) (cid:1) I(cid:40)(cid:1)
Joebm(cid:1)ajnon (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) W(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1).(cid:61)(cid:58)8(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1)
O(cid:16)o(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)i(cid:16)i(cid:60)(cid:16)kbm(cid:2)o(cid:10)id(cid:1)a(cid:16)non(cid:69)(cid:67)(cid:10)ia(cid:16)(cid:14)b(cid:68)(cid:1)(cid:67)V(cid:68) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:57)&(cid:58)0(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) .(cid:57)2(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) I(cid:40)(cid:1)
O(cid:16)o(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)mbo(cid:10)mb(cid:14)bio(cid:60)mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in(cid:61)a(cid:16)no(cid:1)(cid:67)V(cid:68) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:58)&(cid:58)(cid:61)1(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) W&W(cid:58)2(cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:56)128(cid:61)(cid:1),
.W(cid:79)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)fia(cid:13)p(cid:5)bn(cid:1)kbinfji(cid:1)nboo(cid:13)bhbio(cid:1)ae(cid:2)mdbn(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)8W(cid:1) f(cid:13)(cid:13)fji8(cid:1)Mbcbm(cid:1)oj(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)P&(cid:1)—Mbofmbhbio5Mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)wbibcfon&(cid:77)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)fofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)ficjmh(cid:2)ofji8(cid:1)
I(cid:40)6Ijo(cid:1)hb(cid:2)ifidcp(cid:13)
Ojo(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)kmb5o(cid:2)s(cid:1)mbofmbhbio5mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)fiamb(cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1) t(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)&(cid:57)(cid:56)2(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)&(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)pb(cid:1)oj(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)fiamb(cid:2)nb(cid:1)fi(cid:1)
apmo(cid:2)f(cid:13)hbion:nboo(cid:13)bhbion(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:57)&W0(cid:58)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)mfqbi(cid:1) t(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)kbinfji(cid:1)nboo(cid:13)bhbio(cid:1)ae(cid:2)mdbn(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)&(cid:1)efdebm(cid:1)mbajdifub(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)aop(cid:2)mf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)
(cid:13)jnnbn(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:58)02(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)&(cid:1)efdebm(cid:1)nbmqfab(cid:1)ajno(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:57)10(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)jrbm(cid:1)bskbaob(cid:5)(cid:1)mbopmin(cid:1)ji(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1).(cid:85)W(cid:61)W(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:1)k(cid:2)mof(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)t(cid:1)jccnbo(cid:1) t(cid:1)
(cid:13)jrbm(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bcfib(cid:5)(cid:1)ajiomf pofji(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in(cid:1).(cid:85)00W(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)jrbm(cid:1)fiobmbno(cid:1)ajnon(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:56)1(cid:54)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)8(cid:1)
vn(cid:1)(cid:5)fnapnnb(cid:5)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)—Jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1).iji5Bvv(cid:43)(cid:79)(cid:1)z(cid:2)mifidn(cid:77)(cid:1)nbaofji&(cid:1)rb(cid:1)ae(cid:2)m(cid:2)aobmfub(cid:1)abmo(cid:2)fi(cid:1)mbofmbhbio5mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)ajnon(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
joebmn(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)iji5jkbm(cid:2)ofid8(cid:1)Pof(cid:13)fufid(cid:1)oefn(cid:1)ae(cid:2)m(cid:2)aobmfu(cid:2)ofji&(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)mbofmbhbio5mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)ajnon(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)(cid:85)W&(cid:54)(cid:56)W(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:5)bamb(cid:2)nb(cid:1)
jc(cid:1)(cid:85)W(cid:60)(cid:61)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)&(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)mfqbi(cid:1) t(cid:1)(cid:13)jrbm(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bcfib(cid:5)(cid:1)ajiomf pofji(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)in(cid:1).(cid:85)00W(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)&(cid:1)k(cid:2)mof(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)t(cid:1)jccnbo(cid:1) t(cid:1)
efdebm(cid:1)nbmqfab(cid:1)ajno(cid:1).(cid:85)(cid:57)10(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:5)pb(cid:1)oj(cid:1)P8N8(cid:1)mbofmbhbio(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)ae(cid:2)idbn(cid:1)bccbaofqb(cid:1)E(cid:2)ip(cid:2)mt’W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)8(cid:1)Dia(cid:13)p(cid:5)fid(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)bhk(cid:13)jtbb(cid:1)
n(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)mt(cid:1)fiamb(cid:2)nb(cid:1)bccbaofqb(cid:1)E(cid:2)ip(cid:2)mt’W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)&(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)ibo(cid:1)fhk(cid:2)ao(cid:1)oj(cid:1)jpm(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)ajnon(cid:1)cmjh(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)P8N8(cid:1)mbofmbhbio(cid:1)k(cid:13)(cid:2)i(cid:1)ae(cid:2)idbn(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)
fhh(cid:2)obmf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)tb(cid:2)m8(cid:1)Mbcbm(cid:1)oj(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)P&(cid:1)—Mbofmbhbio5Mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)wbibcfon&(cid:77)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)fofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)ficjmh(cid:2)ofji8(cid:1)Iji5jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)ajno(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)
(cid:85)(cid:57)&(cid:58)0(cid:61)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)fiajhb(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)2(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)tb(cid:2)m5oj5tb(cid:2)m(cid:1)ae(cid:2)idb(cid:1)fi(cid:1)iji5jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1)ajnon(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)(cid:5)mfqbi(cid:1)
kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1) t(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)kbinfji(cid:1)nboo(cid:13)bhbio(cid:1)ae(cid:2)mdbn(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)tb(cid:2)m(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)efdebm(cid:1)mbajdifub(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)aop(cid:2)mf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)jnnbn(cid:72)(cid:1)k(cid:2)mof(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)t(cid:1)jccnbo(cid:1) t(cid:1)(cid:13)jrbm(cid:1)
fiobmbno(cid:1)ajnon8
(cid:36)ia(cid:16)(cid:14)b(cid:1)O(cid:2)sbn
Oeb(cid:1)ajiofipfid(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofjin(cid:1)bccbaofqb(cid:1)o(cid:2)s(cid:1)m(cid:2)ob(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1).(cid:57)81(cid:79)(cid:1)kbmabio(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)W(cid:57)80(cid:1)kbmabio(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)apmmbio5tb(cid:2)m(cid:1)
bccbaofqb(cid:1)o(cid:2)s(cid:1)m(cid:2)ob(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)kmfh(cid:2)mf(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:5)mfqbi(cid:1) t(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)o(cid:2)s(cid:1)fhk(cid:2)ao(cid:1)jc(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)kbinfji(cid:1)nboo(cid:13)bhbio(cid:1)ae(cid:2)mdbn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)mbnj(cid:13)pofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)abmo(cid:2)fi(cid:1)o(cid:2)s(cid:1)(cid:2)p(cid:5)fo(cid:1)
h(cid:2)oobmn8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)jkbm(cid:2)ofid(cid:1).iji5Bvv(cid:43)(cid:79)(cid:1)bccbaofqb(cid:1)o(cid:2)s(cid:1)m(cid:2)ob(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)W(cid:57)8(cid:60)(cid:1)kbmabio(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)mb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)W(cid:58)8(cid:54)(cid:1)kbmabio(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)8(cid:1)Ajm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)fofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)
ficjmh(cid:2)ofji&(cid:1)mbcbm(cid:1)oj(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)B&(cid:1)—O(cid:2)sbn8(cid:77)

===== PAGE 27 =====
Management Discussion 25
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
1Financial Position
Dynamics
Our balance sheet at December 31, 2024 continues to provide us with flexibility to support and invest in the business.
Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and marketable securities at December 31, 2024 were $14,804 million, an increase of
$1,342 million compared to prior-year end. Total debt of $54,973 million decreased $1,574 million compared to December 31,
2023. We continue to manage our debt levels while being acquisitive and without sacrificing investments in our business.
During 2024, we generated $13,445 million in cash from operating activities, compared to $13,931 million in 2023. While cash
provided by financing receivables declined year to year from business variability, we had performance-related improvements within
net income driving an increase within cash from operating activities.Our free cash flow for 2024 was $12,749 million, an increase of
$1,538 million versus the prior year. Refer to page 35 for additional information on free cash flow. Our cash generation enables us to
continue investing in innovation and expertise across the portfolio, while returning value to shareholders through dividends. We
invested $3,289 million in acquisitions and returned $6,147 million to shareholders through dividends in 2024.
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remeasured the funded status of our retirement and postretirement plans at
December 31. The overall net underfunded position at December 31, 2024 was$2,657 million, a decrease of $1,348 millionfrom
the prior-year end, primarily due to higher discount rates. At year end, our qualified defined benefit pension plans were well funded
and the required contributions related to these plans and multi-employer plans are expected to be $100 million in 2025. In 2024,
the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan assets was 2.6 percent and the plan was 136 percent funded at December 31, 2024.
Overall, global asset returns were 2.0 percent and the qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 116 percent funded at
December 31, 2024.
IBM Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Current assets $ 34,482 $ 32,908
Current liabilities $ 33,142 $ 34,122
Working capital $ 1,340 $ (1,214)
Current ratio 1.04:1 0.96:1
Working capital increased$2,554 million from the year-end 2023 position. Current assets increased $1,574 million ($2,707 million
adjusted for currency) primarily in cash and cash equivalents, and short-term financing receivables. Current liabilities decreased
$980 million (increased $37 million adjusted for currency) as a result of a decrease in short-term debt mainly due to maturities;
partially offset by an increase in deferred income.
Receivables and Allowances
Roll Forward of Total IBM Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
Additions/ Foreign currency
January 1, 2024 (Releases) (1) Write-offs (2) and other (3) December 31, 2024
$457 $(18) $(146) $(21) $273
(1)Additions/(Releases) for allowance for credit losses are recorded in expense.
(2)Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information regarding allowance for credit loss write-offs.
(3)Other includes additions/(releases) related to discontinued operations.
Excluding receivables classified as held for sale, the total IBM receivables provision coverage was 1.4 percent at December 31,
2024, a decrease of 80 basis points compared to December 31, 2023. The decrease in coverage is due to declines in reserves
primarily driven by write-offs. The majority of the write-offs during the year were related to receivables which had been previously
reserved and were considered uncollectible as the related customer is no longer in operation, or there was no reasonable
expectation of repossession or additional collections primarily due to the age of the receivables. Write-offs also includes about $60
million of previously reserved receivables from discontinued operations. Refer to Financing’s “Financial Position” on page 42 for
additional details regarding the Financing segment receivables and allowances.

===== PAGE 28 =====
26 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Noncurrent assets $ 102,693 $ 102,333
Long-term debt $ 49,884 $ 50,121
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) $ 26,756 $ 28,385
The increase in noncurrent assets of $360 million ($2,453 million adjusted for currency) was primarily due to an increase in goodwill
primarily from the StreamSets and webMethods acquisition; partially offset by currency impacts.
Long-term debt decreased $237 million (increased $761 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by reclassifications to short-
term debt to reflect upcoming maturities and currency impacts; partially offset by our first-quarter 2024 debt issuances.
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt) decreased $1,629 million ($337 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by lower
retirement and postretirement benefit obligations.
Debt
Our funding requirements are continually monitored as we execute our strategies to manage the overall asset and liability profile.
Additionally, we maintain sufficient flexibility to access global funding sources as needed.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Total debt $ 54,973 $ 56,547
Financing segment debt (1) $ 12,116 $ 11,879
Non-Financing debt $ 42,858 $ 44,668
(1)Refer to Financing’s “Financial Position” on page 41 for additional details.
Total debt of $54,973 million decreased $1,574 million ($536 million adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2023, primarily
driven by maturities of $6,615 million; partially offset by proceeds from issuances of $5,705 million.
Non-Financing debt of $42,858 million decreased $1,810 million ($1,029 million adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2023,
primarily driven by maturities; partially offset by proceeds from issuances.
Financing segment debt of $12,116 million increased $236 million ($493 million adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2023,
primarily due to higher funding requirements associated with financing receivables.
Financing provides financing solutions predominantly for IBM’s external client assets, and the debt used to fund Financing assets is
primarily composed of intercompany loans. Total debt changes generally correspond with the level of client and commercial
financing receivables, the level of cash and cash equivalents, the change in intercompany and external payables and the change in
intercompany investment from IBM. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by the company to substantially match the term,
currency and interest rate variability underlying the financing receivable. The Financing debt-to-equity ratio remained at 9.0 to 1 at
December 31, 2024.
Interest expense relating to debt supporting Financing’s external client and internal business is included in the “Financing Results of
Operations” and in note D, “Segments.” In the Consolidated Income Statement, the external debt-related interest expense
supporting Financing’s internal financing to the company is classified as interest expense.

===== PAGE 29 =====
Management Discussion 27
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Equity
Total equity increased $4,780 million from December 31, 2023, primarily driven by an increase from net income of $6,023 million
which includes the impact of the pension settlement charges of $2,407 million net of tax, a decrease in accumulated other
comprehensive loss of $3,492 million driven by retirement-related benefit plans primarily due to the pension settlement charges
and amortization of net losses, and an increase in common stock of $1,737 million; partially offset by dividends paid of $6,147
million.
Cash Flow
Our cash flows from operating, investing and financing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows on page
49, are summarized in the table below. These amounts also include the cash flows associated with the Financing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023
Net cash provided by/(used in)
Operating activities $ 13,445 $ 13,931
Investing activities (4,937) (7,070)
Financing activities (7,079) (1,769)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (359) 9
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash $ 1,071 $ 5,101
During 2024, we generated $13,445 million in cash from operating activities, compared to $13,931 million in 2023. While cash
provided by financing receivables declined year to year due to variability in volumes, we had performance-related improvements
within net income driving an increase within cash from operating activities.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $2,133 million mainly driven by the Apptio acquisition in 2023, an increase in cash
provided by divestitures from the sale of The Weather Company assets and an increase in cash from disposition of property, plant
and equipment/other mainly driven by proceeds from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets; partially offset by the current year
acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods and higher net purchases of marketable securities and other investments.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $5,309 million mainly due to an decrease in net cash provided by debt of $5,377
million primarily driven by a lower level of debt issuances and a higher level of maturities in the current year compared to 2023.

===== PAGE 30 =====
28 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of our income statement results as reported under GAAP to our operating earnings
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. Management’s calculation of operating (non-GAAP) earnings, as presented, may differ
from similarly titled measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section for
management’s rationale for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2024: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments (1) Impacts (2) (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $ 35,551 $ 724 $ — $ — $ 36,275
Gross profit margin 56.7 % 1.2 pts. — pts. — pts. 57.8 %
SG&A $ 19,688 $ (1,159) $ — $ — $ 18,529
Other (income) and expense (3) 1,871 (70) (3,457) — (1,656)
Total expense and other (income) 29,754 (1,229) (3,457) — 25,068
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 5,797 1,953 3,457 — 11,207
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 9.2 % 3.1 pts. 5.5 pts. — pts. 17.9 %
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes (4) $ (218) $ 497 $ 790 $ 455 $ 1,523
Effective tax rate (3.8) % 5.1 pts. 8.2 pts. 4.1 pts. 13.6 %
Income from continuing operations $ 6,015 $ 1,456 $ 2,668 $ (455) $ 9,684
Income margin from continuing operations 9.6 % 2.3 pts. 4.3 pts. (0.7) pts. 15.4 %
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 6.42 $ 1.55 $ 2.85 $ (0.49) $ 10.33
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Acquisition- Retirement- U.S. Tax
Related Related Reform Operating
For the year ended December 31, 2023: GAAP Adjustments Adjustments Impacts (non-GAAP)
Gross profit $ 34,300 $ 631 $ — $ — $ 34,931
Gross profit margin 55.4 % 1.0 pts. — pts. — pts. 56.5 %
SG&A $ 19,003 $ (1,039) $ — $ — $ 17,964
Other (income) and expense (914) 10 39 — (866)
Total expense and other (income) (3) 25,610 (1,029) 39 — 24,620
Pre-tax income from continuing operations 8,690 1,660 (39) — 10,311
Pre-tax margin from continuing operations 14.0 % 2.7 pts. (0.1) pts. — pts. 16.7 %
Provision for income taxes (4) $ 1,176 $ 368 $ (8) $ (95) $ 1,441
Effective tax rate 13.5 % 1.4 pts. 0.0 pts. (0.9) pts. 14.0 %
Income from continuing operations $ 7,514 $ 1,292 $ (30) $ 95 $ 8,870
Income margin from continuing operations 12.1 % 2.1 pts. 0.0 pts. 0.2 pts. 14.3 %
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations $ 8.15 $ 1.40 $ (0.03) $ 0.10 $ 9.62
(1)Retirement-Related Adjustments in 2024 includes the impact of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion ($2.4 billion net of tax) . Refer to note U,
"Retirement-Related Benefits," for additional information.
(2)2024 includes a benefit from income taxes due to the resolution of certain tax audit matters.
(3)Acquisition-Related Adjustments in 2024 and 2023 include the impact of a $68 million loss and $12 million gain, respectively, recognized on foreign
exchange derivative contracts entered into by the company prior to the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods from Software AG. Refer to note S,
“Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
(4)The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income.

===== PAGE 31 =====
Management Discussion 29
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
1PRIOR YEAR IN REVIEW
This section provides a summary of our segment results and year-to-year comparisons between 2023 and 2022. These segment
results have been recast to conform to our segment changes effectivefirst-quarter 2024. There was no change to our consolidated
results. Refer to “Year in Review” section of our “Management Discussion,”(pages 17 to 28), of our 2023 Annual Report on Form
10-K for a discussion of all other details of our financial condition and results of operations for the year ended December 31, 2023
compared to the year ended December 31, 2022.
Segment Details
The table below presents each reportable segment’s revenue and gross margin results which are presented on a comparable basis.
Refer to “Organization of Information” section of “Management Discussion” and note D, “Segments,” for additional information on
the recast of our segment financial results for 2023 and 2022.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr. Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/ Percent Change
Margin Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change Currency
Revenue
Software $ 25,011 $ 23,629 5.8 % 5.9 %
Gross margin 82.9 % 82.5 % 0.4 pts.
Consulting 20,884 20,058 4.1 % 5.6 %
Gross margin 26.8 % 25.8 % 0.9 pts.
Infrastructure 14,593 15,288 (4.5) % (3.9) %
Gross margin 56.1 % 52.8 % 3.3 pts.
Financing 741 645 14.8 % 15.0 %
Gross margin 48.1 % 38.3 % 9.8 pts.
Other 632 909 (30.5) % (31.6) %
Gross margin (87.4) % (32.9) % (54.5) pts.
Total revenue $ 61,860 $ 60,530 2.2 % 2.9 %
Total gross profit $ 34,300 $ 32,687 4.9 %
Total gross margin 55.4 % 54.0 % 1.4 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets 631 682 (7.5) %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit $ 34,931 $ 33,370 4.7 %
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin 56.5 % 55.1 % 1.3 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Software
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change Currency
Software revenue $ 25,011 $ 23,629 5.8 % 5.9 %
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 17,396 $ 16,458 5.7 % 5.8 %
Red Hat 9.1 9.0
Automation 3.4 3.6
Data & AI 6.0 6.4
Security (1.4) (1.4)
Transaction Processing 7,615 7,171 6.2 6.3
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Software revenue of $25,011 increased 5.8 percent as reported (5.9 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023 compared to the prior
year, driven by growth in both Hybrid Platform & Solutions and Transaction Processing. The growth in Hybrid Platform & Solutions
was led by Red Hat, Automation and Data & AI. In Transaction Processing, our IBM Z platform continued to drive client demand. Our
Software revenue performance in 2023 reflected growth in our high-value, recurring revenue base, which was approximately 80
percent of our annual software revenue, as well as transactional revenue.

===== PAGE 32 =====
30 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Hybrid Platform & Solutions revenue of $17,396 increased 5.7 percent as reported (5.8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023
compared to the prior year. Within Hybrid Platform & Solutions, Red Hat revenue increased 9.1 percent as reported (9.0 percent
adjusted for currency) led by double-digit growth in OpenShift and Ansible, and solid growth in RHEL. OpenShift continued its strong
performance with annual recurring revenue of $1.2 billion exiting 2023. Automation revenue increased 3.4 percent as reported (3.6
percent adjusted for currency), with strength in AIOps and Management solutions as clients looked to optimize business
performance and enhance productivity. Data & AI revenue increased 6.0 percent as reported (6.4 percent adjusted for currency),
reflecting demand for data management as clients prepared for generative AI, and strength in asset and supply chain management
software which helps clients run sustainable operations. Security revenue decreased 1.4 percent as reported and adjusted for
currency. While we had revenue declines in security threat management and identity and access management, we delivered
revenue growth in data security.
Across Hybrid Platform & Solutions, our annual recurring revenue (ARR) was $13.8 billion exiting 2023. ARR is a key performance
metric management uses to assess the health and growth trajectory of our Hybrid Platform & Solutions business within the Software
segment. Refer to the “Year in Review” section on page 17 for our definition of ARR.
Transaction Processing revenue of $7,615 million increased 6.2 percent as reported (6.3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023
compared to the prior year. Clients continued to value this portfolio of mission-critical software in support of growing workloads on
our hardware platforms, such as IBM Z. This, together with price increases, contributed to growth in both recurring and
transactional revenue in Transaction Processing.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change
Software
Gross profit $ 20,721 $ 19,483 6.4 %
Gross profit margin 82.9 % 82.5 % 0.4 pts.
Segment profit $ 7,499 $ 7,012 6.9 %
Segment profit margin 30.0 % 29.7 % 0.3 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Software gross profit margin of 82.9 percent in 2023 increased 0.4 points compared to the prior year, primarily driven by margin
expansion in software services due to portfolio mix. Segment profit of $7,499 million increased 6.9 percent and segment profit
margin of 30.0 percent increased 0.3 points compared to 2022. The year-to-year increases in segment profit and segment profit
margin were driven by our solid revenue growth, higher gross profit contribution and the productivity actions that were taken;
partially offset by key investments in innovation. Segment profit margin in 2023 included approximately 1 point of impact from
currency.
Consulting
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change Currency
Consulting revenue $ 20,884 $ 20,058 4.1 % 5.6 %
Business Transformation $ 9,179 $ 8,834 3.9 % 5.3 %
Technology Consulting 3,775 3,730 1.2 2.8
Application Operations 7,930 7,494 5.8 7.3
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Consulting revenue of $20,884 million increased 4.1 percent as reported (5.6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023 compared to
the prior year, with growth across all three business areas. This growth reflected the solid demand for our data and technology
transformation projects with a focus on AI and analytics. Clients were also prioritizing cloud modernization and cloud-based
application development projects. There was a consistent client focus throughout 2023 on digital transformation and AI initiatives
to drive productivity and cost savings for their enterprises. Our integrated value proposition, investments in skills and strategic
partnerships and focused execution differentiated us in the marketplace. Our strategic partnerships, which accounted for
approximately 40 percent of Consulting revenue, delivered double-digit Consulting revenue growth in 2023 compared to the prior
year.

===== PAGE 33 =====
Management Discussion 31
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Business Transformation revenue of $9,179 million increased 3.9 percent as reported (5.3 percent adjusted for currency) year to
year, led by data and technology transformations including AI and analytics-focused projects, and finance and supply chain
transformations.
Technology Consulting revenue of $3,775 million increased 1.2 percent as reported (2.8 percent adjusted for currency), led by
cloud-based application development and cloud modernization projects.
Application Operations revenue of $7,930 million increased 5.8 percent as reported (7.3 percent adjusted for currency) driven by
growth in platform engineering services and cloud application management.
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change
Consulting
Gross profit $ 5,588 $ 5,180 7.9 %
Gross profit margin 26.8 % 25.8 % 0.9 pts.
Segment profit $ 2,130 $ 1,871 13.8 %
Segment profit margin 10.2 % 9.3 % 0.9 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Consulting gross profit margin increased 0.9 points to 26.8 percent in 2023 compared to the prior year. Segment profit of $2,130
million increased 13.8 percent and segment profit margin increased 0.9 points to 10.2 percent.The increases in gross profit margin
and segment profit margin reflected benefits from pricing and productivity actions, which were partially offset by increased labor
costs.
Infrastructure
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Yr.-to-Yr. Percent Change
Percent Adjusted for
For the year ended December 31: 2023 2022 Change Currency
Infrastructure revenue $ 14,593 $ 15,288 (4.5) % (3.9) %
Hybrid Infrastructure $ 9,215 $ 9,451 (2.5) % (2.2) %
IBM Z (4.5) (4.2)
Distributed Infrastructure (1.0) (0.7)
Infrastructure Support 5,377 5,837 (7.9) (6.6)
Infrastructure revenue of $14,593 million decreased 4.5 percent as reported (3.9 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023 as
compared to the prior year, reflecting product cycle dynamics which impacted both Hybrid Infrastructure and Infrastructure
Support.
Hybrid Infrastructure revenue of $9,215 million decreased 2.5 percent as reported (2.2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2023 as
compared to the prior year. Within Hybrid Infrastructure, IBM Z revenue decreased 4.5 percent as reported (4.2 percent adjusted
for currency) on a year-to-year basis, consistent with the z16 cycle, as it was introduced in the second quarter of 2022. Overall,
across the program cycle, z16 revenue performance at year-end 2023 had significantly outperformed prior cycles, including the
successful z15 program. The z16 program incorporates a number of key innovations for our clients including cloud-native
development for hybrid cloud, embedded AI at scale, quantum safe cyber-resilient security, energy efficiency and strong reliability
and scalability. Clients increasingly leveraged IBM Z for more workloads which drove demand for more capacity. Installed MIPS
have doubled during the last two IBM Z product cycles. IBM Z remains an enduring platform, driving hardware adoption as well as
related software, storage and services. Distributed Infrastructure revenue decreased 1.0 percent as reported (0.7 percent adjusted
for currency). We had year-to-year declines in high-end Power and cloud platform revenue; partially offset by strong growth in high-
end Storage and low- to mid-range Power.
Infrastructure Support revenue of $5,377 million decreased 7.9 percent as reported (6.6 percent adjusted for currency), which
reflected reduced demand for support services as a result of product cycle dynamics.

===== PAGE 34 =====
32 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent/
Margin
For the year ended December 31: 2023 (1) 2022 (1) Change
Infrastructure
Gross profit $ 8,187 $ 8,076 1.4 %
Gross profit margin 56.1 % 52.8 % 3.3 pts.
Segment profit $ 2,828 $ 2,671 5.9 %
Segment profit margin 19.4 % 17.5 % 1.9 pts.
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Infrastructure gross profit margin increased 3.3 points to 56.1 percent in 2023 compared to the prior year. The increase was driven
by margin expansion in Hybrid Infrastructure across both Distributed Infrastructure and IBM Z, reflecting our continued focus on
productivity initiatives including streamlining our supply chain; partially offset by margin decline in Infrastructure Support due to
product cycle dynamics. Segment profit of $2,828 million increased 5.9 percent and segment profit margin increased 1.9 points to
19.4 percent primarily driven by the increase in gross profit contribution, an increase in IP and custom development income, a
benefit from the change in the useful life of servers and network equipment, and productivity actions. Segment profit margin in 2023
included approximately 1 point of impact from currency.
Financing
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2023 2022 Change
Revenue $ 741 $ 645 14.8 %
Segment profit (1) $ 373 $ 340 9.8 %
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Financing revenue increased 14.8 percent (15.0 percent adjusted for currency) to $741 million in 2023 compared to the prior year,
primarily driven by client financing up $89 million to $728 million. The increase in client financing revenue was primarily driven by
an increase in client financing asset yields.
Financing segment profit increased9.8 percent to $373 million in 2023 compared to the prior year and the segment profit margin of
50.3 percent decreased 2.3 points year to year. The increase in segment profit in 2023 was primarily driven by a decrease in SG&A
expenses and settlements on non-accrual assets.

===== PAGE 35 =====
Management Discussion 33
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
OTHER INFORMATION
Looking Forward
Technology has proven to be a fundamental source of competitive advantage and is now the key to sustainable growth and business
transformation. Continued demand for technology will serve as a major driving force behind global economic and business growth
as businesses look to scale, offer better services, drive efficiencies and seize new market opportunities. AI-driven productivity, in
particular, continues to be a top priority for businesses for both cost reductions and new revenue opportunities.
Enterprise AI continues to gain momentum. Our clients have moved beyond experimentation and are now looking to scale AI in their
businesses and generate return from their investments. The portfolio of AI offerings we have built is focused on generating that
return through productivity improvements and automation. We have infused AI across the business, from the tools clients use to
manage and optimize their hybrid cloud environments, to the tools to deploy AI within their enterprise, to Infrastructure and
Consulting, there is AI innovation within all of our segments. For example, in Software, IBM watsonx provides a robust portfolio of AI
products for developing AI apps, managing data, and governing the entire lifecycle of AI models. Red Hat is bringing AI to the
platform with innovation such as OpenShift AI and RHEL AI. In Transaction Processing, we are experiencing continued customer
interest in our generative AI product, watsonx Code Assistant for Z. In Infrastructure, IBM Z is equipped with real time AI
inferencing capabilities. We continue to see Infrastructure play a larger role, enabling hybrid cloud environments for mission-critical
transactions and AI workloads, as clients bring AI to their data. In Consulting, our experts are helping clients design and execute AI
strategies by leveraging the IBM Consulting Advantage platform, an AI delivery platform designed to implement solutions at scale,
transforming how our consultants work and harnessing AI across every stage of the project lifecycle.
We are committed to an open innovation ecosystem around AI, to help our clients maximize flexibility and leverage skills, and IBM
with Red Hat can be a key driver of open-source AI. In the second quarter of 2024, we open-sourced IBM’s Granite models, which
are designed for specific purposes and significantly more cost-efficient than larger alternatives, and we see parallels to how Linux
became a leader in the enterprise server space as a result of the speed and innovation offered by open source. Red Hat and IBM
also launched InstructLab to evolve and improve AI models. Our partner ecosystem remains essential to both AI and hybrid cloud
growth and we continue to progress strategic partnerships with leading technology providers. In August 2024, we completed the
sale of certain IBM QRadar SaaS assets to Palo Alto, which is part of a partnership with them to deliver AI-powered security
solutions using watsonx to clients.
We continue to invest in emerging technologies, bringing new innovations to market. In 2024, we expanded our IBM Quantum Data
Center in Poughkeepsie, New York and opened the first IBM Quantum Data Center in Europe. We also announced a partnership with
the State of Illinois to build the National Quantum Algorithm Center in Chicago and deploy a next-generation IBM Quantum System
Two, supporting the future of quantum-centric supercomputing and greatly advancing our goal of expanding access to the world’s
most performant quantum computers. We also remained focused on portfolio optimization. In January 2024, we closed the
divestiture of The Weather Company assets. To complement our portfolio, we completed eleven acquisitions in 2024, including the
acquisition of the StreamSets and webMethods assets from Software AG. This acquisition brings together leading capabilities in
integration, API management, and data ingestion. At the end of 2024, we closed the acquisition of Neural Magic, which strengthens
our AI capabilities in performance engineering and model optimization.
On April 24, 2024, we announced our intent to acquire all of the outstanding shares of HashiCorp. The combination of IBM’s and
HashiCorp’s combined portfolios will help clients manage growing application and infrastructure complexity and create a
comprehensive end-to-end hybrid cloud platform designed for the AI era. Under the terms of the definitive agreement, HashiCorp
shareholders on record immediately prior to the effective time on the closing date will receive $35 per share in cash, representing a
total enterprise value of approximately $6.4 billion. On July 15, 2024, HashiCorp stockholders voted to approve the merger with
IBM. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarter of 2025, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing
conditions. Upon closing, HashiCorp will be integrated into the Software segment.
In 2024, we continued to invest organically and inorganically, bring new products and innovation to market, expand our ecosystem
and drive productivity across our business. We have made significant progress in becoming a higher growth, more focused business
that has delivered sustained revenue growth, strong cash generation and meaningful returns to all our stakeholders – our 2024
performance is a proof point of this progress. Today, IBM is a software-led, fully integrated platform company, a business well
positioned for 2025 and the future.
In the first quarter of 2025, we announced changes to the reported revenue categories within our Software and Consulting
reportable segments to better reflect the market opportunities and how we address them. IBM will report revenue and year-to-year
revenue percent change for Hybrid Cloud (Red Hat), Automation, Data, and Transaction Processing within Software, and for Strategy
and Technology and Intelligent Operations within Consulting. These changes were effective January 1, 2025 and will not impact our
Consolidated Financial Statements or our reportable segments. Since these changes did not occur until first-quarter 2025, the
periods presented in this Annual Report reflect the historical reported revenue categories.

===== PAGE 36 =====
34 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Retirement-Related Plans
Our retirement-related plans remain in a strong financial position. In aggregate, our worldwide qualified plans are funded 116
percent, with the U.S. at 136 percent. Contributions for all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $1.3 billion in
2025, approximately flat compared to 2024, of which$0.1 billionrelates to legally required contributions to non-U.S. defined
benefits and multi-employer plans. We expect 2025 pre-tax retirement-related plan cost to be approximately $1.1 billion. This
estimate reflects current pension plan assumptions at December 31, 2024. Within total retirement-related plan cost, operating
retirement-related plan cost is expected to be approximately $1.0 billion in 2025, essentially flat compared to the prior year. Non-
operating retirement-related plan cost is expected to be approximately $0.1 billion, a decrease of approximately $3.3 billion
compared to 2024, primarily driven by the $3.1 billion pension settlement charges resulting from the U.S. and Canada pension
transfers in 2024, and lower recognized actuarial losses. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information
on the pension transfers.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
We have generated strong cash flow from operations allowing us to invest and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-
term opportunities. We provide for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining an adequate cash balance, access to
global funding sources, committed global credit facilities and other committed and uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. The
following table provides a summary of the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2022 through 2024.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2024 2023 2022
Net cash from operating activities $ 13.4 $ 13.9 $ 10.4
Cash and cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term marketable securities $ 14.8 $ 13.5 $ 8.8
Committed global credit facilities (1) $ 10.0 $ 10.0 $ 10.0
(1)Refer to note O, “Borrowings,” for additional information.
The indenture governing our debt securities and our various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which obligate the
company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and leaseback
transactions to 10 percentof IBM’s consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict our ability to merge or consolidate unless certain
conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a covenant on our consolidated net interest expense ratio, which cannot be less
than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted indebtedness of at least $500 million.
We are in compliance with all of our significant debt covenants and provide periodic certification to our lenders. The failure to
comply with debt covenants could constitute an event of default with respect to our debt to which such provisions apply. If certain
events of default were to occur, the principal and interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
immediately due and payable.
We do not have “ratings trigger” provisions in our debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the holders to declare an
event of default and seek to accelerate payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. Our debt covenants are well
within the required levels. Our contractual agreements governing derivative instruments contain standard market clauses which can
trigger the termination of the agreement if IBM’s credit rating were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2024, the fair
value of those instruments that were in a liability position was $726 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is
subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on the level of our outstanding instruments and market conditions. We
have no other contractual arrangements that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect on
our financial position or liquidity.
The following table presents the major ratings agencies’ ratings assigned to our debt securities as of December 31, 2024. The
Moody’s, Standard and Poor’s and Fitch’s ratings remain unchanged from December 31, 2023.
Moody’s
Standard Investors Fitch
IBM Ratings and Poor’s Service Ratings
Senior long-term debt A- A3 A-
Commercial paper A-2 Prime-2 F1
We have financial flexibility, supported by our strong liquidity position and cash flows, to operate at a single A credit rating.Debt
levelsdecreased $1.6 billionfrom December 31, 2023 primarily driven by currency, and maturities of $6.6 billion partially offset by
proceeds from issuances of $5.7 billionin the current year.In the first quarter of 2025, we issued $8.4 billion of debt for general

===== PAGE 37 =====
Management Discussion 35
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
corporate purposes, including our future debt maturity obligations, as well as capital allocation priorities. Refer to note V,
“Subsequent Events,” for additional information.
We prepare our Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow
presentation on page 49 and highlight causes and events underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on page 27. For the
purpose of running its business, IBM manages, monitors and analyzes cash flows in a different manner.
Management uses free cash flow as a measure to evaluate its operating results, plan shareholder return levels, strategic
investments and assess its ability and need to incur and service debt. The entire free cash flow amount is not necessarily available
for discretionary expenditures. We define free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the change in Financing
receivables and net capital expenditures, including the investment in software and other asset sales(e.g., the sale of certain QRadar
SaaS assets). A key objective of the Financing business is to generate strong returns on equity, and our Financing receivables are the
basis for that growth. Accordingly, management considers Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. Therefore, management includes presentations of both free cash flow and net cash
from operating activities that exclude the effect of Financing receivables.
The following is management’s view of cash flows for 2024, 2023 and 2022 prepared in a manner consistent with the description
above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022 (1)
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP $ 13.4 $ 13.9 $ 10.4
Less: change in Financing receivables (0.4) 1.2 (0.7)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Financing receivables 13.9 12.7 11.2
Capital expenditures, net (1.1) (1.5) (1.9)
Free cash flow 12.7 11.2 9.3
Change in Financing receivables (2) (0.4) 1.2 (0.7)
Acquisitions (3.3) (5.1) (2.3)
Divestitures 0.7 0.0 1.3
Dividends (6.1) (6.0) (5.9)
Change in total debt (2) (0.9) 4.5 1.2
Other (2) (1.0) (1.2) (1.2)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted
cash (2) (0.4) 0.0 (0.2)
Change in cash, cash equivalents, restricted cash and short-term
marketable securities $ 1.3 $ 4.6 $ 1.3
(1)Includes immaterial cash flows from discontinued operations.
(2)Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024 presentation.
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 2024, after investing $1.1 billion in net capital investments, we
generated free cash flow of $12.7 billion, an increase of $1.5 billion versus the prior year. The year-to-year increase in free cash
flow primarily reflects current year performance-related improvements within net income and sustainable lower cash requirements
through changes in our retirement plans. In 2024, net capital expenditures and net cash from operating activities include $0.4
billion and $0.1 billion, respectively, of cash proceeds from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets. This benefit to net capital
expenditures, net cash from operating activities and to free cash flow represented only a nominal net benefit to current-year cash
flows due to payments for structural actions and foregone profit from the QRadar business. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions &
Divestitures,” for additional information.In2024, we continued to return value to shareholders with $6.1 billion in dividends and
invested $3.3 billion in acquisitions.
IBM’s Board of Directors considers the dividend payment on a quarterly basis. In the second quarter of 2024, the Board of Directors
increased the company’s quarterly common stock dividend from $1.66 to $1.67 per share.Beginning in the first quarter of 2025, we
expect to file our quarterly reports on Form 10-Q closer to the timing of our quarterly earnings release, which may not coincide with
the timing of our Board of Directors meeting. If the company’s Board of Directors approves a common stock dividend following the
filing, the company will disclose this event in a current report on Form 8-K.
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow dynamics discussed previously include significant changes in
operating results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected adverse impacts from litigation, future pension

===== PAGE 38 =====
36 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
funding requirements during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation
has such an adverse impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more completely described in note Q, “Commitments &
Contingencies.”
With respect to pension funding, in 2024, we contributed $79 million to our non-U.S. defined benefit plans compared to $70 million
in 2023. As highlighted in the Contractual Obligations table, we expect to make legally mandated pension plan contributions to
certain non-U.S. plans of approximately $0.7 billionin the next five years. The 2025 contributions are currently expected to be
approximately $100 million. Contributions related to all retirement-related plans are expected to be approximately $1.3 billion in
2025, approximately flat compared to 2024. Refer to “Retirement-Related Plans” within the “Looking Forward” section for
additional information.Financial market performance could increase the legally mandated minimum contributions in certain non-
U.S. countries that require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. We are not quantifying any further impact from
pension funding because it is not possible to predict future movements in the capital markets or pension plan funding regulations.
In 2025, we are not legally required to make any contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans.
Our cash flows are sufficient to fund our current operations and obligations, including investing and financing activities such as
dividends and debt service. When additional requirements arise, we have several liquidity options available. These options may
include the ability to borrow additional funds at reasonable interest rates and utilizing our committed global credit facilities. Our
overall shareholder payout remains at a comfortable level, and we remain fully committed to our long-standing dividend policy.
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual Payments Due In
Payment Stream 2025 2026–27 2028–29 After 2029
Long-term debt obligations $ 55,111 $ 4,850 $ 12,326 $ 8,503 $ 29,433
Interest on long-term debt obligations 21,441 1,901 3,132 2,467 13,942
Finance lease obligations (1) 1,000 198 334 286 183
Operating lease obligations (1) 4,026 906 1,417 765 938
Purchase obligations 4,892 1,657 1,880 1,065 291
Other long-term liabilities:
Minimum defined benefit pension plan
funding (mandated) (2) 700 100 300 300
Excess Savings Plan 1,674 229 482 513 450
Long-term termination benefits 785 214 113 78 380
Tax reserves (3) 5,355 46
Other 597 97 118 84 298
Total $ 95,582 $ 10,198 $ 20,100 $ 14,061 $ 45,915
(1)Finance lease obligations are presented on a discounted cash flow basis, whereas operating lease obligations are presented on an undiscounted cash
flow basis.
(2)As funded status on plans will vary, obligations for mandated minimum pension payments after 2028 could not be reasonably estimated.
(3)These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. We estimate that approximately $46 million of the liability is expected to be
settled within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the
timing of the payments will depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within
the next 12 months.
Certain contractual obligations reported in the previous table exclude the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the
amounts reported in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Certain noncurrent liabilities are excluded from the previous table as their
future cash outflows are uncertain. This includes deferred taxes, derivatives, deferred income, disability benefits and other sundry
items. Certain obligations related to our divestitures are included.
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any of
the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) we would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or (3) we must make
specified minimum payments even if we do not take delivery of the contracted products or services (take-or-pay). If the obligation
to purchase goods or services is noncancelable, the entire value of the contract is included in the previous table. If the obligation is
cancelable, but we would incur a penalty if canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obligation.
Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay contracts are also included in the table as they represent the portion of each
contract that is a firm commitment.

===== PAGE 39 =====
Management Discussion 37
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
In the ordinary course of business, we enter into contracts that specify that we will purchase all or a portion of our requirements of a
specific product, commodity or service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in order to secure
pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, we do not
consider them to be purchase obligations.
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the effective interest rate at December 31, 2024, plus the interest rate
spread associated with that debt, if any.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
In the normal course of business, we may enter into off-balance sheet arrangements such as client financing commitments and
guarantees. At December 31, 2024, we had no off-balance sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a
material current or future effect on our financial condition, changes in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of
operations, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. Refer to the table above for our contractual obligations, and note Q,
“Commitments & Contingencies,” for detailed information about our guarantees, financial commitments and indemnification
arrangements. We do not have retained interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other material off-balance sheet
interests or instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires IBM to make estimates and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly affect
its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section are those that we consider to
be the most critical to our financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or
assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of
outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to IBM’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed the
development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with the Audit Committee of IBM’s Board of Directors. Our significant
accounting policies are described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that information is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides
material information to investors. The amounts used to assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow
users of the financial statements to understand a general direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do not
represent management’s predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely develop
exactly as forecasted, and estimates require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For our defined benefit pension plans, the measurement of the benefit obligation to plan participants and net periodic pension
(income)/cost requires the use of certain assumptions, including, among others, estimates of discount rates, interest crediting rates
and expected return on plan assets. Beginning in 2024, as a result of changes to the Qualified PPP as discussed in note U,
“Retirement-Related Benefits,” the interest crediting rate and expected return on plan assets will be based on their relationship to
the plan’s discount rate.
Changes in the discount rate and the interest crediting rate assumptions would impact the service cost, (gain)/loss amortization and
interest cost components of the net periodic pension (income)/cost calculation and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). Changes
in the expected long-term return on plan assets assumption impacts the net periodic pension (income)/cost. Expected returns on
plan assets are calculated based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes changes in the fair value of plan
assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost. The
differences between the actual return on plan assets and the expected long-term return on plan assets are recognized over five
years in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic pension (income)/cost and also as a component of actuarial (gains)/
losses, which are recognized over the service lives or life expectancy of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such
amounts exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by accounting
standards.
The discount rate assumption for the Qualified PPP and Excess Personal Pension Plan (U.S. Defined Benefit Pension Plans),
increased by 50 basis points to 5.5 percent on December 31, 2024. This change will increase pre-tax income recognized in 2025 by
an estimated $104 million. A 25 basis point increase in the discount rate assumption would cause a corresponding increase in the
pre-tax income recognized in 2025 by an estimated $75 million. A 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate assumption would
cause a corresponding decrease in the pre-tax income recognized in 2025 by an estimated $27 million. The impact on pre-tax
income as a result of a change in discount rate includes the impact of a similar change in the interest crediting rate. The increase or
decrease in the discount rate would also cause a corresponding increase or decrease, respectively, in the 2025 expected return on
plan assets assumption. Further changes in the discount rate assumptions would impact the PBO which, in turn, may impact our
funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan assets. A 25 basis point increase in the discount rate would decrease the PBO by $256
million. A 25 basis point decrease in the discount rate would increase the PBO by $265 million. The impact on the PBO as a result of
a change in discount rate includes the impact of a similar change in the interest crediting rate. Each 50 basis point change in the

===== PAGE 40 =====
38 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
expected long-term return on these U.S. defined benefit plan assets assumption would have an estimated impact of $98 million on
the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/cost (based upon the 2025 assumptions).
We may voluntarily make contributions or be required, by law, to make contributions to our pension plans. Actual results that differ
from the estimates may result in more or less future IBM funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. Impacts of
these types of changes on our pension plans in other countries worldwide would vary depending upon the status of each respective
plan.
In addition to the above, we evaluate other pension assumptions involving demographic factors, such as retirement age and
mortality, and update these assumptions to reflect experience and expectations for the future. Actual results in any given year can
differ from actuarial assumptions because of economic and other factors.
For additional information on our pension plans and the development of these assumptions, refer to note U, “Retirement-Related
Benefits.”
Revenue Recognition
Application of GAAP related to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires us to make judgments and estimates.
Specifically, complex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant contract interpretation to
determine the appropriate accounting, including whether promised goods and services specified in an arrangement are distinct
performance obligations. Other significant judgments include determining the standalone selling price (SSP), determining whether
IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and whether separate contracts should be combined and considered part
of one arrangement.
Revenue recognition is also impacted by our ability to determine when a contract is probable of collection and to estimate variable
consideration, including, for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties and performance bonuses. We consider
various factors when making these judgments, including a review of specific transactions, historical experience and market and
economic conditions. Evaluations are conducted each quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If the estimates were
changed by 10 percent in 2024, the impact on net income would have been $31 million.
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
We enter into numerous service contracts through our services businesses. During the contractual period, revenue, cost and profits
may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which we use cost-to-cost
measures of progress. For those contracts, if at any time these estimates indicate the contract will be unprofitable, the entire
estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in cost. We perform ongoing profitability analyses of these
services contracts in order to determine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed to estimate the future
costs to complete each contract are future labor costs and product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss
provisions recorded as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were immaterial at December 31, 2024 and 2023.
Income Taxes
We are subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgment is required in determining the
consolidated provision for income taxes.
During the ordinary course of business, there are many transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is
uncertain. As a result, we recognize tax liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. These tax
liabilities are recognized when, despite our belief that our tax return positions are supportable, we believe that certain positions may
not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. We believe that our accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open audit
years based on our assessment of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment relies on
estimates and assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that new information
becomes available which causes us to change our judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax
liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results,
estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. In the event that we change our
determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, we will adjust the valuation allowance with a
corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period to period based on non-recurring events, such as the settlement of
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, state
and local taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.

===== PAGE 41 =====
Management Discussion 39
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations before
income taxes, consolidated net income would have decreased/improved by $58 million in 2024.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment accounting requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The
acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires us to estimate the fair value of assets acquired including
separately identifiable intangible assets, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree to properly allocate
purchase price consideration. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill, requires the allocation of cash flows to those
assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets or group of assets. Our estimates are based upon
assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of
management’s assumptions, which would not reflect unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
We review goodwill for impairment annually and whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of
goodwill may not be recoverable. In 2024, the company elected to bypass the qualitative assessment and performed a quantitative
goodwill impairment test to compare the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. Estimating the fair value of a reporting
unit is judgmental in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and assumptions. We estimate the fair value of our
reporting units using the income approach. When circumstances warrant, we may also use a combination of the income approach
and certain market approaches. Under the income approach, we estimate the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present
value of estimated discounted future cash flows. The discounted cash flow methodology includes the use of projections, which
require the use of significant estimates and assumptions specific to the reporting unit as well as those based on general economic
conditions. Factors specific to each reporting unit include revenue growth rates, gross margins, discount rates, terminal value
growth rates, capital expenditures projections, assumed tax rates and other assumptions deemed reasonable by management.
The annual goodwill impairment analysis using the quantitative test performed during the fourth quarter of 2024 did not result in an
impairment charge. All of the company’s reporting units had fair values that substantially exceeded their carrying values.
Loss Contingencies
We are currently involved in various claims and legal proceedings. At least quarterly, we review the status of each significant matter
and assess our potential financial exposure. If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered probable and the
amount can be reasonably estimated, we accrue a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is required in both the
determination of probability and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of uncertainties
related to these matters, accruals are based only on the best information available at the time. As additional information becomes
available, we reassess the potential liability related to our pending claims and litigation, and may revise our estimates. These
revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact on our results of operations and financial position.
Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses
The Financing business reviews its financing receivables portfolio on a regular basis in order to assess collectibility and records
adjustments to the allowance for credit losses at least quarterly. A description of the methods used by management to estimate the
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.” Factors that could result in actual
receivable losses that are materially different from the estimated reserve include significant changes in the economy, or a sudden
change in the economic health of a client that represents a significant concentration in Financing’s receivables portfolio.
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Financing’s
segment profit and our income from continuing operations before income taxes would be higher or lower by an estimated $13
million depending upon whether the actual collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. dollar affect our financial results and financial position. Movements
in currency, and the fact that we do not hedge 100 percent of our currency exposures, resulted in a currency impact to our revenues,
profit and cash flows throughout 2024. We execute a hedging program which defers, versus eliminates, the volatility of currency
impacts on our financial results. During periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and competition adjust to the
changing rates over time.
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect adjustments based upon a simple mathematical formula.
However, this constant currency methodology that we utilize to disclose this information does not incorporate any operational
actions that management could take to mitigate fluctuating currency rates. Based on the currency rate movements in 2024, revenue
from continuing operations increased 1.4 percent as reported and 3 percent at constant currency versus 2023.

===== PAGE 42 =====
40 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2024, currency changes resulted in assets and liabilities denominated in most local currencies being translated
into fewer U.S. dollars than at year-end 2023. We use financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to foreign
currency-based transactions.
We translate revenue, cost and expense in our non-U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. Currency
translation and hedging impacted year-to-year pre-tax income growth and operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income growth by
approximately $100 million in 2024. From a segment perspective, in 2024, the impact from currency translation and hedging to our
segments profit margin year-to-year growth was immaterial. We view these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to our as-
reported financial results. Hedging and certain underlying foreign currency transaction gains and losses are allocated to our
segment results. Considering the operational responses mentioned above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing
of hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts on any particular period.
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, translation
adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, we manage currency risk in these entities by linking prices and
contracts to U.S. dollars.
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, our financial position is routinely subject to a variety of risks, including the market risk associated
with interest rate and currency movements on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and liabilities, and other
risks such as collectibility of accounts receivable.
We regularly assess these risks and have established policies and business practices to protect against the adverse effects of these
and other potential exposures. As a result, we do not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
Our debt, in support of the geographic breadth of our operations and our Financing business, contains an element of market risk
from changes in interest and currency rates. We manage this risk, in part, through the use of a variety of financial instruments
including derivatives, as described in note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments.”
To meet disclosure requirements, we perform a sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures may have on
the fair values of our debt and other financial instruments.
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity analysis are comprised of our cash and cash equivalents, marketable
securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long-term and
short-term debt and derivative financial instruments. Our derivative financial instruments generally include interest rate swaps,
foreign currency swaps, forward contracts, and options.
To perform the sensitivity analysis, we assess the risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in interest rates
and foreign currency exchange rates on market-sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign currency exchange
risk are computed based on the present value of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that are attributable to the
market risk being measured. The discount rates used for the present value computations were selected based on market interest
and foreign currency exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2024 and 2023. The differences in this comparison are the
hypothetical losses associated with each type of risk.
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that we would incur
under normal market conditions because, due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor are held
constant. In addition, the results of the model are constrained by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from the
analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded
items include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash
flows and the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, reported changes in the values of some of the
financial instruments impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched with the offsetting changes in the values of
the items that those instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2024 and 2023, are as follows:
Interest Rate Risk
A hypothetical 10 percent adverse change in the levels of interest rates, with all other variables held constant, would result in a
decrease in the fair value of our financial instruments of approximately $0.3 billion at both December 31, 2024 and 2023. Changes
in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of our financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest
rates from the prior year are primarily driven by changes in debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount.

===== PAGE 43 =====
Management Discussion 41
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
A hypothetical 10 percent adverse change in the levels of foreign currency exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar, with all other
variables held constant, would result in a decrease in the fair value of our financial instruments of approximately $1.3 billion and
$1.6 billion at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The theoretical changes from the prior year are primarily driven by
changes in foreign currency activities related to long-term debt and derivatives.
Financing Risks
Refer to the “Description of Business” on page 14 for a discussion of the financing risks associated with the Financing business and
management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
FINANCING
Financing is a reportable segment that facilitates IBM clients’ acquisition of hardware, software and services by providing financing
solutions, while generating solid returns on equity.
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
Yr.-to-Yr.
Percent
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 Change
Revenue $ 713 $ 741 (3.7) %
Segment profit (1) $ 348 $ 373 (6.6) %
(1)Prior-year amounts recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Financing revenue decreased 3.7 percent (2.5 percent adjusted for currency) to $713 million compared to the prior year. Financing
segment profit decreased 6.6 percent to $348 million compared to the prior year and the segment profit margin of 48.8 percent
decreased 1.5 points. The decreases in revenue and segment profit are primarily driven by a reduction in used equipment sales.
Financial Position
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Cash and cash equivalents $ 561 $ 555
Client financing receivables
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases (1) 3,490 4,237
Client loans 6,804 6,486
Total client financing receivables $ 10,294 $ 10,723
Commercial financing receivables
Held for investment 1,317 1,155
Held for sale 900 692
Other receivables 17 26
Total external receivables (2) $ 12,528 $ 12,596
Intercompany assets (3) 800 963
Other assets 187 294
Total assets $ 14,075 $ 14,409
Debt (4) 12,116 11,879
Other liabilities (5)(6) 613 1,205
Total liabilities (5) $ 12,729 $ 13,085
Total equity (5) $ 1,346 $ 1,324
Total liabilities and equity $ 14,075 $ 14,409
(1)Includes deferred initial direct costs which are expensed in IBM’s consolidated financial results.
(2)The difference between the change in total external receivables of $(0.1) billionand the $(0.4) billionchange in Financing segment’s receivables
disclosed in the free cash flow presentation on page 35 is primarily attributable to currency impacts.
(3)Total amount is eliminated in IBM’s consolidated financial results and therefore does not appear in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
(4)Financing segment debt is primarily composed of intercompany loans.
(5)Prior-year amounts recast to reflect January 2024 segment change. Other liabilities have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024
presentation.
(6)Includes intercompany payables of $0.4 billion at December 31, 2023. There were no intercompany payables outstanding at December 31, 2024.
These intercompany payables were eliminated in IBM’s consolidated financial results.

===== PAGE 44 =====
42 Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Financing Segment Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external Financing segment receivables excluding receivables classified as held for sale, and
immaterial miscellaneous receivables.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Amortized cost (1) $ 11,738 $ 12,034
Specific allowance for credit losses 99 111
Unallocated allowance for credit losses 29 45
Total allowance for credit losses 128 156
Net financing receivables $ 11,611 $ 11,878
Allowance for credit losses coverage 1.1 % 1.3 %
(1)Includes deferred initial direct costs which are expensed in IBM’s consolidated financial results.
The percentage of Financing segment receivables reserved decreased from 1.3 percent at December 31, 2023, to 1.1 percent at
December 31, 2024 primarily driven by improvements in forward looking economic indicators.
We continue to apply our rigorous credit policies. Approximately 74 percent of the total external portfolio was with investment-
grade clients, an increase of 2 points compared to December 31, 2023. This investment grade percentage is based on the credit
ratings of the companies in the portfolio and reflects certain mitigating actions taken to reduce the risk to IBM.
For additional information related to the company’s sales of receivables, refer to “Transfer of Financial Assets” in note K, “Financing
Receivables.”
Return on Equity Calculation
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023 (1)
Numerator
Financing after-tax segment profit (A) (2) $ 287 $ 311
Denominator
Average Financing equity (B) (3) $ 1,231 $ 1,240
Financing return on equity (A)/(B) 23.3 % 25.1 %
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
(2)Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate, which is a function of IBM’s provision for income taxes determined on a consolidated basis.
(3)Average of the ending equity for Financing for the last five quarters.
Return on equity was 23.3 percent compared to 25.1 percent for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The
decrease was driven by a decrease in net income.
Residual Value
The following table presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed residual value for sales-type and direct financing leases at
December 31, 2024 and 2023. In addition, the table presents the run out of when the unguaranteed residual value assigned to
equipment on leases at December 31, 2024, is expected to be returned to the company. The unguaranteed residual value for
operating leases at December 31, 2024 and 2023 was not material. For additional information related to the company’s residual
value, refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Estimated Run Out of December 31, 2024 Balance
At December 31, At December 31, 2028
2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 and Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases $ 458 $ 479 $ 145 $ 115 $ 141 $ 78

===== PAGE 45 =====
Report of Management 43
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM
management. The accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain estimates and judgments as required.
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines of
responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive systems and control procedures. An important element of the control
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to
correct deficiencies as they are identified.
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective
functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest
ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are
distributed to employees throughout the world, and reemphasized through internal programs to assure that they are understood
and followed.
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed solely of independent, non-management directors, and is responsible
for recommending to the Board the independent registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets regularly and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm,
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure
and financial reporting matters.
Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company.
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally
accepted in the United States of America.
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of
records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii)
provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide
reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s
assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting based on the criteria
established in Internal Control–Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the company’s internal control over financial reporting
was effective as of December 31, 2024.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits
conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States).

===== PAGE 46 =====
44 Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Board of Directors and Stockholders of International Business Machines Corporation
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying consolidated balance sheets of International Business Machines Corporation and its
subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, and the related consolidated statements of income, of
comprehensive income, of equity and of cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2024, including
the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We also have audited the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework
(2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position
of the Company as of December 31, 2024 and 2023, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in
the period ended December 31, 2024 in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of
December 31, 2024, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the COSO.
Basis for Opinions
The Company’s management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control
over financial reporting, and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the
accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the
Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audits.
We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States) (PCAOB) and are
required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules
and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the
audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement,
whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of
the consolidated financial statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such
procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial
statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as
well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial
reporting included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material
weakness exists, and testing and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk.
Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our
audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of
the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable
assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that
could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also,
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because
of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.

===== PAGE 47 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm 45
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matter communicated below is a matter arising from the current period audit of the consolidated financial
statements that was communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or
disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or
complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our opinion on the consolidated financial
statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate opinion on the
critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Income Taxes – Uncertain Tax Positions
As described in Notes A and G to the consolidated financial statements, the Company is subject to income taxes in the United States
and numerous foreign jurisdictions. As disclosed by management, during the ordinary course of business there are many
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination is uncertain. As a result, management recognizes tax
liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. As further described by management, these tax
liabilities are recognized when, despite management’s belief that the tax return positions are supportable, management believes
that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. Management bases its assessment of the accruals
for tax liabilities on many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax law. These assessments rely on estimates and
assumptions and may involve a series of complex judgments about future events. As of December 31, 2024, unrecognized tax
benefits were $8.9 billion..
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to uncertain tax positions is a critical audit
matter are the significant judgment by management when estimating the uncertain tax positions, including applying complex tax
laws, and a high degree of estimation uncertainty based on potential for significant adjustments as a result of audits by tax
authorities or other forms of tax settlement. This in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, effort, and subjectivity in
performing procedures to evaluate management’s timely identification and measurement of uncertain tax positions. Also, the
evaluation of audit evidence available to support the uncertain tax positions is complex and required significant auditor judgment as
the nature of the evidence is often inherently subjective, and the audit effort involved the use of professionals with specialized skill
and knowledge.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion
on the consolidated financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the
identification and recognition of the uncertain tax positions, and controls addressing completeness of the uncertain tax positions, as
well as controls over measurement of the amount recorded. These procedures also included, among others (i) testing the
information used in the calculation of the uncertain tax positions, including intercompany agreements and international, federal, and
state filing positions; (ii) testing the calculation of the uncertain tax positions by jurisdiction, including management’s assessment of
the technical merits of tax positions and estimates of the amount of tax benefit expected to be sustained; (iii) testing the
completeness of management’s assessment of both the identification of uncertain tax positions and possible outcomes of each
uncertain tax position; and (iv) evaluating the status and results of income tax audits pending in various tax jurisdictions.
Professionals with specialized skill and knowledge were used to assist in the evaluation of the completeness and measurement of
the Company’s uncertain tax positions, including evaluating the reasonableness of management’s assessment of whether tax
positions are more-likely-than-not of being sustained and the amount of potential benefit to be realized.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 25, 2025
We, or firms that we have ultimately acquired, have served as the Company’s auditor since 1923. For the period from 1923 to 1958,
the Company was audited by firms that a predecessor firm to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP ultimately acquired.

===== PAGE 48 =====
46 Consolidated Income Statement
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2024 2023 2022
Revenue
Services $ 29,813 $ 30,378 $ 30,206
Sales 32,231 30,745 29,673
Financing 709 737 651
Total revenue C 62,753 61,860 60,530
Cost
Services 20,529 21,051 21,062
Sales 6,303 6,127 6,374
Financing 369 382 406
Total cost 27,201 27,560 27,842
Gross profit 35,551 34,300 32,687
Expense and other (income)
Selling, general and administrative 19,688 19,003 18,609
Research, development and engineering 7,479 6,775 6,567
Intellectual property and custom development income (996) (860) (663)
Other (income) and expense (1) F 1,871 (914) 5,803
Interest expense O&S 1,712 1,607 1,216
Total expense and other (income) 29,754 25,610 31,531
Income from continuing operations before income taxes 5,797 8,690 1,156
Provision for/(benefit from) income taxes (1) G (218) 1,176 (626)
Income from continuing operations 6,015 7,514 1,783
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax 8 (12) (143)
Net income (1) $ 6,023 $ 7,502 $ 1,639
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock (1)
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations H $ 6.42 $ 8.15 $ 1.95
Discontinued operations H 0.01 (0.01) (0.16)
Total H $ 6.43 $ 8.14 $ 1.80
Basic
Continuing operations H $ 6.53 $ 8.25 $ 1.97
Discontinued operations H 0.01 (0.01) (0.16)
Total H $ 6.53 $ 8.23 $ 1.82
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution 937,161,224 922,073,828 912,269,062
Basic 921,767,834 911,210,319 902,664,190
(1)2024 and 2022 include the impacts of pension settlement charges. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 49 =====
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income 47
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: Notes 2024 2023 2022
Net income $ 6,023 $ 7,502 $ 1,639
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
Foreign currency translation adjustments R 301 3 176
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities R
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 2 0 (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities 2 0 (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges R
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period 389 207 241
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income 85 (159) (400)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges 474 47 (158)
Retirement-related benefit plans R
Prior service costs/(credits) (56) 2 463
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 70 (3,115) 878
Curtailments and settlements 3,159 5 5,970
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (7) (9) 12
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 975 515 1,596
Total retirement-related benefit plans 4,142 (2,602) 8,919
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax R 4,919 (2,552) 8,936
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income R (1,426) 531 (2,442)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) R 3,492 (2,021) 6,494
Total comprehensive income $ 9,516 $ 5,481 $ 8,134
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 50 =====
48 Consolidated Balance Sheet
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31: Notes 2024 2023
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents $ 13,947 $ 13,068
Restricted cash 214 21
Marketable securities I 644 373
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $114 in 2024 and $192 in 2023) 6,804 7,214
Short-term financing receivables K
Held for investment (net of allowances of $109 in 2024 and $129 in 2023) 6,259 6,102
Held for sale 900 692
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $31 in 2024 and $109 in 2023) 947 640
Inventory J 1,289 1,161
Deferred costs C 959 998
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 2,520 2,639
Total current assets 34,482 32,908
Property, plant and equipment L 17,691 18,122
Less: Accumulated depreciation L 11,959 12,621
Property, plant and equipment—net L 5,731 5,501
Operating right-of-use assets—net M 3,197 3,220
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $19 in 2024 and $27 in 2023) K 5,353 5,766
Prepaid pension assets U 7,492 7,506
Deferred costs C 788 842
Deferred taxes G 6,978 6,656
Goodwill N 60,706 60,178
Intangible assets—net N 10,660 11,036
Investments and sundry assets 1,787 1,626
Total assets $ 137,175 $ 135,241
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes G $ 2,033 $ 2,270
Short-term debt I&O 5,089 6,426
Accounts payable 4,032 4,132
Compensation and benefits 3,605 3,501
Deferred income 13,907 13,451
Operating lease liabilities M 768 820
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 3,709 3,521
Total current liabilities 33,142 34,122
Long-term debt I&O 49,884 50,121
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations U 9,432 10,808
Deferred income 3,622 3,533
Operating lease liabilities M 2,655 2,568
Other liabilities P 11,048 11,475
Total liabilities 109,783 112,628
Commitments and Contingencies Q
Equity R
IBM stockholders' equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital 61,380 59,643
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2024—2,279,164,313; 2023—2,266,911,160)
Retained earnings 151,163 151,276
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2024—1,352,874,243; 2023—1,351,897,514) (169,968) (169,624)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (15,269) (18,761)
Total IBM stockholders' equity 27,307 22,533
Noncontrolling interests A 86 80
Total equity 27,393 22,613
Total liabilities and equity $ 137,175 $ 135,241
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 51 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 49
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income $ 6,023 $ 7,502 $ 1,639
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash provided by operating activities
Pension settlement charges 3,113 — 5,894
Depreciation (1) 2,168 2,109 2,407
Amortization of capitalized software and acquired intangible assets 2,499 2,287 2,395
Stock-based compensation 1,311 1,133 987
Deferred taxes (2,330) (1,114) (2,726)
Net (gain)/loss on divestitures, asset sales and other (652) (170) (363)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables) (374) 725 (539)
Retirement related 265 (462) 331
Inventory (166) 390 71
Other assets/other liabilities 1,601 1,466 126
Accounts payable (13) 65 213
Net cash provided by operating activities 13,445 13,931 10,435
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment (1,048) (1,245) (1,346)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment/other 557 321 111
Investment in software (637) (565) (626)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments (7,762) (11,143) (5,930)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments 6,544 10,647 4,665
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired (3,289) (5,082) (2,348)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred 698 (4) 1,272
Net cash provided by/(used in) investing activities (4,937) (7,070) (4,202)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt 5,705 9,586 7,804
Payments to settle debt (6,615) (5,082) (6,800)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net 30 (7) 217
Common stock repurchases for tax withholdings (651) (402) (407)
Proceeds from issuance of shares (2) 745 414 279
Financing—other (2) (145) (239) (103)
Cash dividends paid (6,147) (6,040) (5,948)
Net cash provided by/(used in) financing activities (7,079) (1,769) (4,958)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash (359) 9 (244)
Net change in cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash 1,071 5,101 1,032
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at January 1 13,089 7,988 6,957
Cash, cash equivalents and restricted cash at December 31 $ 14,160 $ 13,089 $ 7,988
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received $ 1,723 $ 1,564 $ 1,865
Interest paid on debt $ 1,978 $ 1,668 $ 1,401
(1)Includes operating lease right-of-use assets amortization expense of $0.9 billion in 2024, 2023 and 2022.
(2)Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024 presentation.
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 52 =====
50 Consolidated Statement of Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2022
Equity, January 1, 2022 $ 57,319 $ 154,209 $ (169,392) $ (23,234) $ 18,901 $ 95 $ 18,996
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 1,639 1,639 1,639
Other comprehensive income/
(loss) 6,494 6,494 6,494
Total comprehensive income $ 8,134 $ 8,134
Cash dividends paid—common
stock ($6.59 per share) (5,948) (5,948) (5,948)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (8,539,072
shares) 962 962 962
Purchases (3,027,994 shares) and
sales (2,512,300 shares) of
treasury stock under employee
plans—net (12) (92) (104) (104)
Other equity 63 (63) 0 0
Changes in noncontrolling interests (18) (18)
Equity, December 31, 2022 $ 58,343 $ 149,825 $ (169,484) $ (16,740) $ 21,944 $ 77 $ 22,021
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2023
Equity, January 1, 2023 $ 58,343 $ 149,825 $ (169,484) $ (16,740) $ 21,944 $ 77 $ 22,021
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 7,502 7,502 7,502
Other comprehensive income/
(loss) (2,021) (2,021) (2,021)
Total comprehensive income $ 5,481 $ 5,481
Cash dividends paid—common
stock ($6.63 per share) (6,040) (6,040) (6,040)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (9,794,240
shares) 1,300 1,300 1,300
Purchases (2,953,554 shares) and
sales (2,080,983 shares) of
treasury stock under employee
plans—net (11) (140) (152) (152)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 3 3
Equity, December 31, 2023 $ 59,643 $ 151,276 $ (169,624) $ (18,761) $ 22,533 $ 80 $ 22,613
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 53 =====
Consolidated Statement of Equity 51
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Common
Stock and Accumulated
Additional Other Total IBM Non-
Paid-in Retained Treasury Comprehensive Stockholders’ Controlling Total
Capital Earnings Stock Income/(Loss) Equity Interests Equity
2024
Equity, January 1, 2024 $ 59,643 $ 151,276 $ (169,624) $ (18,761) $ 22,533 $ 80 $ 22,613
Net income plus other
comprehensive income/(loss)
Net income 6,023 6,023 6,023
Other comprehensive income/
(loss) 3,492 3,492 3,492
Total comprehensive income $ 9,516 $ 9,516
Cash dividends paid—common
stock ($6.67 per share) (6,147) (6,147) (6,147)
Common stock issued under
employee plans (12,253,153
shares) 1,737 1,737 1,737
Purchases (3,430,885 shares) and
sales (2,454,155 shares) of
treasury stock under employee
plans—net 11 (343) (332) (332)
Changes in noncontrolling interests 6 6
Equity, December 31, 2024 $ 61,380 $ 151,163 $ (169,968) $ (15,269) $ 27,307 $ 86 $ 27,393
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of the financial statements.

===== PAGE 54 =====
52 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE A. SIGNIFICANT ACCOUNTING POLICIES
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and footnotes of the International Business Machines Corporation (IBM or
“the company”) have been prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America
(GAAP).
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers for
disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior-year amounts
have been reclassified to conform to the change in current year presentation. This is annotated where applicable.
Over the past several years, the company has taken actions to reduce the risk profile of its worldwide retirement-related plans,
while at the same time increasing the funded status of the plans. In 2022 and 2024, non-participating single group annuity
contracts were purchased from insurers which irrevocably transferred to the insurers certain defined benefit (“DB”) pension
obligations and related plan assets, as described below. There were no changes to the amount of benefits payable to the
participants and beneficiaries of the plans transferred. These pension transfers reduced the company’s pension obligations and
assets by approximately the same amount and were purchased using assets from their respective retirement plans with no
additional funding contributions required from the company. Each transaction resulted in the recognition of a one-time, non-cash,
pre-tax pension settlement charge (“pension settlement charge”) in the respective period of the pension transfer. Additional details
of each transfer are included below:
In September 2022, the IBM Personal Pension Plan (“Qualified PPP”) irrevocably transferred to insurers approximately $16 billion
of the Qualified PPP’s DB pension obligations and related plan assets. As a result of this transaction, the company recognized a
pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2022.
In September 2024, the Qualified PPP irrevocably transferred to an insurer approximately $6 billion of the Qualified PPP’s DB
pension obligations and related plan assets. As a result of this transaction, the company recognized a pension settlement charge of
$2.7 billion ($2.0 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2024.
In October 2024, IBM Canada LTD (“IBMC”) irrevocably transferred to insurers approximately $1.2 billion of the IBMC IBM
Retirement Plan DB pension obligations and related plan assets. As a result of this transaction, the company recognized a pension
settlement charge of $0.4 billion in the fourth quarter of 2024.
The pension settlement charges described above were primarily related to the accelerated recognition of accumulated actuarial
losses of the plans. The tax benefits associated with these pension settlement charges are reflected as an adjustment to reconcile
net income to net cash provided by operating activities within deferred taxes in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Refer to
note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
The company reported a benefit from income taxes of $218 million and $626 million for the years ended December 31, 2024 and
December 31, 2022, respectively. The 2024 and 2022 tax benefits were driven by the tax impact of the pension settlement charges,
as described above. The 2024 tax benefit was also driven by the resolution of certain tax audit matters. Refer to note G, “Taxes,” for
additional information.
Noncontrolling interest amounts of $17 million, $16 million and $20 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2024,
2023 and 2022, respectively, are included as a reduction within other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are primarily majority
owned. Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported as a component of total equity in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. Net income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest are reported as described above in the
Consolidated Income Statement. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included in the Consolidated Financial
Statements, if required. Investments in business entities in which the company does not have control but has the ability to exercise
significant influence over operating and financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and the company’s
proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, equity method
investments were $108 million and $125 million, respectively. Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities lacking controlling
financial interest or significant influence are primarily measured at cost, absent other indicators of fair value, net of impairment, if
any. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, equity investments measured at cost were $156 million and $131 million, respectively.
Equity method investments and equity investments measured at cost are included in investments and sundry assets in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet. The accounting policy for other investments in equity securities is described within the “Marketable
Securities” section of this note. All intercompany transactions and accounts have been eliminated in IBM’s consolidated financial
results.

===== PAGE 55 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 53
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires management to make estimates and assumptions that
affect amounts that are reported in the Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclosures. Estimates are made for
the following, among others: revenue, costs to complete service contracts, income taxes, pension assumptions, valuation of assets
including goodwill and intangible assets, loss contingencies, allowance for credit losses and other matters. These estimates are
based on management’s best knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that the company may undertake in the
future and on various other assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. Actual results may be
different from these estimates.
In the fourth quarter of 2022, the company completed its annual assessment of the useful lives of its information technology
equipment. Due to advances in technology, the company determined it should increase the estimated useful lives of its server and
network equipment from five to six years for new assets and from three to four years for used assets. This change in accounting
estimate was effective beginning January 1, 2023.
Revenue
The company accounts for a contract with a client when it has written approval, the contract is committed, the rights of the parties,
including payment terms, are identified, the contract has commercial substance and consideration is probable of collection.
Revenue is recognized when, or as, control of a promised product or service transfers to a client, in an amount that reflects the
consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for transferring those products or services. If the
consideration promised in a contract includes a variable amount, the company estimates the amount to which it expects to be
entitled using either the expected value or most likely amount method. The company’s contracts may include terms that could
cause variability in the transaction price, including, for example, rebates, volume discounts, service-level penalties, and
performance bonuses or other forms of contingent revenue.
The company only includes estimated amounts in the transaction price to the extent it is probable that a significant reversal of
cumulative revenue recognized will not occur when the uncertainty associated with the variable consideration is resolved. The
company may not be able to reliably estimate contingent revenue in certain long-term arrangements due to uncertainties that are
not expected to be resolved for a long period of time or when the company’s experience with similar types of contracts is limited.
The company’s arrangements infrequently include contingent revenue. Changes in estimates of variable consideration are included
in note C, “Revenue Recognition.”
The company’s standard billing terms are that payment is due upon receipt of invoice, payable within 30 days. Invoices are
generally issued as control transfers and/or as services are rendered. Additionally, in determining the transaction price, the
company adjusts the promised amount of consideration for the effects of the time value of money if the billing terms are not
standard and the timing of payments agreed to by the parties to the contract provide the client or the company with a significant
benefit of financing, in which case the contract contains a significant financing component. As a practical expedient, the company
does not account for significant financing components if the period between when the company transfers the promised product or
service to the client and when the client pays for that product or service will be one year or less. Most arrangements that contain a
financing component are financed through the company’s Financing business and include explicit financing terms.
The company may include subcontractor services or third-party vendor equipment or software in certain integrated services
arrangements. In these types of arrangements, revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services is recorded net of
costs when the company is acting as an agent between the client and the vendor, and gross when the company is the principal for
the transaction. To determine whether the company is an agent or principal, the company considers whether it obtains control of the
products or services before they are transferred to the customer. In making this evaluation, several factors are considered, most
notably whether the company has primary responsibility for fulfillment to the client, as well as inventory risk and pricing discretion.
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as resellers) when the
reseller has economic substance apart from the company and the reseller is considered the principal for the transaction with the
end-user client.
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions.
In addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific revenue recognition policies for arrangements with
multiple performance obligations and for each major category of revenue.

===== PAGE 56 =====
54 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Arrangements with Multiple Performance Obligations
The company’s global capabilities as a hybrid cloud platform and AI company include services, software, hardware and related
financing. The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist of any combination of these products and services
based on the needs of its clients.
The company continues to develop new products and offerings and their associated consumption and delivery methods, including
the use of cloud and as-a-Service models. These are not separate businesses; they are offerings across the segments that address
market opportunities in areas such as cloud, data, AI, analytics and security. Revenue from these offerings follows the specific
revenue recognition policies for arrangements with multiple performance obligations and for each major category of revenue,
depending on the type of offering, which are comprised of services, software and/or hardware.
To the extent that a product or service in multiple performance obligation arrangements is subject to other specific accounting
guidance, such as leasing guidance, that product or service is accounted for in accordance with such specific guidance. For all other
products or services in these arrangements, the company determines if the products or services are distinct and allocates the
consideration to each distinct performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis.
When products and services are not distinct, the company determines an appropriate measure of progress based on the nature of
its overall promise for the single performance obligation.
The revenue policies in the Services, Hardware and/or Software sections below are applied to each performance obligation, as
applicable.
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include consulting services, including business transformation; technology consulting and
application operations including the design and development of complex IT environments to a client’s specifications (e.g., design
and build); cloud services; business process outsourcing; security services and infrastructure support. Many of these services can be
delivered entirely or partially through cloud or as-a-Service delivery models. The company’s services are provided on a time-and-
material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the contract terms generally range
from less than one year to 5 years.
In services arrangements, the company typically satisfies the performance obligation and recognizes revenue over time. In design
and build arrangements, the performance obligation is satisfied over time either because the client controls the asset as it is created
(e.g., when the asset is built at the customer site) or because the company’s performance does not create an asset with an
alternative use and the company has an enforceable right to payment plus a reasonable profit for performance completed to date.
In most other services arrangements, the performance obligation is satisfied over time because the client simultaneously receives
and consumes the benefits provided as the company performs the services.
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized on an output basis as labor hours are delivered and/or direct expenses are
incurred. Revenue from as-a-Service type contracts, such as Infrastructure-as-a-Service, is recognized either on a straight-line
basis or on a usage basis, depending on the terms of the arrangement (such as whether the company is standing ready to perform or
whether the contract has usage-based metrics). If an as-a-Service contract includes setup activities, those promises in the
arrangement are evaluated to determine if they are distinct.
In areas such as application management, business process outsourcing and other cloud-based services arrangements, the
company determines whether the services performed during the initial phases of the arrangement, such as setup activities, are
distinct. In most cases, the arrangement is a single performance obligation comprised of a series of distinct services that are
substantially the same and that have the same pattern of transfer (i.e., distinct days of service). The company applies a measure of
progress (typically time-based) to any fixed consideration and allocates variable consideration to the distinct periods of service
based on usage. As a result, revenue is generally recognized over the period the services are provided on a usage basis. This results
in revenue recognition that corresponds with the value to the client of the services transferred to date relative to the remaining
services promised.
Revenue related to maintenance and infrastructure support and extended warranty is recognized on a straight-line basis over the
period of performance because the company is standing ready to provide services.
In design and build contracts, revenue is recognized based on progress toward completion of the performance obligation using a
cost-to-cost measure of progress. Revenue is recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total
estimated labor costs to fulfill the contract. Due to the nature of the work performed in these arrangements, the estimation of cost
at completion is complex, subject to many variables and requires significant judgment. Key factors reviewed by the company to
estimate costs to complete each contract are future labor and product costs and expected productivity efficiencies. Changes in
original estimates are reflected in revenue on a cumulative catch-up basis in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise to

===== PAGE 57 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 55
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
the revision become known by the company. Refer to note C, “Revenue Recognition,” for the amount of revenue recognized in the
reporting period on a cumulative catch-up basis (i.e., from performance obligations satisfied, or partially satisfied, in previous
periods).
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its design and build services contracts accounted for using a cost-to-cost
measure of progress in order to determine whether the latest estimates of revenues, costs and profits require updating. If at any
time these estimates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is
recorded immediately. For other types of services contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income
of $3,169 million and $3,444 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, is included in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
In other services contracts, the company performs the services prior to billing the client. When the company performs services prior
to billing the client in design and build contracts, the right to consideration is typically subject to milestone completion or client
acceptance and the unbilled accounts receivable is classified as a contract asset. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, contract assets
for services contracts of $403 million and $420 million, respectively, are included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in
the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The remaining amount of unbilled accounts receivable for services contracts of $808 million and
$816 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, are included in notes and accounts receivable–trade in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions.
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of Hybrid Infrastructure solutions including IBM Z as well as Distributed
Infrastructure solutions such as Power and Storage solutions. The capabilities of these products can also be delivered through as-a-
Service or cloud delivery models, such as Infrastructure-as-a-Service and Storage-as-a-Service. The company also offers
installation services for its more complex hardware products. Hardware offerings are often sold with distinct maintenance services,
described in the Services section above.
Revenue from hardware sales is recognized when control has transferred to the customer which typically occurs when the hardware
has been shipped to the client, risk of loss has transferred to the client and the company has a present right to payment for the
hardware. In limited circumstances when a hardware sale includes client acceptance provisions, revenue is recognized either when
client acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the
criteria specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. Revenue from hardware sales-type leases is recognized at
the beginning of the lease term. Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of
the rental or lease.
Revenue from as-a-Service arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or on a usage basis as described in the
Services section above. Installation services are accounted for as distinct performance obligations with revenue recognized as the
services are performed. Shipping and handling activities that occur after the client has obtained control of a product are accounted
for as an activity to fulfill the promise to transfer the product rather than as an additional promised service and, therefore, no
revenue is deferred and recognized over the shipping period.
Software
The company’s software offerings include hybrid platform software solutions, which contain many of the company’s strategic areas
including Red Hat, automation, data and AI, and security; transaction processing, which primarily supports mission-critical systems
for clients; and distributed infrastructure software, which provides operating systems for IBM Z and Power Systems hardware.
These offerings include proprietary software and open-source software, and many can be delivered entirely or partially through as-
a-Service or cloud delivery models, while others are delivered as on-premise software licenses.
Revenue from proprietary perpetual (one-time charge) license software is recognized at a point in time at the inception of the
arrangement when control transfers to the client, if the software license is distinct from the post-contract support (PCS) offered by
the company.
Revenue from proprietary term license software is recognized at a point in time for the committed term of the contract, unless
consideration depends on client usage, in which case revenue is recognized when the usage occurs.
Proprietary term licenses often have a one-month contract term due to client termination rights, in which case, revenue would be
recognized in that month for both the license and PCS. Clients may contract to convert their existing IBM term license software into
perpetual license software plus PCS. When proprietary term license software is converted to perpetual license software, the
consideration becomes fixed with no cancellability and, therefore, revenue for the perpetual license is recognized upon conversion,
consistent with the accounting for other perpetual licenses, as described above. PCS revenue is recognized as described below.

===== PAGE 58 =====
56 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company also has open-source software offerings. Since open-source software is offered under an open-source licensing model
and therefore, the license is available for free, the standalone selling price is zero. As such, when the license is sold with PCS or
other products and services, no consideration is allocated to the license when it is a distinct performance obligation and therefore
no revenue is recognized when control of the license transfers to the client. Revenue is recognized over the PCS period. In certain
cases, open-source software is bundled with proprietary software and, if the open-source software is not considered distinct, the
software bundle is accounted for under a proprietary software model.
Revenue from PCS is recognized over the contract term on a straight-line basis because the company is providing a service of
standing ready to provide support, when-and-if needed, and is providing unspecified software upgrades on a when-and-if available
basis over the contract term.
Revenue from software hosting or Software-as-a-Service (SaaS) arrangements is recognized either on a straight-line basis or on a
usage basis as described in the Services section above. In software hosting arrangements, the rights provided to the client (e.g.,
ownership of a license, contract termination provisions and the feasibility of the client to operate the software) are considered in
determining whether the arrangement includes a license. In arrangements that include a software license, the associated revenue is
recognized in accordance with the software license recognition policy above rather than over time as a service.
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Standalone Selling Price
The company allocates the transaction price to each performance obligation on a relative standalone selling price basis. The
standalone selling price (SSP) is the price at which the company would sell a promised product or service separately to a client. In
most cases, the company is able to establish SSP based on the observable prices of products or services sold separately in
comparable circumstances to similar clients. The company typically establishes SSP ranges for its products and services which are
reassessed on a periodic basis or when facts and circumstances change.
In certain instances, the company may not be able to establish a SSP range based on observable prices, and as a result, the
company estimates SSP. The company estimates SSP by considering multiple factors including, but not limited to, overall market
conditions, including geographic or regional specific factors, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing practices. Additionally, in
certain circumstances, the company may estimate SSP for a product or service by applying the residual approach. Estimating SSP is
a formal process that includes review and approval by the company’s management.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts are recognized as incurred. For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of
external hardware and software accounted for under the cost-to-cost measure of progress are deferred and recognized based on
the labor costs incurred to date (i.e., the measure of progress), as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the
contract as control transfers over time for these performance obligations. Certain eligible, non-recurring costs (i.e., setup costs)
incurred in the initial phases of business process outsourcing contracts and other cloud-based services contracts, including
Software-as-a-Service arrangements, are capitalized when the costs relate directly to the contract, the costs generate or enhance
resources of the company that will be used in satisfying the performance obligation in the future, and the costs are expected to be
recovered. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related to the provisioning, configuring, implementation and training
and other deferred fulfillment costs, including, for example, prepaid assets used in services contracts (i.e., prepaid software or
prepaid maintenance). Capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, which can
include anticipated contract renewals or extensions, consistent with the transfer to the client of the services to which the asset
relates. Additionally, fixed assets associated with these contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the
expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the
asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in business process
outsourcing arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of
benefit. The company performs periodic reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and setup costs. If the
carrying amount is deemed not recoverable, an impairment loss is recognized. Refer to note C, “Revenue Recognition,” for the
amount of deferred costs to fulfill a contract at December 31, 2024 and 2023.
In situations in which a business process outsourcing or other cloud-based services contract is terminated, the terms of the contract
may require the client to reimburse the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamortized deferred contract
costs and additional costs incurred by the company to transition the services.

===== PAGE 59 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 57
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to
research, development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to produce the finished product after technological
feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis
over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded in software cost within cost of sales. The company performs periodic
reviews to ensure that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue. Costs to support or service licensed
programs are charged to software cost within cost of sales as incurred.
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to purchase or develop internal-use software. Internal-use software
programs also include software used by the company to deliver Software-as-a-Service when the client does not receive a license to
the software and the company has no substantive plans to market the software externally. Capitalized costs are amortized on a
straight-line basis over periods ranging up to three years and are recorded in selling, general and administrative expense or cost of
sales, depending on whether the software is used by the company in revenue generating transactions. Additionally, the company
may capitalize certain types of implementation costs and amortize them over the term of the arrangement when the company is a
customer in a cloud-computing arrangement.
Incremental Costs of Obtaining a Contract
Incremental costs of obtaining a contract (e.g., sales commissions) are capitalized and amortized on a straight-line basis over the
expected customer relationship period if the company expects to recover those costs. The expected customer relationship period,
determined based on the average customer relationship period, including expected renewals, for each offering type, is three years.
Expected renewal periods are only included in the expected customer relationship period if commission amounts paid upon renewal
are not commensurate with amounts paid on the initial contract. Incremental costs of obtaining a contract include only those costs
the company incurs to obtain a contract that it would not have incurred if the contract had not been obtained. The company has
determined that certain commissions programs meet the requirements to be capitalized. Some commission programs are not
subject to capitalization as the commission expense is paid and recognized as the related revenue is recognized. Additionally, as a
practical expedient, the company expenses costs to obtain a contract as incurred if the amortization period would have been a year
or less. These costs are included in selling, general and administrative expenses.
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that generally range up to three years, with the majority being either one or
three years. Any cost of standard warranties is accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. The company estimates its
standard warranty costs for products based on historical warranty claim experience and estimates of future spending and applies
this estimate to the revenue stream for products under warranty. Estimated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue
recognized in the current period are charged to cost of sales. The warranty liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly
reflects the remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are
made when actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts,
including extended warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred.
Revenue from extended warranty contracts is initially recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a straight-line
basis over the delivery period because the company is providing a service of standing ready to provide services over such term.
Refer to note Q, “Commitments & Contingencies,” for additional information.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred and included in cost in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to income as incurred, except for certain sales commissions, which
are capitalized and amortized. For further information regarding capitalizing sales commissions, refer to “Incremental Costs of
Obtaining a Contract” above. Expenses of promoting and selling products and services are classified as selling expense and, in
addition to sales commissions, include such items as compensation, advertising and travel. General and administrative expense
includes such items as compensation, IT costs, legal costs, office rental, non-income taxes, and insurance. In addition, general and
administrative expense includes other operating items such as amortization of certain intangible assets, workforce rebalancing
charges related to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, acquisition costs related to business combinations,
environmental remediation costs, and allowance for credit losses.

===== PAGE 60 =====
58 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs as incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are
recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period in which the related advertising and promotional expense is
incurred.
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, agency and promotional expense, was $1,173 million, $1,237 million
and $1,330 million in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed as incurred. These costs are predominantly research and
development expenses, related to scientific research and the application of scientific advances to the development of new and
improved products and their uses, as well as services and their application. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished
product after technological feasibility has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade
secrets and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-
based sales/other transfers. Income from licensing arrangements is recognized at the inception of the license term if the nature of
the company’s promise is to provide a right to use the company’s intellectual property as it exists at that point in time (i.e., the
license is functional intellectual property) and control has transferred to the client. Income is recognized over time if the nature of
the company’s promise is to provide a right to access the company’s intellectual property throughout the license period (i.e., the
license is symbolic intellectual property), such as a trademark license. Income from royalty-based fee arrangements is recognized
at the later of when the subsequent sale or usage occurs or the performance obligation to which some or all of the royalty has been
allocated has been satisfied (or partially satisfied). The company also enters into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and
income from these arrangements is recognized when control transfers to the customer. In addition, the company earns income from
certain custom development projects with strategic technology partners and specific clients. The company records the income from
these projects over time as the company satisfies the performance obligation if there are no repayment provisions and the fee is not
dependent upon the ultimate success of the project.
Government Assistance
The company receives grants from governments and government agencies (government) in support of certain of the company’s
business activities, primarily related to research, job creation, or job training. Grants are generally received in the form of cash as
either a recovery for expenses incurred or as an incentive for meeting certain requirements as agreed to in the grant, with terms
ranging from one to five years. Grants are recorded as credits against Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement
based on the nature of the grant and the expense being offset once the conditions and restrictions of the grant have been met and
payment has been received from the government. When a grant is received before conditions of the grant have been met, the grant
is recorded in other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. For the years ended
December 31, 2024 and 2023, grants recorded in the company’s Consolidated Financial Statements were not material.
Business Combinations and Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired,
the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree are generally recorded at their acquisition date fair values.
Contract assets and contract liabilities are measured in accordance with the guidance on revenue recognition. Goodwill represents
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets.
The primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies between the acquired entities and the company and the
acquired assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as a separately identifiable intangible asset. Goodwill recorded in an
acquisition is assigned to applicable reporting units based on expected revenues or expected cash flows. Identifiable intangible
assets with finite lives are amortized over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology is recorded in cost, and
amortization of all other intangible assets is recorded in SG&A expense. Acquisition-related costs, including advisory, legal,
accounting, valuation and pre-close and other costs, are typically expensed in the periods in which the costs are incurred and are
recorded in SG&A expense. The results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the Consolidated Financial Statements
from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the
carrying amount may not be recoverable. The impairment test is typically based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, the
asset is written down to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. Goodwill is tested for impairment at
least annually, in the fourth quarter and whenever changes in circumstances indicate an impairment may exist. The goodwill
impairment test is performed at the reporting unit level, which is generally at the level of or one level below an operating segment.

===== PAGE 61 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 59
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method.
The estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20
years; land improvements, 20 years; production, engineering, office and other equipment, 2 to 20 years; and information technology
equipment, 1.5 to 6 years. Leasehold improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the related
lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.
As noted within the “Software Costs” section of this note, capitalized software costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over
periods ranging up to 3 years. Other intangible assets are amortized over periods between 1 and 20 years.
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated,
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental liabilities.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated with the retirement of long-lived assets and the liability is
initially recorded at fair value. The related asset retirement costs are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related
assets by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related
assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the
passage of time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the amount of the original expected cash flows to the
related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The funded status is measured as the difference between the fair
value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension plans, the
benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected to be
paid upon retirement based on employee services already rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the nonpension
postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which represents
the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value of plan
assets represents the current market value of assets held in an irrevocable trust fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which
are invested by the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated
and recorded as a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair
value of plan assets, are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligation equal to this
excess.
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value of
benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Income Statement and
includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses
previously recognized as a component of other comprehensive income/(loss) (OCI) and amortization of the net transition asset
remaining in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI). The service cost component of net benefit cost is recorded in
Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement (unless eligible for capitalization) based on the employees’ respective
functions. The other components of net benefit cost are presented separately from service cost within other (income) and expense
in the Consolidated Income Statement.
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are recognized as a component of OCI in the Consolidated Statement of
Comprehensive Income as they arise. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized as a
component of net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions of applicable accounting guidance.
(Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a result of changes in actuarial
assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service granted in plan
amendments.
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such as
compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected return on
plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and mortality rates.

===== PAGE 62 =====
60 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is recorded when the employee renders service to the company. The
charge is recorded in Cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Income Statement based on the employees’ respective functions.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-based awards granted to employees. The company measures
stock-based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee requisite service period. The company grants its employees
Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs); Performance Share Units (PSUs); and stock
options. RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests,
typically over a one- to four-year period. PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately received by the employee
depends on performance against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period. Over the performance period, the
number of shares that will be issued is adjusted based upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. The ultimate
number of shares issued and the related compensation cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the final
performance metrics to the specified targets. Dividend equivalents are not paid on the stock awards described above. The fair value
of the awards is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend
equivalents where applicable and for PSUs assumes that performance targets will be achieved. The company estimates the fair
value of stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Stock-based compensation cost is recorded in Cost, SG&A, and RD&E
in the Consolidated Income Statement based on the employees’ respective functions.
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the
amount of compensation cost recognized and the relevant statutory tax rates. The differences between the deferred tax assets
recognized for financial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax return are recorded as a benefit
or expense to the provision for income taxes in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are
recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. The company
includes Global Intangible Low-Taxed Income (GILTI) in measuring deferred taxes. Valuation allowances are recognized to reduce
deferred tax assets to the amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation allowance,
management considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future taxable
income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies/actions. When the company changes its determination as to the
amount of deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax
expense in the period in which such determination is made.
The company recognizes additional tax liabilities when the company believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon
review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent
likely of being realized upon settlement. The noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in the Consolidated
Balance Sheet. To the extent that new information becomes available which causes the company to change its judgment regarding
the adequacy of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax expense in the period in which such
determination is made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for potential tax assessments are included in
income tax expense.
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local functional currency are translated to U.S. dollars at year-end
exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in OCI. Income and expense items are translated at weighted-average rates
of exchange prevailing during the year.
Inventory, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches
that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company acquired the assets or
liabilities. All other assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange rates
with the transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) and expense. Income and expense items are translated at the
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. These translation gains and losses are included in net income for the
period in which exchange rates change.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company uses derivative financial instruments primarily to manage foreign currency and interest rate risk, and to a lesser extent
equity. The company does not use derivative financial instruments for trading or speculative purposes. Derivatives that qualify for
hedge accounting can be designated as either cash flow hedges, net investment hedges, or fair value hedges. The company may

===== PAGE 63 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 61
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
enter into derivative contracts that economically hedge certain of its risks, even when hedge accounting does not apply, or the
company elects not to apply hedge accounting.
Derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at fair value on a gross basis as either assets or liabilities and
classified as current or noncurrent based upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months.
Changes in the fair value of derivatives designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in OCI and
subsequently reclassified into the same income statement line as the hedged exposure when the underlying hedged item is
recognized in earnings. For forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges of the principal associated with foreign currency
denominated debt, the company excludes the initial forward points from the assessment of hedge effectiveness and recognizes it in
other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement on a straight-line basis over the life of the hedging instrument.
Changes in the fair value of the amounts excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness are recognized in OCI. Effectiveness
for net investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. Changes in the fair value of highly effective net
investment hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial instruments designated as net investment hedges are recorded as
foreign currency translation adjustments in OCI. Unrealized gains or losses on excluded components of net investment hedging
derivatives are recorded in OCI and recognized on a straight-line basis over the life of the hedge in interest expense and cost of
financing in the Consolidated Income Statement. Changes in the fair value of interest rate derivatives designated as a fair value
hedge and the offsetting changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged exposure are recorded in interest expense and cost of
financing. Changes in the fair value of derivatives not designated as hedges are reported in earnings primarily in other (income) and
expense. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for further information.
The cash flows associated with derivatives designated as fair value and cash flow hedges are reported in cash flows from operating
activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges and
derivatives not designated as hedges are reported in cash flows from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash
Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt directly associated with the
settlement of the principal are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated
Statement of Cash Flows.
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based on
market conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. Refer to note I, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,” for further
information. All methods of assessing fair value result in a general approximation of value, and such value may never actually be
realized.
Fair Value Measurement
Fair value is defined as the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date. The company classifies certain assets and liabilities based on the following
fair value hierarchy:
• Level 1–Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that can be accessed at the measurement
date;
• Level 2–Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability, either directly or
indirectly; and
• Level 3–Unobservable inputs for the asset or liability.
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market prices in active markets to measure the fair value and classifies such
items as Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based upon internally developed models that use current
market-based or independently sourced market parameters such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using internally
generated models are classified according to the lowest level input or value driver that is significant to the valuation.
The determination of fair value considers various factors including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates
commensurate with the duration of the instrument.
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base
valuations” calculated using the methodologies described below for several parameters that market participants would consider in
determining fair value:
• Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial instruments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.

===== PAGE 64 =====
62 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
• Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair value. The
methodology is consistent with that applied in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incorporates the company’s
own credit risk as observed in the credit default swap market.
The company holds investments primarily in time deposits, certificates of deposit, and U.S. government debt that are designated as
available-for-sale. The primary objective of the company’s cash and debt investment portfolio is to protect principal by investing in
very liquid investment securities with highly rated counterparties.
Available-for-sale securities are measured for impairment on a recurring basis by comparing the security’s fair value with its
amortized cost basis. If the fair value of the security falls below its amortized cost basis, the change in fair value is recognized in the
period the impairment is identified when the loss is due to credit factors. The change in fair value due to non-credit factors is
recorded in other comprehensive income when the company does not intend to sell and has the ability to hold the investment. The
company’s standard practice is to hold all of its debt security investments classified as available-for-sale until maturity. There were
no impairments for credit losses and no material non-credit impairments recognized for the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023
and 2022.
Certain nonfinancial assets such as property, plant and equipment, land, goodwill and intangible assets are subject to non-recurring
fair value measurements if they are deemed to be impaired. The impairment models used for nonfinancial assets depend on the
type of asset. There were no material impairments of nonfinancial assets for the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with original maturities of three months or less at the date of purchase are considered to be cash
equivalents.
Marketable Securities
The company measures equity investments at fair value with changes recognized in net income.
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the
balance sheet date. Long-term debt securities are included in investments and sundry assets. Debt securities are considered
available-for-sale and are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, in OCI. The realized gains
and losses on available-for-sale debt securities are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Realized gains and losses are calculated based on the specific identification method. Refer to note I, “Financial Assets & Liabilities,”
for additional information.
Inventory
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the lower of average cost or net realizable value.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade and Contract Assets
The company classifies the right to consideration in exchange for products or services transferred to a client as either a receivable or
a contract asset. A receivable is a right to consideration that is unconditional as compared to a contract asset which is a right to
consideration that is conditional upon factors other than the passage of time. The majority of the company’s contract assets
represent unbilled amounts related to design and build services contracts when the cost-to-cost method of revenue recognition is
utilized, revenue recognized exceeds the amount billed to the client, and the right to consideration is subject to milestone
completion or client acceptance. Contract assets are generally classified as current and are recorded on a net basis with deferred
income (i.e., contract liabilities) at the contract level.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables primarily consist of client loan and installment payment receivables (loans) and investment in sales-type and
direct financing leases (collectively referred to as client financing receivables) and commercial financing receivables. Leases are
accounted for in accordance with lease accounting standards. Loans, which are generally unsecured, are primarily for IBM
hardware, software and services. Commercial financing receivables are primarily for working capital financing to business partners
and distributors of IBM products and services. Financing receivables are classified as either held for sale or held for investment,
depending on the company’s intent and ability to hold the underlying contract for the foreseeable future or until maturity or payoff.
Loans and commercial financing receivables are recorded at amortized cost, which approximates fair value.
Transfers of Financial Assets
The company enters into arrangements to sell certain financial assets (primarily notes and accounts receivable–trade and financing
receivables) to third-party financial institutions. For a transfer of financial assets to be considered a sale, the asset must be legally
isolated from the company and the purchaser must have control of the asset (“true sale”). Determining whether all the true sale
requirements have been met includes an evaluation of legal considerations, the extent of the company’s continuing involvement
with the assets transferred and any other relevant consideration. When the true sale criteria are met, the company derecognizes the

===== PAGE 65 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 63
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
carrying value of the financial asset transferred and recognizes a net gain or loss on the sale. The proceeds from these arrangements
are reflected as cash provided by operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. If the true sale criteria are not
met, the transfer is considered a secured borrowing and the financial asset remains on the Consolidated Balance Sheet with
proceeds from the sale recognized as debt and recorded as cash flows from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of
Cash Flows.
Arrangements to sell notes and accounts receivable–trade are used in the normal course of business as part of the company’s cash
and liquidity management. Facilities primarily in the U.S. and several countries in Europe enable the company to sell certain notes
and accounts receivable–trade, without recourse, to third parties in order to manage credit, collection, concentration and currency
risk. The gross amounts sold (the gross proceeds) under these arrangements were $4.2 billion, $3.4 billion and $3.3 billion for the
years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. Within the notes and accounts receivables–trade sold and
derecognized from the Consolidated Balance Sheet, $0.9 billion, $0.5 billion and $1.0 billion remained uncollected from customers
at December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. The fees and the net gains and losses associated with the transfer of notes
and accounts receivables-trade were not material for any of the periods presented. Refer to note K, “Financing Receivables,” for
more information on transfers of financing receivables.
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a product and/or delivery of a service to customers. An allowance
for uncollectible trade receivables and contract assets, if needed, is estimated based on specific customer situations, current and
future expected economic conditions, past experiences of losses, as well as an assessment of potential recoverability of the balance
due.
The company estimates its allowances for expected credit losses for financing receivables by considering past events, including any
historical default, historical concessions and resulting troubled debt restructurings, current economic conditions, any non-
freestanding mitigating credit enhancements, and certain forward-looking information, including reasonable and supportable
forecasts. The methodologies that the company uses to calculate its financing receivables reserves, which are applied consistently
to its different portfolios, are as follows:
Individually Evaluated–The company reviews all financing receivables considered at risk quarterly, and performs an analysis based
upon current information available about the client, such as financial statements, news reports, published credit ratings, current
market-implied credit analysis, as well as collateral net of repossession cost, prior collection history and current and future
expected economic conditions. For loans that are collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the collateral
when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and
calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the
company records a specific reserve.
Collectively Evaluated–The company determines its allowances for credit losses for collectively evaluated financing receivables
(unallocated) based on two portfolio segments: client financing receivables and commercial financing receivables. The company
further segments the portfolio into three classes: Americas, Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) and Asia Pacific.
For client financing receivables, the company uses a credit loss model to calculate allowances based on its internal loss experience
and current conditions and forecasts, by class of financing receivable. The company records an unallocated reserve that is
calculated by applying a reserve rate to its portfolio, excluding accounts that have been individually evaluated and specifically
reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, term and loss history. The allowance is adjusted
quarterly for expected recoveries of amounts that were previously written off or are expected to be written off. Recoveries cannot
exceed the aggregated amount of the previous write-off or expected write-off.
The company considers forward-looking macroeconomic variables such as gross domestic product, unemployment rates, equity
prices and corporate profits when quantifying the impact of economic forecasts on its client financing receivables allowance for
expected credit losses. Macroeconomic variables may vary by class of financing receivables based on historical experiences,
portfolio composition and current environment. The company also considers the impact of current conditions and economic
forecasts relating to specific industries, geographical areas, and client credit ratings, in addition to performing a qualitative review of
credit risk factors across the portfolio. Under this approach, forecasts of these variables over two years are considered reasonable
and supportable. Beyond two years, the company reverts to long-term average loss experience. Forward-looking estimates require
the use of judgment, particularly in times of economic uncertainty.
The portfolio of commercial financing receivables is short term in nature and any allowance for these assets is estimated based on a
combination of write-off history and current economic conditions, excluding any individually evaluated accounts.

===== PAGE 66 =====
64 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Credit-Related Policies
Past Due–The company views client financing receivables as past due when payment has not been received after 90 days,
measured from the original billing date.
Non-Accrual–Non-accrual assets include those receivables (impaired loans or nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and
other accounts for which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all amounts due according to original terms of the
lease or loan agreement. Interest income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections are first applied as a
reduction to principal outstanding. Any cash received in excess of principal payments outstanding is recognized as interest income.
Receivables may be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances, such as a
sustained history of payments.
Write-Off–Receivable losses are charged against the allowance in the period in which the receivable is deemed uncollectible.
Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance. Write-offs of receivables and associated reserves occur to the extent
that the customer is no longer in operation and/or there is no reasonable expectation of additional collections or repossession.
Supplier Financing
The company has supplier finance programs with third-party financial institutions where the company agrees to pay the financial
institutions the stated amounts of invoices from participating suppliers on the originally invoiced maturity date, which have an
average term of 90 to 120 days, consistent with the company's standard payment terms. The financial institutions offer earlier
payment of the invoices at the sole discretion of the supplier for a discounted amount. The company does not provide secured legal
assets or other forms of guarantees under the arrangements. The company is not a party to the arrangements between its suppliers
and the financial institutions. These obligations are recognized as accounts payable in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The
obligations outstanding under these programs at December 31, 2024 and December 31, 2023 were $110 million and $101 million,
respectively. The amount of the invoices received and paid under these obligations was $512 million and $503 million, respectively,
for the year ended December 31, 2024.
Leases
The company conducts business as both a lessee and a lessor. In its ordinary course of business, the company enters into leases as
a lessee for property, plant and equipment. The company is also the lessor of certain equipment, mainly through its Financing
segment.
When procuring goods or services, or upon entering into a contract with its clients, the company determines whether an
arrangement contains a lease at its inception. As part of that evaluation, the company considers whether there is an implicitly or
explicitly identified asset in the arrangement and whether the company, as the lessee, or the client, if the company is the lessor, has
the right to control the use of that asset.
Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
When the company is the lessee, all leases with a term of more than 12 months are recognized as right-of-use (ROU) assets and
associated lease liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease liabilities are measured at the lease commencement date
and determined using the present value of the lease payments not yet paid and the company’s incremental borrowing rate, which
approximates the rate at which the company would borrow on a secured basis in the country where the lease was executed. The
interest rate implicit in the lease is generally not determinable in transactions where the company is the lessee. The ROU asset
equals the lease liability adjusted for any initial direct costs (IDCs), prepaid rent and lease incentives. The company’s variable lease
payments generally relate to payments tied to various indexes, non-lease components and payments above a contractual minimum
fixed amount.
Operating leases are included in operating right-of-use assets–net, current operating lease liabilities and operating lease liabilities
in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. Finance leases are included in property, plant and equipment, short-term debt and long-term
debt in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The lease term includes options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably
certain that the company will exercise that option.
The company made a policy election to not recognize leases with a lease term of 12 months or less in the Consolidated Balance
Sheet.
For all asset classes, the company has elected the lessee practical expedient to combine lease and non-lease components (e.g.,
maintenance services) and account for the combined unit as a single lease component. A significant portion of the company’s lease
portfolio is real estate, which are mainly accounted for as operating leases, and are primarily used for corporate offices and data
centers. The average term of the real estate leases is approximately five years. The company also has equipment leases, such as IT
and semiconductor research equipment, which have lease terms that range from five to ten years. For certain of these operating and
finance leases, the company applies a portfolio approach to account for the lease assets and lease liabilities.

===== PAGE 67 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 65
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
The company typically enters into leases as an alternative means of realizing value from equipment that it would otherwise sell.
Assets under lease primarily include new and used IBM equipment. IBM equipment generally consists of IBM Z, Power and Storage
products.
Lease payments due to IBM are typically fixed and paid in equal installments over the lease term. The majority of the company’s
leases do not contain variable payments that are dependent on an index or a rate. Variable lease payments that do not depend on an
index or a rate (e.g., property taxes), that are paid directly by the company and are reimbursed by the client, are recorded as
revenue, along with the related cost, in the period in which collection of these payments is probable. Payments that are made
directly by the client to a third party, including certain property taxes and insurance, are not considered part of variable payments
and therefore are not recorded by the company. The company has made a policy election to exclude from consideration in contracts
all collections from sales and other similar taxes.
The company’s payment terms for leases are typically unconditional. Therefore, in an instance when the client requests to terminate
the lease prior to the end of the lease term, the client would typically be required to pay the remaining lease payments in full. At the
end of the lease term, the company allows the client to either return the equipment, purchase the equipment at the then-current fair
market value or at a pre-stated purchase price, or renew the lease based on mutually agreed upon terms.
When lease arrangements include multiple performance obligations, the company allocates the consideration in the contract
between the lease components and the non-lease components on a relative standalone selling price basis.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
For a sales-type or direct financing lease, the carrying amount of the asset is derecognized from inventory and a net investment in
the lease is recorded. For a sales-type lease, the net investment in the lease is measured at commencement date as the sum of the
lease receivable and the estimated residual value of the equipment less unearned income and allowance for credit losses. Any
selling profit or loss arising from a sales-type lease is recorded at lease commencement. Selling profit or loss is presented on a
gross basis when the company enters into a lease to realize value from a product that it would otherwise sell in its ordinary course of
business. For segment reporting, the net investment in sales-type leases excluding the allowance for credit losses is recognized as
hardware revenue in the Infrastructure segment, while the estimated residual value less related unearned income is recognized as a
reduction in revenue in the Other revenue category and represents the portion of fair value retained by the company. In transactions
where the company enters into a lease for the purpose of generating revenue by providing financing, the selling profit or loss is
presented on a net basis. Under a sales-type lease, initial direct costs are expensed at lease commencement. Over the term of the
lease, the company recognizes finance income on the net investment in the lease and any variable lease payments, which are not
included in the net investment in the lease.
For a direct financing lease, the net investment in the lease is measured similarly to a sales-type lease, however, the net investment
in the lease is reduced by any selling profit. In a direct financing lease, the selling profit and initial direct costs are deferred at
commencement and recognized over the lease term. The company rarely enters into direct financing leases.
The estimated residual value represents the estimated fair value of the equipment under lease at the end of the lease. The company
estimates the future fair value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market for new and used
equipment and obtaining forward-looking product information such as marketing plans and technology innovations. The company
optimizes the recovery of residual values by extending lease arrangements with, or selling leased equipment to existing clients, and
periodically reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual values. Anticipated decreases in specific future residual values that
are considered to be other-than-temporary are recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as adjustments to the
residual value estimate and unearned income, which reduces current period and future period financing income, respectively.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation.
Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a
weighted-average basis.
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method, which determines EPS for each class of common stock and
participating securities according to dividends and dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights in undistributed
earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common shares
outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of
common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method.
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock awards, convertible notes and stock options.

===== PAGE 68 =====
66 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE B. ACCOUNTING CHANGES
New Standards to be Implemented
Disaggregation of Income Statement Expenses
Standard/Description–Issuance date: November 2024. This guidance requires a new tabular disclosure of certain types of
expenses (including purchases of inventory, employee compensation, depreciation and amortization) that are included within
commonly presented expense captions on the income statement. The guidance also requires the disclosure of a qualitative
description of the amounts remaining in relevant expense captions that are not separately disaggregated quantitatively.
Additionally, the guidance requires the disclosure of the total amount of selling expenses and an entity’s definition of selling
expenses. The disclosures are required on an interim and annual basis.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance is effective for the company for annual reporting periods beginning in
2027, and for interim reporting periods beginning January 1, 2028. Early adoption is permitted. The company expects to adopt the
guidance as of the effective date and to apply the guidance on a prospective basis.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–Given the scope of the work required to implement the new standard,
the company began its assessment process in 2024. A cross-functional implementation team has been established which is
evaluating the need for any changes to systems, processes, data or controls to meet the additional disclosure requirements. As the
guidance is a change to disclosures only, it will impact the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements but will not impact the
consolidated financial results.
Income Tax Disclosures
Standard/Description–Issuance date: December 2023. This guidance requires disaggregated disclosure of the tax rate
reconciliation into eight categories, with further disaggregation required for items greater than a specific threshold. Additionally, the
guidance requires the disclosure of income taxes paid disaggregated by federal, state and foreign jurisdictions.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance is effective January 1, 2025 and early adoption is permitted. The
company expects to adopt the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–As the guidance is a change to disclosures only, it will impact note G,
“Taxes,” but will not impact the consolidated financial results.
Standards Implemented
Segment Reporting Disclosures
Standard/Description–Issuance date: November 2023. This guidance requires the disclosure of significant segment expenses that
are regularly provided to a company’s chief operating decision maker and included within each reported measure of segment profit
or loss. The company must also disclose “other segment items,” which is the difference between segment revenue less significant
expenses for each reported measure of segment profit or loss, and a description of its composition. This guidance also requires all
segment annual disclosures to be provided on an interim basis.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance was effective for annual periods beginning in 2024, and for interim
periods beginning January 1, 2025, and is required to be applied on a retrospective basis to all prior periods presented. Early
adoption was permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance is a change to disclosures only, that impacted note D,
“Segments,” but did not have an impact on the consolidated financial results.
Disclosures of Supplier Finance Program Obligations
Standard/Description–Issuance date: September 2022. This guidance requires an entity to provide certain interim and annual
disclosures about the use of supplier finance programs in connection with the purchase of goods or services.
Effective Date and Adoption Considerations–The guidance was effective January 1, 2023 with certain annual disclosures required
beginning in 2024 and early adoption was permitted. The company adopted the guidance as of the effective date.
Effect on Financial Statements or Other Significant Matters–The guidance is a change to disclosures only, that impacted the
supplier financing disclosure in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” but did not have an impact on the consolidated financial
results.

===== PAGE 69 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 67
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE C. REVENUE RECOGNITION
Disaggregation of Revenue
The following tables provide details of revenue by major products/service offerings and revenue by geography. In the first quarter of
2025, the company announced changes to the reported revenue categories within its Software and Consulting reportable segments.
Since these changes did not occur until first-quarter 2025, the periods presented in this Annual Report are reported under the
historical reported revenue categories, as shown in the following tables. These changes will not impact the company’s Consolidated
Financial Statements or its reportable segments.
Revenue by Major Products/Service Offerings
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) 2022 (1)
Hybrid Platform & Solutions $ 18,808 $ 17,396 $ 16,458
Transaction Processing 8,277 7,615 7,171
Total Software $ 27,085 $ 25,011 $ 23,629
Business Transformation $ 9,347 $ 9,179 $ 8,834
Application Operations 7,692 7,930 7,494
Technology Consulting 3,653 3,775 3,730
Total Consulting $ 20,692 $ 20,884 $ 20,058
Hybrid Infrastructure $ 8,913 $ 9,215 $ 9,451
Infrastructure Support 5,107 5,377 5,837
Total Infrastructure $ 14,020 $ 14,593 $ 15,288
Financing (2) $ 713 $ 741 $ 645
Other $ 243 $ 632 $ 909
Total Revenue $ 62,753 $ 61,860 $ 60,530
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes. Refer to note D, “Segments,” for additional information.
(2)Contains lease and loan financing arrangements which are not subject to the guidance on revenue from contracts with customers.
Revenue by Geography
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Americas $ 31,266 $ 31,666 $ 31,057
Europe/Middle East/Africa 19,429 18,492 17,950
Asia Pacific 12,058 11,702 11,522
Total $ 62,753 $ 61,860 $ 60,530
Remaining Performance Obligations
The remaining performance obligation (RPO) disclosure provides the aggregate amount of the transaction price yet to be recognized
as of the end of the reporting period and an explanation as to when the company expects to recognize these amounts in revenue. It
is intended to be a statement of overall work under contract that has not yet been performed and does not include contracts in
which the customer is not committed, such as certain as-a-Service, governmental, term software license and services offerings. The
customer is not considered committed when they are able to terminate for convenience without payment of a substantive penalty.
The disclosure includes estimates of variable consideration, except when the variable consideration is a sales-based or usage-
based royalty promised in exchange for a license of intellectual property. Additionally, as a practical expedient, the company does
not include contracts that have an original duration of one year or less. RPO estimates are subject to change and are affected by
several factors, including terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, adjustment for revenue that has
not materialized and adjustments for currency.
At December 31, 2024, the aggregate amount of the transaction price allocated to RPO related to customer contracts that are
unsatisfied or partially unsatisfied was approximately $63 billion, of which approximately 67 percent is expected to be recognized
as revenue in the subsequent two years, approximately 29 percent in the subsequent three to five years, and the balance thereafter.
Revenue Recognized for Performance Obligations Satisfied (or Partially Satisfied) in Prior Periods
For the year ended December 31, 2024, revenue for performance obligations satisfied or partially satisfied in previous periods was
immaterial.

===== PAGE 70 =====
68 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliation of Contract Balances
The following table provides information about notes and accounts receivable—trade, contract assets and deferred income
balances.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Notes and accounts receivable — trade (net of allowances of $114 in 2024 and $192 in 2023) $ 6,804 $ 7,214
Contract assets (1) 433 505
Deferred income (current) 13,907 13,451
Deferred income (noncurrent) 3,622 3,533
(1)Included within prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
The amount of revenue recognized during the year ended December 31, 2024 that was included within the deferred income balance
at December 31, 2023 was$11.0 billion and primarily related to software and services.
The following table provides roll forwards of the notes and accounts receivable—trade allowance for expected credit losses for the
years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023.
($ in millions)
January 1, 2024 Additions/(Releases) Write-offs (1) Foreign currency and Other December 31, 2024
$192 $(2) $(78) $2 $114
January 1, 2023 Additions/(Releases) Write-offs (1) Foreign currency and Other December 31, 2023
$233 $32 $(79) $6 $192
(1)The majority of the write-offs during the period related to receivables which had been previously reserved.
The contract assets allowance for expected credit losses was not material in the years endedDecember 31, 2024 and 2023.
Deferred Costs
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Capitalized costs to obtain a contract $ 794 $ 686
Deferred costs to fulfill a contract
Deferred setup costs 326 399
Other deferred fulfillment costs 628 755
Total deferred costs (1) $ 1,748 $ 1,841
(1)Of the total deferred costs, $959 million was current and $788 million was noncurrent at December 31, 2024 and $998 million was current and $842
million was noncurrent at December 31, 2023.
The amount of total deferred costs amortized during the year ended December 31, 2024 was $1,363 million and there were no
material impairment losses incurred. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information on deferred costs
to fulfill a contract and capitalized costs of obtaining a contract.

===== PAGE 71 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 69
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE D. SEGMENTS
In the first quarter of 2024, the company made changes to its organizational structure and management system to better align its
portfolio with the market, increase transparency and improve segment comparability to peers. These changes did not impact the
company's Consolidated Financial Statements, but did impact its reportable segments. Due to the removal of certain components of
segment profitability, as described below, the company also updated the title of its segment performance metric from pre-tax
income from continuing operations to segment profit.
The following table displays the segment updates:
Reportable Segment Change Resulting Segment Implications
The Weather Company asset divestiture (1) - Software Segment
+ Other—divested business
Security Services realignment - Software Segment
+ Consulting Segment
Removal of stock-based compensation and net interest - Software Segment, Consulting Segment, Infrastructure
allocations from segment profitability Segment, Financing Segment (2)
+ Other
(1)The Weather Company asset divestiture closed January 31, 2024.
(2)Presentation of interest for the Financing Segment did not change.
The segments represent components of the company for which separate financial information is available that is utilized on a
regular basis by the chief operating decision maker(Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer)in determining how to allocate
resources and evaluate performance. The segments are determined based on several factors, including client base, homogeneity of
products, technology, delivery channels and similar economic characteristics.
Certain transactions between the segments are recorded to other (income) and expense and are reflected in segment profit.The
company utilizes globally integrated support organizations to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a result, a
considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain marketing
functions and support functions such as Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Resources, Chief Information Office, and
Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., headcount.
When a clear and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with
the company’s management system, e.g., advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of
the shared expenses, which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments. These expenses are associated with the
elimination of internal transactions and other miscellaneous items.

===== PAGE 72 =====
70 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and
measurement system utilized within the company and have been recast for the prior-year periods to reflect the company's segment
changes described above.Performance measurement is based on segment profit.The chief operating decision maker considers
budget-to-actual results of segment profit, both when evaluating the performance of and allocating resources to each of the
segments as well as in developing certain compensation recommendations.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Total
For the year ended December 31 (1): Software Consulting Infrastructure Financing (2) Segments
2024
Revenue $ 27,085 $ 20,692 $ 14,020 $ 713 $ 62,510
Segment cost 4,428 15,103 6,201 372 26,103
Other expense and (income) (3) 13,974 3,535 5,369 (6) 22,872
Segment profit 8,684 2,054 2,450 348 13,535
Revenue year-to-year change 8.3% (0.9) % (3.9) % (3.7) % 2.1%
Segment profit year-to-year change 15.8% (3.6) % (13.4) % (6.6) % 5.5%
Segment profit margin 32.1% 9.9 % 17.5 % 48.8 % 21.7%
2023
Revenue $ 25,011 $ 20,884 $ 14,593 $ 741 $ 61,229
Segment cost 4,289 15,297 6,406 384 26,376
Other expense and (income) (3) 13,222 3,458 5,359 (16) 22,023
Segment profit 7,499 2,130 2,828 373 12,829
Revenue year-to-year change 5.8% 4.1 % (4.5) % 14.8 % 2.7%
Segment profit year-to-year change 6.9% 13.8 % 5.9 % 9.8 % 7.9%
Segment profit margin 30.0% 10.2 % 19.4 % 50.3 % 21.0%
2022
Revenue $ 23,629 $ 20,058 $ 15,288 $ 645 $ 59,621
Segment cost 4,146 14,878 7,212 398 26,634
Other expense and (income) (3) 12,471 3,310 5,405 (92) 21,093
Segment profit 7,012 1,871 2,671 340 11,893
(1)Prior-year amounts recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
(2)Refer to “Segment Assets and Other Items” section below for additional information on financing interest income and expense.
(3)Other expense and (income) by segment primarily includes:
Software - SG&A, RD&E, Other income, Intellectual property and custom development income
Consulting -SG&A
Infrastructure - SG&A, RD&E, Intellectual property and custom development income, Other income
Financing - Intercompany financing net other income, SG&A

===== PAGE 73 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 71
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) 2022 (1)
Revenue
Total reportable segments $ 62,510 $ 61,229 $ 59,621
Other—divested businesses 35 397 774
Other revenue 207 235 135
Total revenue $ 62,753 $ 61,860 $ 60,530
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) 2022 (1)
Pre-tax income from continuing operations
Total reportable segment profit $ 13,535 $ 12,829 $ 11,893
Amortization of acquired intangible assets (1,830) (1,627) (1,747)
Acquisition-related (charges)/income (2) (122) (33) (18)
Non-operating retirement-related (costs)/income (3) (3,457) 39 (6,548)
Kyndryl-related impacts (4) — — (351)
Stock-based compensation (1,311) (1,133) (987)
Net interest excluding the Financing segment (984) (973) (1,071)
Workforce rebalancing charges (5) (692) (435) —
Other—divested businesses (6) 234 83 239
Unallocated corporate amounts and other (7) 425 (59) (254)
Total pre-tax income from continuing operations $ 5,797 $ 8,690 $ 1,156
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
(2)2024 and 2023 include the impacts of foreign exchange derivative contracts entered into by the company prior to the acquisition of StreamSets and
webMethods from Software AG.Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
(3)2024 and 2022 include the impacts of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related
Benefits,” for additional information.
(4)Net impacts for Kyndryl retained shares and related swaps. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
(5)Beginning in the first quarter of 2023, the company updated its measure of segment profit, consistent with its management system, to no longer
allocate workforce rebalancing charges to its reportable segments. Workforce rebalancing charges of $40 million for 2022 were included in the
segments.
(6)2024 includes a gain from the divestiture of The Weather Company assets. 2022 includes a gain from the sale of healthcare software assets. Refer to
note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for additional information.
(7)2024 includes a gain from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 74 =====
72 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Immaterial Items
Equity Method Investments and Equity Method Investments Gains/(Losses)
The equity method investments and the resulting gains and (losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial results of the segments.
Segment Assets and Other Items
Software assets are mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Consulting assets are primarily goodwill
and accounts receivable. Infrastructure assets are primarily goodwill, plant, property and equipment, manufacturing inventory and
accounts receivable. Financing assets are primarily financing receivables and cash and marketable securities.
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equipment, several segments may share leased or owned plant, property
and equipment assets. Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets is assigned to one segment and is not allocated to
each user segment. This is consistent with the company’s management system and is reflected accordingly in the table below. In
those cases, there will not be a precise correlation between segment profit and segment assets.
Depreciation expense and capital expenditures that are reported by each segment also are consistent with the landlord ownership
basis of asset assignment.
Financing interest income of $681 million, $680 million and $582 million for the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively,reflect the income associated with Financing's external client transactions, as well as the income from investment in
cash and marketable securities.Financing interest expense of $369 million, $298 million and $175 million for the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, reflect the expense associated with intercompany loans set to substantially
match the term, currency and interest rate variability underlying the financing receivables and secured borrowings both supporting
Financing’s external client transactions. These secured borrowings are included in note O, “Borrowings.” Financing segment cost
primarily reflects the cost of financing presented in IBM’s Consolidated Income Statement. Intercompany financing activities are
recorded to other (income) and expense and are reflected in segment profit. These intercompany transactions are eliminated in
IBM’s consolidated financial results.
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Total
For the year ended December 31: Software Consulting Infrastructure Financing Segments
2024
Assets $ 60,707 $ 14,826 $ 12,161 $ 14,075 $ 101,769
Depreciation/amortization of non-acquired
intangibles 495 100 1,103 9 1,708
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 338 14 684 11 1,048
2023 (1)
Assets $ 59,811 $ 15,089 $ 11,991 $ 14,409 $ 101,300
Depreciation/amortization of non-acquired
intangibles 510 109 1,018 8 1,646
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 369 21 836 15 1,241
2022 (1)
Assets $ 55,822 $ 14,261 $ 12,243 $ 15,757 $ 98,083
Depreciation/amortization of non-acquired
intangibles 547 112 1,250 14 1,923
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles 463 29 853 27 1,371
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.

===== PAGE 75 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 73
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Assets
Total reportable segments (1) $ 101,769 $ 101,300
Elimination of internal transactions (853) (1,028)
Other—divested businesses (1) 74 601
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable securities 14,243 12,907
Deferred tax assets 6,850 6,468
Plant, other property and equipment 1,952 1,838
Operating right-of-use assets 2,001 2,085
Pension assets 7,492 7,506
Other 3,647 3,563
Total IBM consolidated assets $ 137,175 $ 135,241
(1)Prior-year amount recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s total revenue in 2024, 2023 or 2022.
Geographic Information
The following tables provide information for those countries that are 10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue (1)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
United States $ 25,144 $ 25,309 $ 25,098
Other countries 37,609 36,551 35,432
Total revenue $ 62,753 $ 61,860 $ 60,530
(1)Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client.
Plant and Other Property–Net (1)
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023 2022
United States $ 4,009 $ 3,466 $ 3,209
Other countries 1,717 2,027 2,100
Total $ 5,726 $ 5,492 $ 5,308
(1)Excludes rental machines.
Operating Right-of-Use Assets–Net
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023 2022
United States $ 1,154 $ 1,249 $ 1,074
India (1) 365 218 254
Japan 324 340 259
Other countries (1) 1,355 1,413 1,290
Total $ 3,197 $ 3,220 $ 2,878
(1)Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024 presentation.

===== PAGE 76 =====
74 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Revenue by Classes of Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of products or services within the company’s reportable segments.
Client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. For each of
the segments that include services, Software-as-a-Service, consulting, education, training and other product-related services are
included as services. For each of these segments, software includes product license charges and ongoing subscriptions.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 (1) 2022 (1)
Software
Software $ 24,055 $ 22,409 $ 21,326
Services 3,002 2,562 2,237
Systems 29 40 66
Consulting
Services $ 20,277 $ 20,515 $ 19,757
Software 324 272 207
Systems 91 98 94
Infrastructure
Maintenance $ 3,951 $ 4,138 $ 4,590
Servers 3,693 4,253 4,471
Storage 2,360 2,081 1,989
Services 2,262 2,463 2,653
Software 1,753 1,658 1,585
Financing
Financing $ 681 $ 680 $ 582
Used equipment sales 32 60 64
(1)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes.
NOTE E. ACQUISITIONS & DIVESTITURES
Acquisitions
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions, except otherwise stated, were for 100
percent of the acquired business and are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows, net of acquired cash and cash
equivalents.
The goodwill generated from these acquisitions is primarily attributable to the assembled workforce and the expected synergies
from the integration of the acquired businesses. The identified intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their
useful life which approximates the economic life of the assets.
2024
In 2024, the company completed seven acquisitions within the Software segment and four acquisitions within the Consulting
segment at an aggregate cost of $3,515 million. These acquisitions are expected to enhance the company’s portfolio of products
and services capabilities and further advance IBM’s hybrid cloud and AI strategy.
At December 31, 2024, the remaining cash to be remitted by the company related to certain 2024 acquisitions was $156 million, of
which $90 million was classified as restricted cash in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The remaining cash amount is primarily
expected to be paid in 2025.

===== PAGE 77 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 75
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
December 31, 2024.
($ in millions)
Amortization StreamSets and Other
Life (in Years) webMethods Acquisitions
Current assets $ 347 $ 120
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 12 14
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 1,074 918
Client relationships 1—7 680 167
Completed technology 5—7 550 179
Trademarks 1—7 45 6
Total assets acquired $ 2,707 $ 1,403
Current liabilities 196 66
Noncurrent liabilities 253 81
Total liabilities assumed $ 448 $ 147
Total purchase price $ 2,259 $ 1,256
N/A–Not applicable
The valuation of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed is subject to revision. If additional information becomes available, the
company may further revise the purchase price allocation as soon as practical, but no later than one year from the acquisition date;
however, material changes are not expected.
StreamSets and webMethods–On July 1, 2024, the company completed the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods from
Software AG for approximately $2.3 billion (€2.13 billion) in cash. StreamSets added new data ingestion capabilities to IBM's data
platform and webMethods brought integration platform-as-a-service (iPaaS) capabilities to IBM’s automation solutions. Goodwill of
$1,074 million was assigned to the Software segment. It is expected that 56 percentof the goodwill will be deductible for tax
purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 7.0 years. The
acquisition was integrated into the Software segment. Prior to the acquisition, the company entered into foreign currency derivative
contracts which expired by June 28, 2024. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for financial impacts and additional
information.
Other Acquisitions–Goodwill of $470 million, $439 million and $8 million was assigned to the Consulting, Software and
Infrastructure segments, respectively. It is expected that 5 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.7 years.
Transactions Announced–Each of the announced acquisitions is subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing
conditions.
On April 24, 2024, the company announced its intent to acquire all of the outstanding shares of HashiCorp, Inc. (HashiCorp). IBM’s
and HashiCorp’s combined portfolios will help clients manage growing application and infrastructure complexity and create a
comprehensive end-to-end hybrid cloud platform designed for the AI era. Under the terms of the definitive agreement, HashiCorp’s
shareholders on record immediately prior to the effective time on the closing date will receive $35 per share in cash, representing a
total enterprise value of approximately $6.4 billion. On July 15, 2024,HashiCorp stockholders voted to approve the merger with
IBM. The transaction is expected to close in the first quarterof 2025, subject to regulatory approvals and other customary closing
conditions. Upon closing, HashiCorp will be integrated into the Software segment.
On January 16, 2025, the company announced its intent to acquire an Oracle consultancy company with expertise in driving
business transformations with Oracle Cloud Applications, including for clients in the public sector. The acquisition is expected to
close in the first quarter of 2025. Upon closing, the acquisition will be integrated into the Consulting segment.
On February 25, 2025, the company announced its intent to acquire a provider of enterprise-grade databases to build and deliver
Generative AI applications. The acquisition is expected to close in the second quarter of 2025. Upon closing, the acquisition will be
integrated into the Software segment.

===== PAGE 78 =====
76 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2023
In 2023, the company completed seven acquisitions within the Software segment and two acquisitions within the Consulting
segment at an aggregate cost of $5,197 million.
At December 31, 2024 and2023, the remaining cash to be remitted by the company related to certain 2023acquisitions was not
material.
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
December 31, 2024. Net purchase price adjustments recorded in 2024were not material.
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Apptio, Inc. Acquisitions
Current assets $ 145 $ 83
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 23 20
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 3,501 382
Client relationships 6—10 770 44
Completed technology 5—7 530 108
Trademarks 1—5 35 2
Total assets acquired $ 5,005 $ 639
Current liabilities 250 44
Noncurrent liabilities 143 10
Total liabilities assumed $ 393 $ 54
Total purchase price $ 4,612 $ 585
N/A–Not applicable
Apptio, Inc.–On August 10, 2023, the company completed the acquisition of Apptio, Inc., a leading provider of financial and
operational IT management and optimization software which enables enterprise leaders to deliver enhanced business value across
technology investments. Goodwill of $3,134 million and $367 million was assigned to the Software and Consulting segments,
respectively. It is expected that one percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful
life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 8.7 years. The acquisition was integrated into the Software
segment.
Other Acquisitions–Goodwill of $341 million, $30 million and $11 million was assigned to the Software, Consulting and
Infrastructure segments, respectively. It is expected that none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall
weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.6 years.
2022
In 2022, the company completed four acquisitions within the Software segment and four acquisitions within the Consulting segment
at an aggregate cost of $2,651 million.
At December 31, 2024, the remaining cash to be remitted by the company related to certain 2022 acquisitions was $72 million.

===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 77
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of
December 31, 2023. Net purchase price adjustments recorded in 2023 were not material.
($ in millions)
Amortization Other
Life (in Years) Octo Acquisitions
Current assets $ 119 $ 87
Property, plant and equipment/noncurrent assets 8 8
Intangible assets
Goodwill N/A 829 1,055
Client relationships 7—10 365 204
Completed technology 4—7 30 90
Trademarks 2—3 15 10
Total assets acquired $ 1,366 $ 1,454
Current liabilities 53 52
Noncurrent liabilities 50 15
Total liabilities assumed $ 103 $ 67
Total purchase price $ 1,264 $ 1,387
N/A–Not applicable
Octo–On December 22, 2022, the company completed the acquisition of Octo, an IT modernization and digital transformation
services provider exclusively serving the U.S. federal government. Goodwill of $709 million and $120 million was assigned to the
Consulting and Software segments, respectively. It is expected that 24 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes.
The overall weighted-average useful life of the identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 9.3 years. The acquisition was
integrated into the Consulting segment.
Other acquisitions–Goodwill of $625 million and $431 million was assigned to the Consulting and Software segments, respectively.
It is expected that 52 percent of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of the
identified amortizable intangible assets acquired was 6.7 years.
Divestitures
2024
The Weather Company Assets–On January 31, 2024, the company completed the sale of The Weather Company assets to Zephyr
Buyer, L.P., a wholly-owned subsidiary of Francisco Partners (collectively, Francisco). Under the agreement, Francisco acquired The
Weather Company assets from IBM for $1,100 million inclusive of $250 million of contingent consideration, of which $200 million is
contingent on Francisco’s attainment of certain investment return metrics. The assets include The Weather Company’s digital
consumer-facing offerings, The Weather Channel mobile and cloud-based digital properties including Weather.com, Weather
Underground and Storm Radar, as well as its enterprise offerings for broadcast, media, aviation, advertising technology and data
solutions for other emerging industries.
Upon closing, the company received cash proceeds of $750 million and provided seller financing to Francisco in the form of a
$100 million loan with a term of 7 years. The cash proceeds from the sale were primarily included in cash from investing activities
within the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. The seller financing is a non-cash investing activity. For the year ended
December 31, 2024, the company recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $243 million in other (income) and expense in the
Consolidated Income Statement. As discussed in note D, “Segments,” in the first quarter of 2024, The Weather Company assets
previously reported in the Software segment were moved and recast to the Other—divested businesses category.
Other Divestitures–The company completed two divestitures in 2024. The financial terms related to each of these transactions did
not have a material impact to IBM's Consolidated Financial Statements.
2023
The company completedtwodivestitures in 2023. The financial terms related to each of these transactions did not have a material
impact to IBM’s Consolidated Financial Statements.

===== PAGE 80 =====
78 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
2022
Healthcare Software Assets–On June 30, 2022, the company completed the sale of healthcare software assets for the U.S. and
Canada to Francisco Partners (Francisco) and received a cash payment of $1,065 million. Subsequent closings were completed in
most other countries in the second half of 2022, with the remaining country closings completed in 2023. The assets included Health
Insights, MarketScan, Clinical Development, Social Program Management, Micromedex, and imaging software offerings. In addition,
IBM provided Francisco with transition services including IT and other services. For the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and
2022, the company recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of$13 million, $45 million and $258 million, respectively, in other (income)
and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
Other Divestitures–In the first quarter of 2022, the Infrastructure segment completed one divestiture. The financial terms related to
this transaction did not have a material impact to IBM’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
Sale of Assets
2024
On August 31, 2024, the company completed the sale of certain QRadar SaaS (software-as-a-service) assets including QRadar
intellectual property, customer relationships and customer contracts to Palo Alto Networks (Palo Alto). Upon closing, the company
received cash proceeds of $500 million from Palo Alto. Proceeds of $437 million from the sale were included in proceeds from
disposition of property, plant and equipment/other within cash from investing activities and the remaining $63 million related to
transition and migration services described below were included within cash from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement
of Cash Flows. For the year ended December 31, 2024, the company recognized a pre-tax gain on sale of $349 million in other
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
In connection with the sale of the QRadar SaaS assets, IBM and Palo Alto are facilitating the migration of QRadar SaaS and IBM's
QRadar on-premise (on-prem) clients who choose to migrate to Palo Alto’s Cortex XSIAM, their security operations (SOC) platform.
As part of the agreement, IBM will receive incremental future cash payments from Palo Alto for QRadar on-prem clients who choose
to migrate to the Cortex XSIAM platform. Until this migration is completed, or contracts expire, the contractual relationship with
certain QRadar SaaS and IBM’s QRadar on-prem clients remains with IBM. IBM also provides Palo Alto with transition services
including support, operations and other services for QRadar SaaS customer contracts. The client migrations to Cortex XSIAM
platform and transition services did not have a material impact on IBM’s Consolidated Financial Statements in 2024.
NOTE F. OTHER (INCOME) AND EXPENSE
Components of other (income) and expense are as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Other (income) and expense
(Gains)/losses on foreign currency transactions (1) $ (458) $ 116 $ (643)
(Gains)/losses on derivative instruments (1) 515 (17) 225
Interest income (747) (670) (162)
Net (gains)/losses from securities and investment assets (20) (39) 278
Retirement-related costs/(income) (2) 3,457 (39) 6,548
Other (3) (877) (266) (443)
Total other (income) and expense $ 1,871 $ (914) $ 5,803
(1)The company uses financial hedging instruments to limit specific currency risks related to foreign currency-based transactions. The hedging program
does not hedge 100 percent of currency exposures and defers, versus eliminates, the impact of currency. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial
Instruments,” for additional information on foreign exchange risk.
(2)2024 and 2022 include the impacts of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related
Benefits,” for additional information.
(3)2024 includes pre-tax gains of $349 million from the sale of certain QRadar SaaS assets and $243 million from the divestiture of The Weather
Company assets. 2022 includes a pre-tax gain of $258 million from the sale of healthcare software assets. Refer to note E, “Acquisitions &
Divestitures,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 79
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE G. TAXES
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Income/(loss) from continuing operations before income taxes
U.S. operations (1) $ (3,405) $ (227) $ (6,602)
Non-U.S. operations 9,202 8,917 7,758
Total income from continuing operations before income taxes $ 5,797 $ 8,690 $ 1,156
(1)2024 and 2022 include the impact of a pension settlement charge of$2.7 billion and $5.9 billion, respectively. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related
Benefits,” for additional information.
The components of the income from continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes by taxing jurisdiction were as
follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
U.S. federal
Current $ (335) $ 560 $ 391
Deferred (2,204) (1,371) (2,645)
$ (2,539) $ (811) $ (2,253)
U.S. state and local
Current $ 152 $ 127 $ 184
Deferred (335) (162) (486)
$ (183) $ (34) $ (302)
Non-U.S.
Current $ 2,301 $ 1,594 $ 1,676
Deferred 203 428 252
$ 2,504 $ 2,022 $ 1,929
Total continuing operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ (218) $ 1,176 $ (626)
Discontinued operations provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ 6 $ (9) $ 124
Total provision for/(benefit from) income taxes $ (212) $ 1,167 $ (503)
In addition to the total provision for/(benefit from) income taxes, the company recorded a provision included in net income for social
security, real estate, personal property and other taxes of approximately $2.9 billion in 2024. The total taxes included in net income
was approximately $2.7 billion in 2024.
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s effective tax rate from continuing operations was as follows:
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Statutory rate 21 % 21 % 21 %
Tax differential on foreign income (1) (13) (3) (29)
Domestic incentives (1) (7) (5) (24)
State and local (1) (2) 0 (21)
Other (1) (3) 1 (1)
Effective rate (4) % 14 % (54) %
(1)2024 includes the impacts of pension settlement charges on tax differential on foreign income, domestic incentives, state and local, and other of (4)
points, (3) points, (2) points, and (1) point, respectively.2022 includes the impacts of a pension settlement charge on tax differential on foreign
income, domestic incentives, state and local, and other of (24) points, (20) points, (21) points, and (1) point, respectively. Refer to note U,
“Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
Percentages rounded for disclosure purposes.
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconciliation labeled “Tax differential on foreign income” include the
effects of foreign subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory rate, U.S. taxes on foreign income and any net
impacts of intercompany transactions. These items also reflect audit settlements or changes in the amount of unrecognized tax
benefits associated with each of these items.

===== PAGE 82 =====
80 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The continuing operations effective tax rate was (3.8) percent, 13.5 percent, and (54.2) percent in 2024, 2023, and 2022,
respectively. The 2024 and 2022 effective tax rates were driven by the tax impact of the pension settlement charges. Refer to note
U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information. The 2024 effective tax rate was also driven by the resolution of certain
tax audit matters.
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities did not have a material impact on the company’s 2024 effective
tax rate.
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Retirement benefits $ 1,898 $ 2,269
Leases 1,157 1,055
Share-based and other compensation 796 720
Tax losses/credits (1)(2) 3,615 3,069
Deferred income 790 682
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves 198 305
Depreciation 238 205
Accruals (includes restructuring charges) (2) 395 347
Intangible assets 2,482 2,774
Capitalized research and development 4,185 3,524
Other (2) 784 917
Gross deferred tax assets 16,537 15,868
Less: valuation allowance 1,223 765
Net deferred tax assets $ 15,314 $ 15,103
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Goodwill and intangible assets $ 3,147 $ 3,054
GILTI deferred taxes 1,200 2,195
Leases and right-of-use assets 1,483 1,369
Depreciation 438 523
Retirement benefits 1,478 1,443
Undistributed foreign earnings 211 192
Hedging (2) 448 30
Other (2) 746 786
Gross deferred tax liabilities $ 9,151 $ 9,593
(1)Includes domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards and foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards.
(2)Prior-year amounts have been reclassified to conform to the change in 2024 presentation.
For financial reporting purposes, as of December 31, 2024, the company had loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which was $1,774
million, as well as credit carryforwards of $1,681 million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least two years
and the majority are available for 10 years or more.
The valuation allowances as of December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 were $1,223 million, $765 million and $770 million,
respectively. The amounts principally apply to certain loss carryforwards and credits. In the opinion of management, it is more likely
than not that these assets will not be realized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carryforwards and credits
are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense.

===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 81
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 increased by $103 million in 2024 to $8,875 million. A
reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits was as follows:
($ in millions)
2024 2023 2022
Balance at January 1 $ 8,772 $ 8,728 $ 8,709
Additions based on tax positions related to the current year 667 296 355
Additions for tax positions of prior years 452 231 174
Reductions for tax positions of prior years (955) (457) (470)
Settlements (61) (26) (41)
Balance at December 31 $ 8,875 $ 8,772 $ 8,728
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current and prior years were primarily attributable to U.S. federal, state,
and non-U.S. tax matters, including transfer pricing. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits for tax positions of
prior years were primarily attributable to U.S federal, state, and non-U.S. tax matters, including impacts due to lapse of statute of
limitations and foreign currency translation adjustments.
The unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 of $8,875 million can be reduced by $617 million associated with timing
adjustments, potential transfer pricing adjustments and state income taxes. The net amount of $8,258 million, if recognized, would
favorably affect the company’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 2023 and 2022 were $8,205 million and
$8,191 million, respectively.
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included in income tax expense. During the years ended December 31,
2024, 2023 and 2022, the company recognized $282 million, $379 million and $185 million, respectively, in interest expense and
penalties. The company had $1,560 million and $1,321 million for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31,
2024 and December 31, 2023, respectively.
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits
associated with certain positions may be reduced. The potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax benefits is associated
with certain non-U.S. positions that are expected to be recognized due to a lapse in statute of limitations, as well as anticipated
resolution of various audits. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2024 could be reduced by
$139 million.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) concluded its examination of the company’s U.S. income
tax returns for 2013 and 2014 and issued a final Revenue Agent’s Report (RAR) proposing adjustments related to certain cross-
border transactions that occurred in 2013. The company filed its IRS Appeals protest in the first quarter of 2021, and in October of
2023, the IRS issued a revised RAR. These adjustments, if sustained, would increase the company’s income subject to tax by
approximately $4.2 billion, with tax calculated at the relevant federal income tax rate. The company continues to strongly disagree
with the IRS position and will pursue resolution at IRS Appeals and then court, if necessary. In the first quarter of 2024, the IRS
concluded its examination of the company's U.S. income tax returns for 2015 and 2016 and issued a final RAR proposing
adjustments related to certain cross-border transactions that occurred in 2015. The proposed adjustments, if sustained, would
increase the company’s income subject to tax by approximately $1.2 billion, with tax calculated at the relevant federal income tax
rate. The company strongly disagrees with the IRS position and filed its IRS Appeals protest in the second quarter of 2024. In the
fourth quarter of 2021, the IRS commenced its audit of the company’s U.S. tax returns for 2017 and 2018. The company anticipates
that this audit will be completed in 2025.With respect to major U.S. state and foreign taxing jurisdictions, the company is generally
no longer subject to tax examinations for years prior to 2016. The company is no longer subject to income tax examination of its U.S.
federal tax return for years prior to 2013. The open years contain matters that could be subject to differing interpretations of
applicable tax laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/or timing of income, deductions, and tax credits. Although the
outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes that adequate amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been
provided for any adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
The company is involved in a number of income tax-related matters in India challenging tax assessments issued by the India Tax
Authorities. As of December 31, 2024, the company had recorded approximately $400 million as prepaid income taxes in India. A
significant portion of this balance represents cash tax deposits paid over time to protect the company’s right to appeal various
income tax assessments made by the India Tax Authorities. Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the company
believes that adequate amounts of tax, interest and penalties have been provided for any adjustments that are expected to result
for these years.

===== PAGE 84 =====
82 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Within consolidated retained earnings at December 31, 2024 were undistributed after-tax earnings from certain non-U.S.
subsidiaries that were not indefinitely reinvested. At December 31, 2024, the company had a deferred tax liability of $211 million
for the estimated taxes associated with the repatriation of these earnings. Undistributed earnings of approximately $1.3 billion and
other outside basis differences in foreign subsidiaries were indefinitely reinvested in foreign operations. Quantification of the
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings and outside basis differences was not practicable.
NOTE H. EARNINGS PER SHARE
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 (1) 2023 2022 (1)
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share
calculations are based
Basic 921,767,834 911,210,319 902,664,190
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans 13,012,755 8,700,951 7,593,455
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares 2,380,636 2,162,558 2,011,417
Assuming dilution 937,161,224 922,073,828 912,269,062
Income from continuing operations $ 6,015 $ 7,514 $ 1,783
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax (2) 8 (12) (143)
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated $ 6,023 $ 7,502 $ 1,639
Income from continuing operations $ 6,015 $ 7,514 $ 1,783
Net income applicable to contingently issuable shares — — —
Income from continuing operations on which diluted earnings per
share is calculated $ 6,015 $ 7,514 $ 1,783
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax, on which
diluted earnings per share is calculated 8 (12) (143)
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated $ 6,023 $ 7,502 $ 1,639
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
Continuing operations $ 6.42 $ 8.15 $ 1.95
Discontinued operations 0.01 (0.01) (0.16)
Total $ 6.43 $ 8.14 $ 1.80
Basic
Continuing operations $ 6.53 $ 8.25 $ 1.97
Discontinued operations 0.01 (0.01) (0.16)
Total $ 6.53 $ 8.23 $ 1.82
(1)2024 and 2022 include the impacts of pension settlement charges. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
(2)Primarily relates to discontinued operations of Kyndryl, separated in 2021.
Weighted-average stock options to purchase 764,673 common shares in 2024, 1,761,463 common shares in 2023 and 814,976
common shares in 2022 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings per share because the
exercise price of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares for the full year, and therefore, the
effect would have been antidilutive.

===== PAGE 85 =====
H(cid:16)obn(cid:1)o(cid:16)(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)in(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)A(cid:10)i(cid:2)ia(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)Mo(cid:2)obhbion 1(cid:57)
Diobmi(cid:2)ofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)wpnfibnn(cid:1)(cid:40)(cid:2)aefibn(cid:1)xjmkjm(cid:2)ofji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)Np nf(cid:5)f(cid:2)mt(cid:1)xjhk(cid:2)ifbn
I(cid:42)O(cid:32)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:63)(cid:1)A(cid:36)I(cid:28)Ix(cid:36)(cid:28)(cid:39)(cid:1)(cid:28)NN(cid:32)ON(cid:1)(cid:59)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:36)(cid:28)(cid:29)(cid:36)(cid:39)(cid:36)O(cid:36)(cid:32)N
A(cid:2)(cid:10)m(cid:1)P(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)(cid:39)b(cid:2)npmbhbion
A(cid:10)i(cid:2)ia(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:28)nnbon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:10)o(cid:10)bn(cid:1)(cid:40)b(cid:2)npmb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)A(cid:2)(cid:10)m(cid:1)(cid:49)(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)(cid:16)i(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)Mbapmm(cid:10)id(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:2)n(cid:10)n
Oeb(cid:1)cj(cid:13)(cid:13)jrfid(cid:1)o(cid:2) (cid:13)b(cid:1)kmbnbion(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)it–n(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1)hb(cid:2)npmb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)ji(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)mbapmmfid(cid:1)
(cid:2)nfn(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)8
.(cid:85)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fjin(cid:79)
A(cid:2)(cid:10)m(cid:1)P(cid:2)(cid:13)pb (cid:53)S(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)S(cid:53)V
vo(cid:1)ybabh bm(cid:1)VT4 C(cid:10)bm(cid:2)maet(cid:1)Fb(cid:23)b(cid:13) vnnbon(cid:1)7Y(cid:69) F(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:10)o(cid:10)bn(cid:1)7(cid:58)(cid:69) vnnbon(cid:1)7Y(cid:69) F(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:10)o(cid:10)bn(cid:1)7(cid:58)(cid:69)
x(cid:2)ne(cid:1)blpfq(cid:2)(cid:13)bion(cid:1).W(cid:79)
Ofhb(cid:1)(cid:5)bkjnfon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)abmofcfa(cid:2)obn(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bkjnfo(cid:1).(cid:56)(cid:79) (cid:56) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)&(cid:60)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:61)&(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
(cid:40)jibt(cid:1)h(cid:2)m(cid:12)bo(cid:1)cpi(cid:5)n W (cid:1) (cid:56)1(cid:58)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)2(cid:58)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
Ojo(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)a(cid:2)ne(cid:1)blpfq(cid:2)(cid:13)bion (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)&2(cid:58)1(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:61)&(cid:60)22(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
zlpfot(cid:1)fiqbnohbion(cid:1) W (cid:1) 7(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)0(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
yb o(cid:1)nbapmfofbn6apmmbio(cid:1).(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1).(cid:57)(cid:79) (cid:56) (cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:57)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
yb o(cid:1)nbapmfofbn6ijiapmmbio(cid:1).(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1).(cid:58)(cid:79) (cid:56)&(cid:57) (cid:1) W(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1) I:v(cid:1) (cid:1) 1(cid:1) I:v(cid:1)
ybmfq(cid:2)ofqbn(cid:1)(cid:5)bnfdi(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)eb(cid:5)dfid(cid:1)finomphbion
Diobmbno(cid:1)m(cid:2)ob(cid:1)ajiom(cid:2)aon (cid:56) (cid:1) 7(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)22(cid:1)
Ajmbfdi(cid:1)bsae(cid:2)idb(cid:1)ajiom(cid:2)aon (cid:56) (cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:58)0(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)2(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) W(cid:57)W(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:61)0(cid:1)
ybmfq(cid:2)ofqbn(cid:1)ijo(cid:1)(cid:5)bnfdi(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)eb(cid:5)dfid(cid:1)finomphbion
Ajmbfdi(cid:1)bsae(cid:2)idb(cid:1)ajiom(cid:2)aon(cid:1).0(cid:79) (cid:56) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) WW0(cid:1) (cid:1) W2(cid:1)
zlpfot(cid:1)ajiom(cid:2)aon(cid:1) (cid:56) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) 2(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) 7(cid:1)
N(cid:16)o(cid:2)(cid:13) (cid:85)(cid:1) 1&(cid:57)1(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:61)(cid:56)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) 1&(cid:58)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) 02(cid:57)(cid:1)
.W(cid:79)Dia(cid:13)p(cid:5)b(cid:5)(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)a(cid:2)ne(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)a(cid:2)ne(cid:1)blpfq(cid:2)(cid:13)bion(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)w(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iab(cid:1)Nebbo8
.(cid:56)(cid:79)vq(cid:2)f(cid:13)(cid:2) (cid:13)b5cjm5n(cid:2)(cid:13)b(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1)nbapmfofbn(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)a(cid:2)mmtfid(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pbn(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)(cid:2)kkmjsfh(cid:2)ob(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb8
.(cid:57)(cid:79)Obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)bkjnfon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)P8N8(cid:1)omb(cid:2)npmt(cid:1) f(cid:13)(cid:13)n(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1)mbkjmob(cid:5)(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)h(cid:2)m(cid:12)bo(cid:2) (cid:13)b(cid:1)nbapmfofbn(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)w(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iab(cid:1)Nebbo8
.(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)fia(cid:13)p(cid:5)b(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:85)W(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)nb(cid:13)(cid:13)bm(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iafid(cid:1)(cid:13)j(cid:2)i(cid:1)fi(cid:1)ajiibaofji(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)(cid:5)fqbnofopmb(cid:1)jc(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)Rb(cid:2)oebm(cid:1)xjhk(cid:2)it(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)mbkjmob(cid:5)(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)
fiqbnohbion(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)npi(cid:5)mt(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)w(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iab(cid:1)Nebbo8(cid:1)Mbcbm(cid:1)oj(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)z&(cid:1)—valpfnfofjin(cid:1)3(cid:1)yfqbnofopmbn&(cid:77)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)fofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)ficjmh(cid:2)ofji8
.0(cid:79)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)fia(cid:13)p(cid:5)b(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:60)(cid:56)’hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)mb(cid:13)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)cjmbfdi(cid:1)bsae(cid:2)idb(cid:1)a(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:1)jkofji(cid:1)ajiom(cid:2)aon(cid:1)biobmb(cid:5)(cid:1)fioj(cid:1)fi(cid:1)ajiibaofji(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)(cid:2)alpfnfofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)Nomb(cid:2)hNbon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
rb (cid:40)boej(cid:5)n(cid:1)cmjh(cid:1)Njcor(cid:2)mb(cid:1)vB8(cid:1)Oebmb(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)ij(cid:1)(cid:2)nnjaf(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:5)bmfq(cid:2)ofqbn(cid:1)jpono(cid:2)i(cid:5)fid(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)8(cid:1)Mbcbm(cid:1)oj(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)z&(cid:1)—valpfnfofjin(cid:1)3(cid:1)
yfqbnofopmbn&(cid:77)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)ijob(cid:1)N&(cid:1)—ybmfq(cid:2)ofqb(cid:1)Afi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)Dinomphbion&(cid:77)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)fofji(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)ficjmh(cid:2)ofji8
.(cid:60)(cid:79)Oeb(cid:1)dmjnn(cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iabn(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bmfq(cid:2)ofqb(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)ajio(cid:2)fib(cid:5)(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)kmbk(cid:2)f(cid:5)(cid:1)bskbinbn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon&(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)fiqbnohbion(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)npi(cid:5)mt(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)
xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)w(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iab(cid:1)Nebbo(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)(cid:85)0(cid:61)0(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)2(cid:60)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)mbnkbaofqb(cid:13)t&(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:58)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
(cid:85)(cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)mbnkbaofqb(cid:13)t8
.(cid:61)(cid:79)Oeb(cid:1)dmjnn(cid:1) (cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iabn(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:5)bmfq(cid:2)ofqb(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn(cid:1)ajio(cid:2)fib(cid:5)(cid:1)rfoefi(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)(cid:2)aampb(cid:5)(cid:1)bskbinbn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn&(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)xjinj(cid:13)f(cid:5)(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)w(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)iab(cid:1)
Nebbo(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)(cid:60)(cid:56)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:58)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)mbnkbaofqb(cid:13)t&(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)ybabh bm’(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)rbmb(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)2(cid:58)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)22(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji&(cid:1)
mbnkbaofqb(cid:13)t8
I:v6Ijo(cid:1)(cid:2)kk(cid:13)fa(cid:2) (cid:13)b
A(cid:10)i(cid:2)ia(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:28)nnbon(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:10)(cid:2) (cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:10)o(cid:10)bn(cid:1)I(cid:16)o(cid:1)(cid:40)b(cid:2)npmb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)A(cid:2)(cid:10)m(cid:1)(cid:49)(cid:2)(cid:13)pb
Me(cid:16)mo(cid:61)Nbmh(cid:1)Lbab(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2) (cid:13)bn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:42)(cid:2)t(cid:2) (cid:13)bn
Nejmo5obmh(cid:1)mbabfq(cid:2) (cid:13)bn(cid:1).bsa(cid:13)p(cid:5)fid(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)kjmofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)mbabfq(cid:2) (cid:13)bn(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)fiqbnohbion(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbon(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)
a(cid:2)mmtfid(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pbn(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)(cid:2)kkmjsfh(cid:2)ob(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb8(cid:1)vaajpion(cid:1)k(cid:2)t(cid:2) (cid:13)b&(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)(cid:2)aampb(cid:5)(cid:1)bskbinbn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)nejmo5obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1).bsa(cid:13)p(cid:5)fid(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)
kjmofji(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)a(cid:2)mmtfid(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pbn(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)(cid:2)kkmjsfh(cid:2)ob(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb8(cid:1)Dc(cid:1)hb(cid:2)npmb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)
cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)no(cid:2)obhbion&(cid:1)oebnb(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)finomphbion(cid:1)rjp(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:1) b(cid:1)a(cid:13)(cid:2)nnfcfb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)Gbqb(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)efbm(cid:2)maet&(cid:1)bsabko(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)nejmo5obmh(cid:1)
(cid:5)b o(cid:1)refae(cid:1)rjp(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:1) b(cid:1)a(cid:13)(cid:2)nnfcfb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)Gbqb(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:56)8
F(cid:16)(cid:2)in(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)F(cid:16)id(cid:61)Nbmh(cid:1)Lbab(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2) (cid:13)bn
A(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pbn(cid:1)(cid:2)mb(cid:1) (cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)ji(cid:1)(cid:5)fnajpiob(cid:5)(cid:1)cpopmb(cid:1)a(cid:2)ne(cid:1)c(cid:13)jrn(cid:1)pnfid(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:1)fiobmbno(cid:1)m(cid:2)obn(cid:1)jccbmb(cid:5)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)nfhf(cid:13)(cid:2)m(cid:1)(cid:13)j(cid:2)in(cid:1)oj(cid:1)a(cid:13)fbion(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)nfhf(cid:13)(cid:2)m(cid:1)
amb(cid:5)fo(cid:1)m(cid:2)ofidn(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)n(cid:2)hb(cid:1)mbh(cid:2)fifid(cid:1)h(cid:2)opmfofbn8(cid:1)vo(cid:1)ybabh bm(cid:1)(cid:57)W&(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)&(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)(cid:5)fccbmbiab(cid:1) borbbi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)a(cid:2)mmtfid(cid:1)(cid:2)hjpio(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
bnofh(cid:2)ob(cid:5)(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:13)j(cid:2)in(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)mbabfq(cid:2) (cid:13)bn(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)fhh(cid:2)obmf(cid:2)(cid:13)8(cid:1)Dc(cid:1)hb(cid:2)npmb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)o(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)no(cid:2)obhbion&(cid:1)oebnb(cid:1)
cfi(cid:2)iaf(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)finomphbion(cid:1)rjp(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:1) b(cid:1)a(cid:13)(cid:2)nnfcfb(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)Gbqb(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:1)fi(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)efbm(cid:2)maet8
F(cid:16)id(cid:61)Nbmh(cid:1)yb o
A(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)jc(cid:1)kp (cid:13)fa(cid:13)t(cid:1)om(cid:2)(cid:5)b(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1)fn(cid:1) (cid:2)nb(cid:5)(cid:1)ji(cid:1)lpjob(cid:5)(cid:1)h(cid:2)m(cid:12)bo(cid:1)kmfabn(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)f(cid:5)biofa(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fot(cid:1)rebi(cid:1)om(cid:2)(cid:5)b(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)n(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:1)(cid:2)nnbo(cid:1)fi(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:1)
(cid:2)aofqb(cid:1)h(cid:2)m(cid:12)bo8(cid:1)Ajm(cid:1)joebm(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1).fia(cid:13)p(cid:5)fid(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)cfi(cid:2)iab(cid:1)(cid:13)b(cid:2)nb(cid:1)(cid:13)f(cid:2) f(cid:13)fofbn(cid:79)(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)refae(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)lpjob(cid:5)(cid:1)h(cid:2)m(cid:12)bo(cid:1)kmfab(cid:1)fn(cid:1)ijo(cid:1)
(cid:2)q(cid:2)f(cid:13)(cid:2) (cid:13)b&(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:1)bskbaob(cid:5)(cid:1)kmbnbio(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb(cid:1)obaeiflpb(cid:1)oe(cid:2)o(cid:1)pnbn(cid:1)m(cid:2)obn(cid:1)apmmbio(cid:13)t(cid:1)(cid:2)q(cid:2)f(cid:13)(cid:2) (cid:13)b(cid:1)oj(cid:1)oeb(cid:1)ajhk(cid:2)it(cid:1)cjm(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1)rfoe(cid:1)nfhf(cid:13)(cid:2)m(cid:1)obmhn(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)
mbh(cid:2)fifid(cid:1)h(cid:2)opmfofbn(cid:1)fn(cid:1)pnb(cid:5)(cid:1)oj(cid:1)bnofh(cid:2)ob(cid:1)c(cid:2)fm(cid:1)q(cid:2)(cid:13)pb8(cid:1)Oeb(cid:1)a(cid:2)mmtfid(cid:1)(cid:2)hjpio(cid:1)jc(cid:1)(cid:13)jid5obmh(cid:1)(cid:5)b o(cid:1)r(cid:2)n(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:58)2&11(cid:58)(cid:1)hf(cid:13)(cid:13)fji(cid:1)(cid:2)i(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)0(cid:54)&W(cid:56)W(cid:1)

===== PAGE 86 =====
84 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
million, and the estimated fair value was $47,389 million and $48,284 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. If
measured at fair value in the financial statements, long-term debt (including the current portion) would be classified as Level 2 in
the fair value hierarchy.
NOTE J. INVENTORY
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Finished goods $ 134 $ 78
Work in process and raw materials 1,155 1,083
Total $ 1,289 $ 1,161
NOTE K. FINANCING RECEIVABLES
Financing receivables primarily consist of client loan and installment payment receivables (loans), investment in sales-type and
direct financing leases (collectively referred to as client financing receivables) and commercial financing receivables. Loans are
provided primarily to clients to finance the purchase of IBM hardware, software and services. Payment terms on these financing
arrangements are for terms generally up to seven years. Investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relate principally to
the company’s Infrastructure products and are for terms generally up to five years. Commercial financing receivables, which consist
of both held-for-investment and held-for-sale receivables, relate primarily to working capital financing for business partners and
distributors of IBM products and services. Payment terms for working capital financing generally range from 30 to 60 days.
A summary of the components of the company’s financing receivables is presented as follows:
($ in millions)
Client Financing Receivables
Commercial Financing
Client Loan and Investment in Receivables
Installment Payment Sales-Type and
Receivables Direct Financing Held for Held for
At December 31, 2024: (Loans) Leases Investment Sale (1) Total
Financing receivables, gross $ 7,425 $ 3,406 $ 1,322 $ 900 $ 13,052
Unearned income (547) (344) — — (891)
Unguaranteed residual value — 479 — — 479
Amortized cost $ 6,878 $ 3,540 $ 1,322 $ 900 $ 12,639
Allowance for credit losses (73) (50) (5) — (128)
Total financing receivables, net $ 6,804 $ 3,491 $ 1,317 $ 900 $ 12,512
Current portion $ 3,535 $ 1,408 $ 1,317 $ 900 $ 7,159
Noncurrent portion $ 3,269 $ 2,083 $ — $ — $ 5,353
($ in millions)
Client Financing Receivables
Commercial Financing
Client Loan and Investment in Receivables
Installment Payment Sales-Type and
Receivables Direct Financing Held for Held for
At December 31, 2023: (Loans) Leases Investment Sale (1) Total
Financing receivables, gross $ 7,060 $ 4,261 $ 1,160 $ 692 $ 13,173
Unearned income (486) (429) — — (915)
Unguaranteed residual value — 458 — — 458
Amortized cost $ 6,574 $ 4,290 $ 1,160 $ 692 $ 12,716
Allowance for credit losses (87) (63) (6) — (156)
Total financing receivables, net $ 6,486 $ 4,227 $ 1,155 $ 692 $ 12,560
Current portion $ 3,427 $ 1,520 $ 1,155 $ 692 $ 6,793
Noncurrent portion $ 3,059 $ 2,707 $ — $ — $ 5,766
(1)The carrying value of the receivables classified as held for sale approximates fair value.
The company has a long-standing practice of taking mitigation actions, in certain circumstances, to transfer credit risk to third
parties. These actions may include credit insurance, financial guarantees, nonrecourse secured borrowings,true salesor sales of

===== PAGE 87 =====
(cid:40)otes to the Consolidated (cid:33)inancial Statements (cid:62)(cid:59)
(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:40)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20)
(cid:6)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)
(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:75)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:69)(cid:1)
(cid:33)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:57)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)
(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:26)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:42)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:76)(cid:29)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:77)
(cid:45)ra(cid:14)(cid:19)(cid:7)(cid:6)r o(cid:7) (cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:14)a(cid:14)(cid:4)(cid:10)al (cid:26)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:19)
(cid:32)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:37)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:59)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:56)(cid:60)(cid:66)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:5)(cid:66)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)
(cid:85)(cid:55)(cid:69)(cid:57)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:29)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:66)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:23)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:69) (cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)
(cid:2)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:5)(cid:66)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)
(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)
(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:69)(cid:1)
(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:69)
(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:79)
(cid:33)or the (cid:26)ear ended (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:65) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54)
Commercial financing receiva(cid:3)les
(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:5) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:61)(cid:71)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:63)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:62)(cid:1)
(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:60)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:1)
(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:42)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)
(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:69)
(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:22)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)
(cid:20)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:33)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)
(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:60)(cid:62)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:63)(cid:62)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:26)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)
(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:33)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:75)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)
(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:76)(cid:46)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:69)(cid:77)(cid:1)
(cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:14)a(cid:14)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:8) (cid:43)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:22)a(cid:3)l(cid:6)(cid:19) (cid:3)(cid:25) (cid:41)or(cid:20)(cid:7)ol(cid:10)o S(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:20)
(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:27)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:87)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)
(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:70)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:32)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:80)(cid:40)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:32)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:32)(cid:40)(cid:32)(cid:28)(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)
(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:8)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:75)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:13)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:69)
(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:79)
At (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55)(cid:65) Americas (cid:32)M(cid:32)A Asia Pacific (cid:46)otal
Amorti(cid:27)ed cost (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:71)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:55)(cid:62)(cid:1)
Allo(cid:24)ance for credit losses
Beginning (cid:3)alance at (cid:37)anuar(cid:26) (cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:63)(cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:1)
(cid:50)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:66)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:78)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:42)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:32)nding (cid:3)alance at (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)
(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:79)
At (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54)(cid:65) Americas (cid:32)M(cid:32)A Asia Pacific (cid:46)otal
Amorti(cid:27)ed cost (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:62)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:54)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:71)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:1)
Allo(cid:24)ance for credit losses
Beginning (cid:3)alance at (cid:37)anuar(cid:26) (cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:62)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:60)(cid:62)(cid:1)
(cid:50)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:66)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:63)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:78)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:42)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:62)(cid:1)
(cid:32)nding (cid:3)alance at (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52)(cid:66) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:63)(cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:1)
(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:43)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:11)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:69)

===== PAGE 88 =====
86 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evaluated either on an individual or a collective basis. For the
company’s policy on determining allowances for credit losses, refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies.”
Past Due Financing Receivables
The company summarizes information about the amortized cost basis for client financing receivables, including amortized cost aged
over 90 days and still accruing, billed invoices aged over 90 days and still accruing, and amortized cost not accruing.
($ in millions)
Amortized Billed Amortized
Total Amortized Cost Invoices Cost
Amortized Cost > 90 Days and > 90 Days and Not
At December 31, 2024: Cost > 90 Days (1) Accruing (1) Accruing Accruing (2)
Americas $ 5,861 $ 66 $ 7 $ 1 $ 62
EMEA 3,128 29 1 0 28
Asia Pacific 1,429 8 0 0 7
Total client financing receivables $ 10,418 $ 103 $ 8 $ 1 $ 97
($ in millions)
Amortized Billed Amortized
Total Amortized Cost Invoices Cost
Amortized Cost > 90 Days and > 90 Days and Not
At December 31, 2023: Cost > 90 Days (1) Accruing (1) Accruing Accruing (2)
Americas $ 6,488 $ 111 $ 40 $ 6 $ 71
EMEA 3,007 31 1 1 31
Asia Pacific 1,368 9 1 0 8
Total client financing receivables $ 10,863 $ 151 $ 43 $ 7 $ 110
(1)At a contract level, which includes total billed and unbilled amounts for financing receivables aged greater than 90 days.
(2)Of the amortized cost not accruing, there was a related allowance of $94 million and $106 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
Financing income recognized on these receivables was immaterial for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023.
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators, which are based on rating agency data, publicly available information and information
provided by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the relative level of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating
system that maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown below. The company uses information provided by Moody’s,
where available, as one of many inputs in its determination of customer credit ratings. The credit quality of the customer is
evaluated based on these indicators and is assigned the same risk rating whether the receivable is a lease or a loan.
The following tables present the amortized cost basis for client financing receivables by credit quality indicator at December 31,
2024 and 2023, respectively. Receivables with a credit quality indicator ranging from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment grade.
All others are considered non-investment grade. The credit quality indicators reflect mitigating credit enhancement actions taken by
customers which reduce the risk to IBM. Gross write-offs by vintage year at December 31, 2024 were not material.
($ in millions)
Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
At December 31, 2024: Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C
Vintage year
2024 $ 2,080 $ 621 $ 1,145 $ 514 $ 616 $ 77
2023 1,372 310 341 258 285 19
2022 950 113 408 194 254 26
2021 233 24 125 27 69 5
2020 43 17 29 15 36 8
2019 and prior 53 44 37 35 26 7
Total $ 4,732 $ 1,129 $ 2,085 $ 1,043 $ 1,287 $ 142

===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 87
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Americas EMEA Asia Pacific
At December 31, 2023: Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C Aaa - Baa3 Ba1 - C
Vintage year
2023 $ 2,292 $ 1,028 $ 750 $ 520 $ 501 $ 70
2022 1,645 268 687 374 386 42
2021 655 85 284 83 110 40
2020 205 79 106 60 97 22
2019 104 23 58 38 40 8
2018 and prior 55 50 16 30 39 12
Total $ 4,955 $ 1,533 $ 1,901 $ 1,106 $ 1,174 $ 195
Modifications
The company did not have any significant modifications due to clients experiencing financial difficulty for the years ended
December 31, 2024 and 2023.
NOTE L. PROPERTY, PLANT & EQUIPMENT
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Land and land improvements $ 179 $ 182
Buildings and building and leasehold improvements 4,825 5,333
Information technology equipment 8,895 9,223
Production, engineering, office and other equipment 3,792 3,385
Total—gross 17,691 18,122
Less: Accumulated depreciation 11,959 12,621
Total—net $ 5,731 $ 5,501
NOTE M. LEASES
Accounting for Leases as a Lessee
The following table presents the various components of lease costs.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Finance lease cost $ 229 $ 114 $ 67
Operating lease cost 1,018 1,013 1,050
Short-term lease cost 9 9 7
Variable lease cost 321 331 262
Sublease income (39) (61) (72)
Total lease cost $ 1,537 $ 1,406 $ 1,315
The company recorded net gains on sale and leaseback transactions of $17 million, $145 million and $41 million for the years
ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively.

===== PAGE 90 =====
88 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents supplemental information relating to the cash flows arising from lease transactions. Cash payments
related to variable lease costs and short-term leases are not included in the measurement of operating and finance lease liabilities,
and, as such, are excluded from the amounts below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Cash paid for amounts included in the measurement of lease liabilities
Operating cash outflows from finance leases $ 43 $ 16 $ 9
Financing cash outflows from finance leases 189 75 55
Operating cash outflows from operating leases 961 961 1,020
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new finance lease liabilities 698 355 196
ROU assets obtained in exchange for new operating lease liabilities 988 1,220 705
The following table presents the weighted-average lease term and discount rate for finance and operating leases.
At December 31: 2024 2023
Finance leases
Weighted-average remaining lease term (in years) 6.0 5.1
Weighted-average discount rate 5.03 % 4.62 %
Operating leases
Weighted-average remaining lease term (in years) 6.4 6.2
Weighted-average discount rate 4.91 % 4.46 %
The following table presents a maturity analysis of expected undiscounted cash flows for operating and finance leases on an annual
basis for the next five years and thereafter.
($ in millions)
Imputed
2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 Thereafter Interest (1) Total (2)
Finance leases $ 246 $ 210 $ 194 $ 168 $ 155 $ 202 $ (174) $ 1,000
Operating leases 906 787 630 447 318 938 (603) 3,422
(1)Imputed interest represents the difference between undiscounted cash flows and discounted cash flows.
(2)The company entered into lease agreements, primarily related to operating leases, for certain facilities and equipment with payments totaling
approximately$496 million that have not yet commenced as of December 31, 2024, and therefore are not included in this table.
The following table presents information on the company’s finance leases recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
ROU assets—Property, plant and equipment $ 984 $ 481
Lease liabilities
Short-term debt 198 121
Long-term debt 803 379

===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 89
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Accounting for Leases as a Lessor
The following table presents amounts included in the Consolidated Income Statement related to lessor activity.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Lease income—sales-type and direct financing leases
Sales-type lease selling price $ 865 $ 1,280 $ 1,636
Less: Carrying value of underlying assets (1) (176) (245) (385)
Gross profit 689 1,034 1,251
Interest income on lease receivables 268 242 200
Total sales-type and direct financing lease income 958 1,276 1,451
Lease income—operating leases 60 93 116
Variable lease income 68 68 87
Total lease income $ 1,085 $ 1,437 $ 1,653
(1)Excludes unguaranteed residual value.
Sales-Type and Direct Financing Leases
At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the unguaranteed residual values of sales-type and direct financing leases were $479 million and
$458 million, respectively. Refer to note K, “Financing Receivables,” for additional information on the company’s net investment in
leases.
For the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, impairment of residual values was immaterial.
The following table presents a maturity analysis of the lease payments due to IBM on sales-type and direct financing leases over the
next five years and thereafter, as well as a reconciliation of the undiscounted cash flows to the financing receivables recognized in
the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2024.
($ in millions)
Total
2025 $ 1,552
2026 963
2027 584
2028 244
2029 60
Thereafter 3
Total undiscounted cash flows $ 3,406
Present value of lease payments (recognized as financing receivables) (1) 3,062
Difference between undiscounted cash flows and discounted cash flows $ 344
(1)The present value of the lease payments will not equal the financing receivables balances in the Consolidated Balance Sheet due to certain items,
including IDCs, allowance for credit losses and residual values, which are included in the financing receivable balance, but are not included in the
future lease payments.

===== PAGE 92 =====
90 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE N. INTANGIBLE ASSETS INCLUDING GOODWILL
Intangible Assets
The following table presents the company’s intangible asset balances by major asset class.
($ in millions)
Gross Carrying Accumulated Net Carrying
At December 31, 2024: Amount Amortization Amount (1)
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $ 1,282 $ (492) $ 790
Client relationships 9,704 (4,387) 5,317
Completed technology 6,297 (3,164) 3,132
Patents/trademarks 1,826 (519) 1,307
Other (2) 138 (24) 114
Total $ 19,247 $ (8,587) $ 10,660
($ in millions)
Gross Carrying Accumulated Net Carrying
At December 31, 2023: Amount Amortization Amount (1)
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software $ 1,636 $ (762) $ 874
Client relationships 9,053 (3,500) 5,553
Completed technology 5,713 (2,510) 3,203
Patents/trademarks 1,821 (436) 1,385
Other (2) 41 (20) 22
Total $ 18,265 $ (7,229) $ 11,036
(1)Amounts as ofDecember 31, 2024 and December 31, 2023 include a decrease in the net intangible asset balance of $126 million and an increase in
the net intangible asset balance of $50 million, respectively, due to foreign currency translation.
(2)Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary technology licenses, data, business processes, methodologies and systems.
There was no impairment of intangible assets recorded in 2024 and 2023. The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased
$376 million during the year ended December 31, 2024, primarily due to intangible asset amortization, partially offset by additions
of acquired intangibles from business combinations of $1,627 million, driven by the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods in
the third quarter of 2024, and additions of capitalized software. The aggregate intangible amortization expense was $2,499 million
and $2,287 million for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. In addition, in 2024 and 2023, respectively, the
company retired $923 million and $1,505 million of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross carrying amount and
accumulated amortization by this amount.
The future amortization expense relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet is estimated to
be the following at December 31, 2024:
Capitalized Acquired
($ in millions) Software Intangibles Total
2025 $ 427 $ 1,939 $ 2,365
2026 260 1,902 2,162
2027 103 1,881 1,984
2028 0 1,582 1,582
2029 0 936 936
Thereafter — 1,631 1,631

===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 91
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023 are as follows:
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Purchase Translation
Balance at Goodwill Price and Other Balance at
Segment January 1, 2024 Additions Adjustments (1) Divestitures Adjustments (2) December 31, 2024
Software $ 46,447 $ 1,511 $ (51) $ — $ (770) $ 47,136
Consulting 8,883 469 (3) (1) (142) 9,206
Infrastructure 4,384 8 (1) — (28) 4,363
Other (3) 464 — — (464) — —
Total $ 60,178 $ 1,987 $ (55) $ (465) $ (940) $ 60,706
($ in millions)
Foreign
Currency
Purchase Translation
Balance at Goodwill Price and Other Balance at
Segment January 1, 2023 Additions Adjustments Divestitures Adjustments (2) December 31, 2023
Software (4) $ 42,712 $ 3,538 $ (17) $ — $ 214 $ 46,447
Consulting (4) 8,409 403 2 — 69 8,883
Infrastructure 4,363 12 — — 8 4,384
Other (4) 464 — — — — 464
Total $ 55,949 $ 3,953 $ (15) $ — $ 291 $ 60,178
(1)Includes measurement period adjustments related to business combinations that closed in the current and prior year.
(2)Primarily driven by foreign currency translation.
(3)In the first quarter of 2024, the company derecognized goodwill related to the divestiture of The Weather Company assets. Refer to note E,
“Acquisitions & Divestitures,” for additional information.
(4)Recast to reflect January 2024 segment changes. Refer to note D, “Segments,” for additional information.
There were no goodwill impairment losses recorded during 2024 or2023, and the company has no accumulated impairment losses.
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2024 and 2023 were related to acquisitions that were still subject to the measurement
period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date or when information becomes available. Net purchase price
adjustments recorded in 2024 and 2023 were not material.
NOTE O. BORROWINGS
Short-Term Debt
The company’s total short-term debt atDecember 31, 2024 and December 31, 2023 was $5,089 million and $6,426 million,
respectively, and primarily consisted of current maturities of long-term debt detailed in “Long-Term Debt” below.

===== PAGE 94 =====
92 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31: Maturities 2024 2023
U.S. dollar debt (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2024): (1)
3.3% 2024 $ — $ 5,003
5.1% 2025 1,601 1,601
3.7% 2026 5,800 5,201
3.3% 2027 4,119 3,619
5.0% 2028 1,313 1,313
3.6% 2029 3,750 3,250
2.0% 2030 1,350 1,350
4.8% 2031 500 —
4.4% 2032 1,850 1,850
4.8% 2033 750 750
4.9% 2034 1,000 —
8.0% 2038 83 83
4.5% 2039 2,745 2,745
2.9% 2040 650 650
4.0% 2042 1,107 1,107
5.3% 2044 1,000 —
7.0% 2045 27 27
4.7% 2046 650 650
4.3% 2049 3,000 3,000
3.0% 2050 750 750
4.2% 2052 1,400 1,400
5.1% 2053 650 650
5.3% 2054 1,400 —
7.1% 2096 316 316
$ 35,813 $ 35,317
Euro debt (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2024): (1)
1.1% 2024 — 829
1.6% 2025 3,106 3,315
2.3% 2027 2,071 2,210
0.7% 2028 1,863 1,989
1.5% 2029 1,035 1,105
0.9% 2030 1,035 1,105
2.7% 2031 2,588 2,762
0.7% 2032 1,656 1,768
1.3% 2034 1,035 1,105
3.8% 2035 1,035 1,105
1.2% 2040 880 939
4.0% 2043 1,035 1,105
$ 17,340 $ 19,335
Other currencies (weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2024): (1)
Pound sterling (4.9%) 2038 $ 939 $ 955
Japanese yen (0.7%) 2026–2028 808 1,251
Other (13.8%) 2025–2027 212 241
$ 55,111 $ 57,099
Finance lease obligations (5.0% weighted-average interest rate at December 31, 2024) 2025–2034 1,000 499
$ 56,112 $ 57,598
Less: net unamortized discount 824 838
Less: net unamortized debt issuance costs 168 154
Add: fair value adjustment (2) (176) (60)
$ 54,943 $ 56,546
Less: current maturities 5,059 6,425
Total $ 49,884 $ 50,121
(1)Includes notes, debentures, bank loans and secured borrowings.
(2)The portion of the company’s fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as an amount equal to the sum
of the debt’s carrying value and a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to
movements in benchmark interest rates.

===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 93
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The company’s indenture governing its debt securities and its various credit facilities each contain significant covenants which
obligate the company to promptly pay principal and interest, limit the aggregate amount of secured indebtedness and sale and
leaseback transactions to 10 percent of the company’s consolidated net tangible assets, and restrict the company’s ability to merge
or consolidate unless certain conditions are met. The credit facilities also include a covenant on the company’s consolidated net
interest expense ratio, which cannot be less than 2.20 to 1.0, as well as a cross default provision with respect to other defaulted
indebtedness of at least $500 million.
The company is in compliance with all of its debt covenants and provides periodic certifications to its lenders. The failure to comply
with its debt covenants could constitute an event of default with respect to the debt to which such provisions apply. If certain
events of default were to occur, the principal and interest on the debt to which such event of default applied would become
immediately due and payable.
In the first quarter of 2023, the company issued $0.7 billion of Japanese yen floating-rate syndicated bank loans with a maturity of
5 years; $4.6 billion of Euro fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 4 to 20 years and coupons ranging from 3.375
to 4 percent; $0.9 billion of Pound sterling fixed-rate notes with a maturity of 15 years and a coupon of 4.875 percent; and $3.25
billion of U.S. dollar fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 3 to 30 years and coupons ranging from 4.5 to 5.1
percent.
In the first quarter of 2024, IBM International Capital Pte. Ltd (IIC), a wholly owned finance subsidiary of the company, issued $5.5
billion of U.S. dollar fixed rate notes (IIC Notes) in tranches with maturities ranging from 2 to 30 years and coupons ranging from 4.6
to 5.3 percent. IIC is a 100 percent owned finance subsidiary of IBM, as described by the SEC in Rule 13-01(a)(4)(vi) of Regulation
S-X, the primary purpose of which is to borrow money to be made available for the benefit of IBM and its affiliates. The IIC Notes are
fully and unconditionally guaranteed by IBM, and no other subsidiary of IBM guarantees the IIC Notes.
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
2024 2023
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
At December 31: Amount Interest Rate Amount Interest Rate
Fixed-rate debt $ 47,712 3.3 % $ 48,803 3.0 %
Floating-rate debt (1) 7,231 5.6 % 7,743 6.1 %
Total $ 54,943 $ 56,546
(1)Includes $6,725 million in both 2024 and 2023, of notional interest-rate swaps that effectively convert fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate
debt. Refer to note S, “Derivative Financial Instruments,” for additional information.
Pre-swap annual contractual obligations of long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 2024, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Total
2025 $ 5,047
2026 6,302
2027 6,357
2028 3,863
2029 4,926
Thereafter 29,616
Total $ 56,112

===== PAGE 96 =====
94 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Cost of financing $ 336 $ 334 $ 346
Interest expense 1,712 1,607 1,216
Interest capitalized 12 9 5
Total interest paid and accrued $ 2,060 $ 1,949 $ 1,566
Refer to the related discussion in note D, “Segments,” for interest expense of the Financing segment. Refer to note S, “Derivative
Financial Instruments,” for a discussion of the use of foreign currency denominated debt designated as a hedge of net investment,
as well as a discussion of the use of currency and interest-rate swaps in the company’s debt risk management program.
Lines of Credit
On June 17, 2024, the company amended its existing $2.5 billionThree-YearCredit Agreement and $7.5 billionFive-Year Credit
Agreement (the Credit Agreements) to extend the maturity dates to June 20, 2027 and June 22, 2029, respectively. The Credit
Agreements permit the company and its subsidiary borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion on a revolving basis. The total expense
recorded by the company related to these agreements was $8 million, $8 million and $11 million in 2024, 2023 and 2022,
respectively. Subject to certain conditions stated in the Credit Agreements, the borrower may borrow, prepay and re-borrow
amounts under the Credit Agreements at any time during the term of such agreements. Funds borrowed may be used for the general
corporate purposes of the borrower.
Interest rates on borrowings under the Credit Agreements will be based on prevailing market interest rates, as further described in
the Credit Agreements. The Credit Agreements contain customary representations and warranties, covenants, events of default, and
indemnification provisions. The company believes that circumstances that might give rise to breach of these covenants or an event
of default, as specified in the Credit Agreements, are remote. As of December 31, 2024, there were no borrowings by the company
under the Credit Agreements.
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest
rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
As of December 31, 2024, there were no material borrowings by the company under these credit facilities.
NOTE P. OTHER LIABILITIES
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Income tax reserves $ 6,865 $ 6,916
Deferred taxes 815 1,146
Excess Savings Plan 1,445 1,437
Disability benefits 274 308
Derivative liabilities 463 299
Workforce reductions 445 526
Environmental accruals 204 206
Other 536 639
Total $ 11,048 $ 11,475
In response to changing business needs, the company periodically takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost
competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent future payments associated with these activities are reflected in the
workforce reductions caption in the previous table. The noncurrent liabilities are workforce accruals primarily related to terminated
employees who are no longer working for the company and who were granted annual payments to supplement their incomes in
certain countries. Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, these required payments will continue until the former
employee begins receiving pension benefits or passes away. The total amounts accrued for workforce reductions, including
amounts classified as other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, were $665 million and $725 million
at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
The company employs extensive internal environmental protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company
also participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities, previously
owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no
amounts have been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued

===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 95
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
for non-ARO environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, that do not reflect
actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $247 million and $244 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
Estimated environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the consolidated financial position or consolidated results of
the company’s operations in future periods. However, estimates of future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup
periods, changing environmental remediation regulations and changes in assumptions.
As of December 31, 2024, the company was unable to estimate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for
certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is
not subject to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate
only if it performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have indeterminate
settlement dates, the company could not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will continue to assess its
ability to estimate fair values at each future reporting date. The related liability will be recognized once sufficient additional
information becomes available. The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the
Consolidated Balance Sheet, were $80 million and $113 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively.
NOTE Q. COMMITMENTS & CONTINGENCIES
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities include unused amounts of $1.6 billion and $1.4 billion at
December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. A portion of these amounts was available to the company’s business partners to
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company has committed to provide future financing to its clients in connection
with client purchase agreements for $2.2 billion and $1.9 billion at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The company
collectively evaluates the allowance for these arrangements using a provision methodology consistent with the portfolio of the
commitments. Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” for additional information. The allowance for these commitments is
recorded in other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and was not material at December 31, 2024 and 2023.
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of
requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a description of arrangements in which the company is the
guarantor.
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect to
certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of contracts entered into by the company, under which the company
customarily agrees to hold the party harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations and covenants related to such
matters as title to the assets sold, certain intellectual property rights, specified environmental matters, third-party performance of
nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by the company is
conditioned on the other party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract, the procedures of
which typically allow the company to challenge the other party’s claims. While indemnification provisions typically do not include a
contractual maximum on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these agreements may be limited in terms of
time and/or nature of claim, and in some instances, the company may have recourse against third parties for certain payments made
by the company.
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of future payments under these or similar agreements due to the
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement.
Historically, payments made by the company under these agreements have not had a material effect on the company’s business,
financial condition or results of operations.
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial commitments. The maximum potential future payment under these
financial guarantees and the fair value of these guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31, 2024 and
2023 was not material.
Changes in the company’s warranty liability for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities
and other liabilities in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, and for extended warranty contracts, which are included in deferred income
in the Consolidated Balance Sheet, are presented in the following tables.

===== PAGE 98 =====
96 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2024 2023
Balance at January 1 $ 65 $ 79
Current period accruals 82 84
Accrual adjustments to reflect experience 9 (14)
Charges incurred (81) (83)
Balance at December 31 $ 76 $ 65
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2024 2023
Balance at January 1 $ 184 $ 272
Revenue deferred for new extended warranty contracts 23 70
Amortization of deferred revenue (113) (158)
Other (1) (6) 0
Balance at December 31 $ 88 $ 184
Current portion $ 61 $ 110
Noncurrent portion $ 27 $ 74
(1)Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
The decrease in extended warranty liability is primarily due to the company’s shift to alternative maintenance and support offerings
without a warranty element.
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with clients in more than 175 countries, IBM is involved, either as
plaintiff or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from
time to time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader in the information technology industry and, as such, has
been and will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and associated products and offerings, including claims of
copyright and patent infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. In addition, the company enforces its own IP
against infringement, through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Further, given the rapidly evolving external landscape of
cybersecurity, AI, privacy and data protection laws, regulations and threat actors, the company and its clients have been and will
continue to be subject to actions or proceedings in various jurisdictions. Also, as is typical for companies of IBM’s scope and scale,
the company is party to actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide range of labor and employment issues
(including matters related to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and employment laws, and the company’s
pension, retirement and other benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, product liability, cybersecurity, data
privacy, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environmental matters. These actions may be commenced by a number
of different parties, including competitors, clients, current or former employees, government and regulatory agencies, stockholders
and representatives of the locations in which the company does business. Some of the actions to which the company is party may
involve particularly complex technical issues, and some actions may raise novel questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions
in which these matters arise.
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has
been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the company also discloses matters based on its consideration of other
matters and qualitative factors, including the experience of other companies in the industry, and investor, customer and employee
relations considerations.
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time that
the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this
note, except as specifically discussed herein, the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible losses or range of
losses, including losses in excess of amounts accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations and proceedings

===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 97
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s experience that
damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not meaningful
indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, the company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number of other
factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status of the
matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of information
important to the matters. The company reviews claims, suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions are
made with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and disclosing reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually or
in the aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement discussions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews
by counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter.
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of
variables, including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; the structure and type of any such remedies; the significance
of the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and
circumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional factors. While the company will continue to defend itself
vigorously, it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results of operations or cash flows could be affected in
any particular period by the resolution of one or more of these matters.
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters involving the company.
On June 8, 2021, IBM sued GlobalFoundries U.S. Inc. (GF) in New York State Supreme Court for claims including fraud and breach
of contract relating to a long-term strategic relationship between IBM and GF for researching, developing, and manufacturing
advanced semiconductor chips for IBM. GF walked away from its obligations and IBM sued to recover amounts paid to GF, and other
compensatory and punitive damages, totaling more than $1.5 billion. On September 14, 2021, the court ruled on GF’s motion to
dismiss. On April 7, 2022, the Appellate Division unanimously reversed the lower court’s dismissal of IBM’s fraud claim. In
December 2024, the parties settled the lawsuit, with no material financial impact to IBM, and in January 2025, the lawsuit was
discontinued with prejudice.
On June 2, 2022, a putative class action lawsuit was filed in the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York
alleging that the IBM Pension Plan miscalculated certain joint and survivor annuity pension benefits by using outdated actuarial
tables in violation of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974. IBM, the Plan Administrator Committee, and the IBM
Pension Plan are named as defendants. On April 4, 2024, the court dismissed the lawsuit with prejudice. On May 3, 2024, the
plaintiffs appealed.
As disclosed in the Kyndryl Form 10 and subsequent Kyndryl public filings, in 2017, BMC Software, Inc. (BMC) filed suit against IBM
in the United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas in a dispute involving IBM’s former managed infrastructure
services business. On May 30, 2022, the trial court awarded BMC $718 million in direct damages and $718 million in punitive
damages, plus interest and fees. On April 30, 2024, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit reversed and rendered
the district court’s judgment in IBM’s favor. IBM does not believe it has any material exposure relating to this litigation. No material
liability or related indemnification asset has been recorded by IBM.
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to
CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or
ownership of sites. The company is also conducting environmental investigations, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity
of several current or former operating sites globally pursuant to permits, administrative orders or agreements with country, state or
local environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or former operating sites.
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many
other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is involved in various challenges with Brazilian tax authorities regarding
non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters. The total potential amount related to all these matters for all
applicable years is approximately $300 million. The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is not a
meaningful indicator of liability.

===== PAGE 100 =====
98 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE R. EQUITY ACTIVITY
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of (i) 4,687,500,000 shares of common stock with a $0.20 per share par value, of
which 926,290,070 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2024, and (ii)150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $0.01
per share par value, whereby 75,000,000 shares have been designated as Series A Preferred Stock, of which 57,916,244 shares of
Series A Preferred Stock were issued to a wholly owned subsidiary of the company but were not outstanding at December 31, 2024.
The company does not intend to issue or transfer any shares of Series A Preferred Stock to any third parties.
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM common stock. The company suspended its share repurchase
program at the time of the Red Hat acquisition in 2019.At December 31, 2024, $2,008 million of Board common stock repurchase
authorization was available.
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part of its stock-based compensation plans and employees stock
purchase plan: 12,253,153 shares in 2024, 9,794,240 shares in 2023, and 8,539,072 shares in 2022. The company issued
2,454,155 treasury shares in 2024, 2,080,983 treasury shares in 2023, and 2,512,300 treasury shares in 2022, as a result of
restricted stock unit releases and exercises of stock options by employees of certain acquired businesses and by non-U.S.
employees. Also, as part of the company’s stock-based compensation plans,3,430,885 common shares at a cost of$651 million,
2,953,554 common shares at a cost of $402 million, and 3,027,994 common shares at a cost of $407 million in 2024, 2023 and
2022, respectively, were remitted by employees to the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding
requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock balance in the Consolidated Balance Sheet and the Consolidated
Statement of Equity.
Reclassifications and Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2024: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 301 $ (324) $ (23)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 2 $ 0 $ 1
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 2 $ 0 $ 1
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 389 $ (113) $ 276
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (22) 6 (16)
Cost of sales (40) 13 (27)
Cost of financing 6 (2) 5
SG&A expense (16) 5 (11)
Other (income) and expense 125 (32) 94
Interest expense 31 (8) 24
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 474 $ (130) $ 343
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ (56) $ 11 $ (45)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 70 (65) 6
Curtailments and settlements 3,159 (719) 2,441
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (7) 2 (5)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 975 (201) 775
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 4,142 $ (971) $ 3,171
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 4,919 $ (1,426) $ 3,492
(1)These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost and include the impact of pension settlement charges of $3.1
billion ($2.4 billion net of tax). Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 99
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2023: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 3 $ 100 $ 103
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 207 $ (63) $ 144
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services 5 (1) 5
Cost of sales (22) 8 (14)
Cost of financing 14 (3) 10
SG&A expense (12) 4 (8)
Other (income) and expense (209) 53 (157)
Interest expense 66 (17) 49
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ 47 $ (19) $ 28
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 2 $ 0 $ 2
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period (3,115) 536 (2,579)
Curtailments and settlements 5 (1) 4
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs (9) 3 (6)
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 515 (88) 427
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ (2,602) $ 450 $ (2,152)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ (2,552) $ 531 $ (2,021)
(1)These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost. Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional
information.
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Before Tax Tax (Expense)/ Net of Tax
For the year ended December 31, 2022: Amount Benefit Amount
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
Foreign currency translation adjustments $ 176 $ (406) $ (229)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ (1) $ 0 $ (1)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to other (income) and expense — — —
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities $ (1) $ 0 $ (1)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period $ 241 $ (64) $ 178
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to:
Cost of services (24) 6 (18)
Cost of sales (99) 28 (70)
Cost of financing 24 (6) 18
SG&A expense (38) 11 (28)
Other (income) and expense (349) 88 (261)
Interest expense 86 (22) 64
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges $ (158) $ 41 $ (117)
Retirement-related benefit plans (1)
Prior service costs/(credits) $ 463 $ (99) $ 364
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period 878 (183) 695
Curtailments and settlements 5,970 (1,490) 4,480
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs 12 (3) 9
Amortization of net (gains)/losses 1,596 (304) 1,293
Total retirement-related benefit plans $ 8,919 $ (2,078) $ 6,841
Other comprehensive income/(loss) $ 8,936 $ (2,442) $ 6,494
(1)These AOCI components are included in the computation of net periodic pension cost and include the impact of a pension settlement charge of $5.9
billion ($4.4 billion net of tax). Refer to note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 102 =====
100 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Net Change Net Unrealized
Net Unrealized Foreign Retirement- Gains/(Losses) Accumulated
Gains/(Losses) Currency Related on Available- Other
on Cash Flow Translation Benefit For-Sale Comprehensive
Hedges Adjustments (1) Plans Securities Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2021 $ (18) $ (3,362) $ (19,854) $ (1) $ (23,234)
Other comprehensive income before
reclassifications 178 (229) 1,059 (1) 1,007
Amount reclassified from accumulated
other comprehensive income (2) (295) — 5,782 — 5,487
Total change for the period (117) (229) 6,841 (1) 6,494
December 31, 2022 (135) (3,591) (13,013) (1) (16,740)
Other comprehensive income before
reclassifications 144 103 (2,577) 0 (2,331)
Amount reclassified from accumulated
other comprehensive income (115) — 425 — 310
Total change for the period 28 103 (2,152) 0 (2,021)
December 31, 2023 (106) (3,488) (15,165) (1) (18,761)
Other comprehensive income before
reclassifications 276 (23) (39) 1 215
Amount reclassified from accumulated
other comprehensive income (3) 67 — 3,210 — 3,278
Total change for the period 343 (23) 3,171 1 3,492
December 31, 2024 $ 237 $ (3,512) $ (11,994) $ 0 $ (15,269)
(1)Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
(2)Net change in retirement-related benefit plans includes the impact of a pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billionnet of tax). Refer to note
U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
(3)Net change in retirement-related benefit plans includes the impact of pension settlement charges of $3.1 billion ($2.4 billion net of tax). Refer to note
U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” for additional information.
NOTE S. DERIVATIVE FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the normal
course of business, the company is exposed to the impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a lesser
extent equity risk. The company limits these risks by following established risk management policies and procedures, including the
use of derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest rate
exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate movements between the interest rates associated with the company’s lease and
other financial assets and the interest rates associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the related cost
of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising from foreign exchange
rate fluctuations.
In the Consolidated Balance Sheet, the company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities in master netting arrangements
nor does it offset receivables or payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral against the fair values of the related
derivative instruments. The amount recognized in other accounts receivable for the right to reclaim cash collateral was $29 million
and $11 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The amount recognized in accounts payable for the obligation to
return cash collateral was$3 million and $7 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. The company restricts the use of
cash collateral received to rehypothecation, and therefore reports it in restricted cash in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. The
amount rehypothecated was$3 million and $7 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively. Additionally, if derivative
exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Balance Sheet at December 31,
2024 and 2023, the total derivative asset and liability positions each would have been reduced by$352 million and$235 million,
respectively.
As discussed in note E, “Acquisitions & Divestitures,” the company completed the acquisition of StreamSets and webMethods from
Software AG on July 1, 2024. Prior to the acquisition, beginning in December 2023, the company entered into foreign currency
derivative contracts which were accounted for as non-hedge derivatives and expired by June 28, 2024. For the years ended
December 31, 2024 and 2023, the company recorded a realized loss of $68 million and an unrealized gain of $12 million,
respectively, in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. At December 31, 2023, the fair value of the call
options was $62 million, and was included in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the Consolidated Balance Sheet. There
were no associated derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2024.
In 2021, the company completed the separation of its managed infrastructure services unit into a new public company, Kyndryl.
During 2022, the company fully disposed of its previously retained interest in Kyndryl common stock pursuant to exchange

===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 101
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
agreements with a third-party financial institution and entered into a cash-settled swap that maintained IBM’s continued economic
exposure in those shares. For the year ended December 31, 2022, IBM recognized a total realized loss of $351 million, including
$267 million on the disposition of shares and $83 million on the settlement of the swap in other (income) and expense in the
Consolidated Income Statement.
In its hedging programs, the company may use forward contracts, futures contracts, interest-rate swaps, cross-currency swaps,
equity swaps and options depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments.
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets to fund its operations and financing business. Access to cost-effective
financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce overall
interest cost, the company may use interest-rate swaps to convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., fair
value hedges) and to convert specific variable-rate debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At both December
31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of the company’s interest-rate swaps was $6.7 billion. The weighted-average
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2024 and 2023 was approximately 4.5 years and 5.5 years, respectively.
These interest-rate contracts were accounted for as fair value hedges. The company did not have any cash flow hedges relating to
this program outstanding at December 31, 2024 and 2023.
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use instruments
such as forward starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest payments related to the forecasted debt issuances.
There were no instruments outstanding at December 31, 2024 and 2023.
In connection with cash flow hedges of forecasted interest payments related to the company’s borrowings, there were unrealized
net losses (before taxes) of $106 million and $121 million at December 31, 2024 and 2023, respectively, deferred in AOCI. The
company estimates that $14 million of the deferred net losses (before taxes) on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2024 will be
reclassified to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying interest
payments.
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries (Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in major
foreign subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the
subsidiaries’ functional currency with respect to the U.S. dollar. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the carrying value of debt
designated as hedging instruments was $14.0 billion and $15.9 billion, respectively. The company also uses foreign currency
derivatives, which may include forward contracts, long-term cross-currency swaps and options, for this risk management purpose.
In the third quarter of 2024, the company entered into long-term cross-currency swaps designated as hedge of net investment
instruments that the company also relates to its underlying U.S. dollar denominated debt. The notional value of these long-term
cross-currency swaps at December 31, 2024 was $2.2 billion. Cash flows associated with interim net interest settlements of these
swaps are reported in cash flows from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. For the year ended
December 31, 2024, interim net interest cash settlements were not material. There were no associated derivatives at December 31,
2023. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of derivative instruments designated as net investment hedges
was $6.2 billion and $4.9 billion, respectively. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the weighted-average remaining maturity of these
instruments was approximately 0.8 years and 0.1 years, respectively.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments
for royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries and with the company. In anticipation of these
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the currency markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange
forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. At December 31,
2024, the maximum remaining length of time over which the company has hedged its exposure to the variability in future cash flows
is approximately two years. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash
flow hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $9.7 billion and $9.2 billion, respectively. At both December 31, 2024
and 2023, the weighted-average remaining maturity of these instruments was approximately 0.6 years.
At December 31, 2024 and 2023, in connection with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, there were
unrealized net gains (before taxes) of $415 million and $40 million, respectively, deferred in AOCI. The company estimates that

===== PAGE 104 =====
102 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
$363 millionof the deferred net gains (before taxes) on derivatives in AOCI at December 31, 2024 will be reclassified to net income
within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company may
employ forward contracts or cross-currency swaps to convert the principal, or principal and interest payments of foreign currency
denominated debt to debt denominated in the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These derivatives are accounted for as
cash flow hedges.
At December 31, 2024, the maximum length of time remaining over which the company has hedged its exposure was approximately
six years. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of derivative instruments designated as cash flow hedges of
foreign currency denominated debt was $5.0 billion and $5.2 billion, respectively.
At December 31, 2024 and 2023, in connection with the cross-currency swaps terminated in August 2023, there were unrealized
net losses (before taxes) of $46 million and $68 million, respectively, deferred in AOCI,of which $15 million of the deferred net
losses (before taxes) is estimated to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 months.
At December 31, 2024 and 2023, in connection with forward contracts, there were unrealized net gains (before taxes) of$84
million and $23 million, respectively, deferred in AOCI.Approximately $54 million of losses (before taxes) related to the initial
forward points excluded from the assessment of hedge effectiveness is expected to be amortized to other (income) and expenses
within the next 12 months.
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps
to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated
Income Statement. At December 31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of
foreign currency exposure was $7.4 billion and $6.7 billion, respectively.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related
to certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A
expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. Although not designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives,
including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The
derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market indices or the total return on the company’s common stock, and
are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Income Statement. At December
31, 2024 and 2023, the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic hedges of these compensation obligations was
$1.5 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively.
Cumulative Basis Adjustments for Fair Value Hedges
AtDecember 31, 2024 and 2023, the following amounts were recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet related to cumulative
basis adjustments for fair value hedges:
($ in millions)
At December 31: 2024 2023
Short-term debt
Carrying amount of the hedged item $ (13) $ (1)
Cumulative hedging adjustments included in the carrying amount—assets/(liabilities) (13) (1)
Long-term debt
Carrying amount of the hedged item (6,497) (6,629)
Cumulative hedging adjustments included in the carrying amount—assets/(liabilities) (1) 190 61
(1)Includes ($155) million and ($200) million of hedging adjustments on discontinued hedging relationships at December 31, 2024 and 2023,
respectively.

===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 103
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Income Statement
The total amounts of income and expense line items presented in the Consolidated Income Statement in which the effects of fair
value hedges, cash flow hedges, net investment hedges and derivatives not designated as hedging instruments are recorded and the
total effect of hedge activity on these income and expense line items are as follows:
($ in millions)
Gains/(Losses) of
Total Total Hedge Activity
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Cost of services $ 20,529 $ 21,051 $ 21,062 $ 22 $ (5) $ 24
Cost of sales 6,303 6,127 6,374 40 22 99
Cost of financing 369 382 406 (10) (11) 2
SG&A expense 19,688 19,003 18,609 151 165 (211)
Other (income) and expense 1,871 (914) 5,803 (515) 17 (225)
Interest expense 1,712 1,607 1,216 (51) (54) 6
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement
Recognized on Attributable to Risk
Consolidated Derivatives Being Hedged (1)
Income Statement
For the year ended December 31: Line Item 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges (2)
Interest rate contracts Cost of financing $ (41) $ (17) $ (73) $ 19 $ (2) $ 85
Interest expense (208) (83) (257) 97 (11) 299
Derivative instruments not designated as
hedging instruments
Other (income)
Foreign exchange contracts and expense (390) (192) (492) N/A N/A N/A
Equity contracts SG&A expense 135 153 (249) N/A N/A N/A
Other (income)
and expense — — (83) N/A N/A N/A
Total $ (504) $ (140) $ (1,153) $ 116 $ (13) $ 384
(1)The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedgeditem recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments
recorded on de-designated hedging relationships during the period.
(2)The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon
payments required under these derivative contracts.

===== PAGE 106 =====
104 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Consolidated Income Statement and Other Comprehensive Income
Reclassified Amounts Excluded from
For the year ended Recognized in OCI Consolidated from AOCI Effectiveness Testing (1)
Income Statement
December 31: 2024 2023 2022 Line Item 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Derivative instruments
in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts $ — $ — $ — Cost of financing $ (2) $ (3) $ (4) $ — $ — $ —
Interest expense (13) (15) (14) — — —
Foreign exchange
contracts Cost of services 22 (5) 24 — — —
Amount included in
the assessment of
effectiveness 405 213 241 Cost of sales 40 22 99 — — —
Amount excluded from
the assessment of
effectiveness (16) (6) — Cost of financing (4) (11) (21) — — —
SG&A expense 16 12 38 — — —
Other (income) and
expense (48) 239 349 (77) (29) —
Interest expense (19) (51) (72) — — —
Instruments in net
investment hedges (2)
Foreign exchange
contracts Cost of financing — — — 18 22 14
Amount included in
the assessment of
effectiveness 1,354 (397) 1,613 Interest expense — — — 91 105 50
Amount excluded from
the assessment of
effectiveness 4 — —
Total $ 1,747 $ (190) $ 1,854 $ (7) $ 189 $ 400 $ 32 $ 98 $ 64
(1)Amounts excluded from effectiveness testing for both net investment hedges and cash flow hedges of foreign currency debt are amortized to net
income on a straight-line basis over the life of the relevant hedging instrument.
(2)Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments with the amounts recognized in OCI providing an offset to the
translation of foreign subsidiaries.
N/A–Not applicable
For the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023, there wereno material gains or losses associated with an underlying exposure
that did not or was not expected to occur (for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course of business.

===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 105
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE T. STOCK-BASED COMPENSATION
The following table presents total stock-based compensation cost included in income from continuing operations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Cost $ 223 $ 190 $ 164
SG&A expense 690 616 566
RD&E expense 398 328 258
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost 1,311 1,133 987
Income tax benefits (469) (290) (249)
Net stock-based compensation cost $ 842 $ 843 $ 738
The company’s total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested awards at December 31, 2024 was $1.9 billion and is
expected to be recognized over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.5 years.
Capitalized stock-based compensation cost was not material at December 31, 2024,2023 and 2022.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the
Plans). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compensation and Management Resources Committee of the Board of
Directors. Awards available under the Plans principally include restricted stock units, performance share units, stock options or any
combination thereof.
There were 293 million shares originally authorized to be awarded under the company’s existing Plans and 66 million shares
granted under previous plans that, if and when those awards were cancelled, could be reissued under the existing Plans. At
December 31, 2024, 40 million unused shares were available to be granted.
Stock Awards
Stock awards for the periods presented were made in the form of Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted
Stock Units (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs).
The following table summarizes RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
RSUs PSUs
Weighted-Average Weighted-Average
Grant Price Number of Units Grant Price Number of Units (1)
Balance at January 1, 2022 $ 116 19,038,480 $ 118 3,728,857
Awards granted 112 11,447,966 110 1,237,019
Awards released 114 (7,013,530) 114 (679,601)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted (2) 116 (2,420,002) 116 (720,197)
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 115 21,052,914 $ 117 3,566,078
Awards granted 118 10,915,958 117 1,295,937
Awards released 114 (7,383,980) 113 (840,111)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted (2) 115 (1,527,249) 114 (548,865)
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 116 23,057,643 $ 118 3,473,039
Awards granted 176 8,220,339 165 1,110,929
Awards released 117 (8,532,751) 126 (963,249)
Awards canceled/forfeited/performance adjusted (2) 123 (1,681,686) 131 (319,169)
Balance at December 31, 2024 $ 139 21,063,545 $ 130 3,301,550
(1)The balances at December 31 for each period presented represent the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date
performance targets. The actual number of shares issued will depend on final performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
(2)Includes adjustments of (196,544), (404,655) and (362,247) for PSUs in 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively, because final performance metrics were
above or below specified targets.

===== PAGE 108 =====
106 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The total fair value of RSUs and PSUs granted and vested during the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 were as
follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
RSUs
Granted $ 1,449 $ 1,293 $ 1,288
Vested 994 845 801
PSUs
Granted $ 183 $ 151 $ 136
Vested 121 95 77
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 were $413 million, $256 million and $249 million, respectively.
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are
granted at an exercise price equal to the company’s average high and low stock price on the date of grant.These awards generally
vest in four equal increments on the first four anniversaries of the grant date and have a contractual term of 10 years. The company
estimates the fair value of stock options at the date of grant using a Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and assumptions
used to estimate the fair value of stock options include the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of the
company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend yield. For the stock options granted for the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the expected option term was determined from historical exercise patterns, volatility was
based on an analysis of the company’s historical stock prices over the expected option term, the risk-free rate was obtained from
the U.S. Treasury yield curve in effect at the time of grant and the dividend yield was based on the company’s expectation of paying
dividends in the foreseeable future. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual future events or the value ultimately
realized by employees who receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indicative of the reasonableness of the original
estimates of fair value made by the company. Stock options are primarily granted by the company as part of its executive
compensation programs.
The weighted-average fair value of stock options granted for the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022 was $40.09,
$22.75 and $14.29, respectively. The fair value was estimated based on the following weighted-average assumptions:
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022
Expected term (in years) 6.3 6.3 6.3
Expected volatility 26.2% 26.0% 25.5%
Risk-free rate 4.4% 4.2% 2.0%
Dividend yield 3.7% 5.0% 5.3%

===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 107
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022.
Weighted-Average Number of Shares
Exercise Price Under Option
Balance at January 1, 2022 $ 135 1,549,732
Options granted 125 5,044,353
Options exercised — —
Options forfeited/cancelled/expired 125 (319,560)
Balance at December 31, 2022 $ 128 6,274,525
Options granted 133 4,574,756
Options exercised 125 (408,045)
Options forfeited/cancelled/expired 129 (584,674)
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 130 9,856,562
Options granted 181 3,156,770
Options exercised 133 (2,384,273)
Options forfeited/cancelled/expired 143 (623,663)
Balance at December 31, 2024 $ 145 10,005,396
Vested and exercisable at December 31, 2024 $ 128 2,029,748
The weighted-average remaining contractual term and the aggregate intrinsic value of stock options outstanding was 8.1 years and
$750 million, respectively, at December 31, 2024. The weighted-average remaining contractual term and the aggregate intrinsic
value of stock options vested and exercisable was 7.5 years and $186 million, respectively, at December 31, 2024.
Exercises of Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised for the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023 was $138 million and $10 million,
respectively. No stock options were exercised for the year ended December 31, 2022 because the company did not grant stock
options during the year ended December 31, 2021. The total cash received from employees as a result of stock option exercises for
the years ended December 31, 2024 and 2023 was approximately $317 million and $51 million, respectively, and was included
within proceeds from issuance of shares within cash from financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. In
connection with these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the company for the year ended December 31, 2024 was $34 million.
The tax benefits realized during 2023wereimmaterial. The company settles employees stock option exercises primarily with newly
issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2024 and 2023 were
1,353 million and 1,352 million shares, respectively.
Acquisitions
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there were 0.2 million stock options outstanding at December 31, 2024, as a
result of the company’s conversion of stock-based awards previously granted by acquired entities. The weighted-average exercise
price of these stock options was $23 per share. No stock awards were outstanding at December 31, 2024.
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
Effective April 1, 2022, the company increased the discount for eligible participants to purchase shares of IBM common stock under
its Employees Stock Purchase Plan (ESPP) from5 percent to 15 percent off the average market price on the date of purchase. Since
this change, the ESPP has been considered compensatory under the accounting requirements for stock-based compensation. The
ESPP enables eligible participants to purchase shares of IBM common stock through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of
eligible compensation. Eligible compensation includes any compensation received by the employee during the year. The ESPP
provides for semi-annual offering periods during which shares may be purchased and continues as long as shares remain available
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period.
Employees purchased approximately 2.6 million, 3.1 million and 2.4 million shares under the ESPP during the years ended
December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, respectively. For the years ended December 31, 2024, 2023 and 2022, the average market
price of shares purchased was$161, $117 and $114 per share, respectively, and the total stock-based compensation cost was
$75 million,$64 million and $43 million, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by the company on its common stock also
include cash dividends on the company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can
be reinvested. The company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered outstanding and is included in the weighted-average
outstanding shares for purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
Approximately 8.7 million shares were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2024.

===== PAGE 110 =====
108 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
NOTE U. RETIREMENT-RELATED BENEFITS
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors the following retirement-related plans/benefits:
Plan Eligibility Funding Benefit Calculation Other
U.S. Defined Benefit IBM Personal Pension U.S. regular, full-time Any company Vary based on the Excluding RBA, benefit
(DB) Pension Plans Plan (Qualified PPP) and part-time contributions, required participant: accruals ceased
which includes the employees hired prior or voluntary, are to an December 31, 2007
Retirement Benefit to January 1, 2005 irrevocable trust fund, Based on average
Account (“RBA”) as of held for the sole earnings, years of Certain defined benefit
January 1, 2024 RBA - U.S. regular, full- benefit of participants service, and age pension obligations
time, and part time and beneficiaries and related plan assets
employees with at Cash balance formula were transferred in
least one year of based on percentage of 2022 and 2024, as
service on or after employees’ annual described under “IBM
January 1, 2024 salary, as well as an Retirement Plan
interest crediting rate Changes,” below
(includes RBA as of
Excess Personal U.S. regular, full-time Unfunded, provides January 1, 2024) Benefit accruals
Pension Plan (“Excess and part-time benefits in excess of ceased December 31,
PPP”) employees hired prior IRS limitations for 2007
to January 1, 2005 qualified plans
Supplemental Eligible U.S. executives Unfunded Based on average
Executive Retention earnings, years of
Plan (“Retention Plan”) service and age
U.S. Defined 401(k) Plan (1) U.S. regular, full-time All plan participant Employees can save up All amounts in the plan
Contribution (DC) and part-time contributions are made to 80% of eligible pay, are 100% vested
Plans employees in cash and invested in subject to the Internal
accordance with Revenue Code (IRC)
participants’ annual contribution
investment elections limit
Excess Savings Plan (1) U.S. employees whose Unfunded, non- Company matches Amounts deferred into
eligible compensation qualified amounts contributions on the Plan, including
is expected to exceed deferred are record- eligible compensation company contributions,
IRS compensation limit keeping (notional) deferred and on are recorded as
for qualified plans accounts and are not compensation earned liabilities
held in trust for the in excess of the IRC
participants, but may pay limit
be invested in
accordance with
participants’
investment elections
(under the 401(k) Plan
options)
U.S. Nonpension Nonpension Medical and dental Company contributes Varies based on plan Since January 1, 2004,
Postretirement Postretirement Plan benefits for eligible to irrevocable trust design formulas and new hires are not
Benefit Plan (IBM Benefits Plan for U.S. retirees and fund, held for the sole eligibility requirements eligible for these
Retired Employees) eligible dependents, as benefit of participants benefits
well as life insurance and beneficiaries
for eligible U.S. retirees
Non-U.S. Plans DB or DC Eligible regular Company deposits Based either on years In certain countries,
employees in certain funds under various of service and the benefit accruals have
non-U.S. subsidiaries fiduciary-type employee’s ceased and/or have
or branches arrangements, compensation been closed to new
purchases annuities (generally during a hires as of various
under group contracts fixed number of years dates
or provides reserves for immediately before
these plans retirement) or on Certain defined benefit
annual credits pension obligations
and related plan assets
were transferred in
2024, as described
under “IBM Retirement
Plan Changes,” below
Nonpension Medical and dental Primarily unfunded Varies based on plan Most non-U.S. retirees
Postretirement Plan benefits for eligible except for a few select design formulas and are covered by local
non-U.S. retirees and countries where the eligibility requirements government sponsored
eligible dependents, as company contributes to by country and administered
well as life insurance irrevocable trust funds programs
for certain eligible non- held for the sole
U.S. retirees benefit of participants
and beneficiaries
(1)Effective January 1, 2024, the 401(k) Plus Plan was renamed to the 401(k) Plan and the Excess 401(k) Plus Plan was renamed to the Excess Savings
Plan. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional information.

===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 109
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the
Consolidated Income Statement.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Total
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Total defined benefit pension plans
(income)/cost (1) $ 3,265 $ (329) $ 5,857 $ 652 $ 359 $ 836 $ 3,918 $ 30 $ 6,693
Total defined contribution plans cost (2) $ 57 $ 615 $ 555 $ 383 $ 376 $ 369 $ 440 $ 991 $ 924
Nonpension postretirement benefit
plans cost $ 79 $ 92 $ 85 $ 41 $ 36 $ 30 $ 120 $ 128 $ 115
Total retirement-related benefits net
periodic cost (1) $ 3,402 $ 378 $ 6,497 $ 1,077 $ 771 $ 1,235 $ 4,478 $ 1,149 $ 7,732
(1)In 2024, U.S. and Non-U.S. Plans include the impact of pension settlement charges of $2.7 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively, and the increase in
total defined benefit pension plans (income)/cost due to the RBA that was effective January 1, 2024. In 2022, U.S. Plans includes the impact of a
pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional information.
(2)Decrease in 2024 U.S. Plans total defined contributions plans cost is due to the introduction of the RBA that was effective January 1, 2024. Refer to the
section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional information.
The following table presents a summary of the total PBO for defined benefit pension plans, APBO for nonpension postretirement
benefit plans, fair value of plan assets and the associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations Fair Value of Plan Assets Funded Status (1)
At December 31: 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024 2023
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified PPP (2) $ 12,941 $ 19,854 $ 17,591 $ 24,437 $ 4,651 $ 4,584
Underfunded plans
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans (3) 1,278 1,382 — — (1,278) (1,382)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan 2,257 2,233 6 10 (2,251) (2,224)
Total underfunded U.S. plans $ 3,535 $ 3,615 $ 6 $ 10 $ (3,529) $ (3,605)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans (4) (5) $ 13,568 $ 16,515 $ 16,410 $ 19,438 $ 2,842 $ 2,923
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans — — — — — —
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans $ 13,568 $ 16,515 $ 16,410 $ 19,438 $ 2,842 $ 2,923
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans (4) $ 10,482 $ 11,946 $ 8,795 $ 9,621 $ (1,688) $ (2,325)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans (4) 4,440 5,018 — — (4,440) (5,018)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 507 586 14 23 (493) (564)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans $ 15,429 $ 17,550 $ 8,809 $ 9,643 $ (6,620) $ (7,907)
Total overfunded plans $ 26,509 $ 36,369 $ 34,001 $ 43,875 $ 7,492 $ 7,506
Total underfunded plans $ 18,964 $ 21,165 $ 8,815 $ 9,653 $ (10,149) $ (11,512)
(1)Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as
compensation and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
(2)Year-to-year reduction in Benefit Obligations and Fair Value of Plan Assets includes the transfer of approximately $6 billion of pension benefit
obligations and assets to Prudential Insurance Company of America. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional
information.
(3)Excess PPP and Retention Plan.
(4)Non-U.S. qualified plans represent plans funded outside of the U.S. Non-U.S. nonqualified plans are unfunded.
(5)Year-to-year reduction inBenefit Obligations and Fair Value of Plan Assets includes the transfer of $1.2 billion of pension benefit obligations and
assets to RBC Life Insurance Company and Brookfield Annuity Company. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for
additional information.

===== PAGE 112 =====
110 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
At December 31, 2024, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 116 percent funded compared to the
benefit obligations, with the Qualified PPP136 percent funded.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 113 represent financial information for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding
defined contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. Plans consist of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the
Retention Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension postretirement benefit plans under non-U.S. Plans consist of
all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan.
The following tables present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the retirement-related benefit plans recognized in the
Consolidated Income Statement, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Service cost (1) $ 394 $ — $ — $ 170 $ 177 $ 237
Interest cost (2) 911 1,090 1,129 1,077 1,170 493
Expected return on plan assets (2) (1,253) (1,529) (1,729) (1,546) (1,440) (1,016)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (2) — 0 8 22 20 14
Recognized actuarial losses (2) 452 109 527 516 400 1,031
Curtailments and settlements (2) (3) 2,761 — 5,923 398 7 47
Multi-employer plans — — — 13 13 15
Other costs/(credits) (2) — — — 3 13 15
Total net periodic (income)/cost (3) $ 3,265 $ (329) $ 5,857 $ 652 $ 359 $ 836
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31: 2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Service cost $ 2 $ 4 $ 5 $ 2 $ 2 $ 3
Interest cost (2) 106 117 85 41 39 24
Expected return on plan assets (2) — — — (1) (2) (2)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits) (2) (29) (29) (10) 0 0 0
Recognized actuarial losses (2) — — 5 (1) (1) 4
Curtailments and settlements (2) — — — 0 (2) 0
Other costs/(credits) (2) — — — 0 0 0
Total net periodic cost $ 79 $ 92 $ 85 $ 41 $ 36 $ 30
(1)Increase in U.S. Plans Service Cost in 2024 is due to the RBA that was effective January 1, 2024. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement
Plan Changes,” for additional information.
(2)These components of net periodic pension costs are included in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Income Statement.
(3)In 2024, U.S. and Non-U.S. Plans include the impact of pension settlement charges of $2.7 billion and $0.4 billion, respectively. In 2022, U.S. Plans
includes the impact of a pension settlement charge of $5.9 billion. Refer to the section below entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional
information.

===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 111
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Retirement Plan Changes
In September 2022, the Qualified PPP irrevocably transferred to The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Metropolitan
Life Insurance Company approximately $16 billion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan
assets, thereby reducing the company’s pension obligations and assets by the same amount.
Upon issuance of the group annuity contracts, the Qualified PPP’s benefit obligations and administration for approximately 100,000
of the company’s retirees and beneficiaries were transferred to The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company. Under the group annuity contracts, The Prudential Insurance Company of America and Metropolitan Life
Insurance Company have made an irrevocable commitment, and are solely responsible, to pay 50 percent of the pension benefits of
the company's retirees and beneficiaries due on and after January 1, 2023. The transaction resulted in no changes to the amount of
benefits payable to the company’s retirees and beneficiaries. The company recognized a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension
settlement charge of $5.9 billion ($4.4 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2022 primarily related to the accelerated recognition
of actuarial losses included within AOCI in the Consolidated Statement of Equity.
In September 2022, the company amended its U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan to transition coverage for Medicare-eligible
participants to a new IBM-sponsored group Medicare Advantage program administered by UnitedHealthcare, as of January 1, 2023.
The changes were intended to provide an enhanced member experience, better value and more comprehensive benefits to IBM
participants. This change resulted in a decrease in nonpension postretirement benefit obligations and a corresponding decrease in
AOCI in 2022.
Effective January 1, 2024, IBM changed how it provides certain retirement-related benefits in the U.S. IBM is providing a new
benefit to most U.S. employees under its existing Qualified PPP called the Retirement Benefit Account (RBA). This is in place of any
IBM contributions to the U.S. employees’ 401(k) Plus accounts. IBM U.S. regular full-time and part-time employees with at least
one year of service will participate in the RBA. Each eligible employee’s RBA will be credited monthly with an amount equal to five
percent of their eligible pay with no employee contribution required. Under the RBA, eligible employees will earn six percent interest
through 2026 and starting in 2027, will earn interest equal to the 10-year U.S. Treasury Yield, subject to a three percent minimum
per year through 2033. Eligible employees also received a salary increase effective January 1, 2024 for the difference between the
IBM 401(k) Plus contribution percent they were previously entitled to receive and the five percent RBA pay credit. Since the RBA is a
component of the Qualified PPP, it is funded by the trust for the Qualified PPP along with all other benefits in the Qualified PPP. At
December 31, 2024, the Qualified PPP was 136 percent funded with assets exceeding liabilities by $4.7 billion.
As a result of this change, inactive pension plan participants no longer represent substantially all of the participants in the Qualified
PPP. As required by U.S. GAAP, as of January 1, 2024, the amortization period of unrecognized actuarial losses changed from the
average remaining life expectancy of inactive plan participants to the average remaining service period of active plan participants.
Amortization expense for the year ended December 31, 2024 was approximately $0.5 billion, primarily driven by the change in
amortization period. There was no impact to funded status, retiree benefit payments or funding requirements of the Qualified PPP
due to the change in amortization period.
In September 2024, the Qualified PPP irrevocably transferred to The Prudential Insurance Company of America approximately $6
billion of the Qualified PPP’s defined benefit pension obligations and related plan assets, thereby reducing the company’s pension
obligations and assets by the same amount. After the transaction, the Qualified PPP remained in an overfunded position.
Upon issuance of the group annuity contract, the Qualified PPP’s benefit obligations and administration for approximately 32,000 of
the company’s Plan participants and beneficiaries were transferred to The Prudential Insurance Company of America. Under the
group annuity contract, The Prudential Insurance Company of America has made an irrevocable commitment, and will be solely
responsible, to pay the benefits payable to the participants and beneficiaries. The transaction resulted in no changes to the amount
of benefits payable to the Plan participants and beneficiaries. The company recognized a one-time, non-cash, pre-tax pension
settlement charge of $2.7 billion ($2.0 billion net of tax) in the third quarter of 2024 primarily related to the accelerated recognition
of actuarial losses included within AOCI in the Consolidated Statement of Equity. As a result of this transaction, the company was
required to remeasure the benefit obligation and plan assets of the Qualified PPP. The remeasurement reflected the use of the
discount rate and actual return on plan assets as of August 31, 2024, applying the practical expedient to remeasure plan assets and
obligations as of the nearest calendar month-end date.
In October 2024, IBM Canada Ltd. (“IBMC”) purchased two separate nonparticipating single premium group annuity contracts from
RBC Life Insurance Company and Brookfield Annuity Company that transferred approximately $1.2 billion of the IBMC IBM
Retirement Plan defined benefit pension obligations to them for approximately 6,000 Plan participants and beneficiaries. It was
funded directly by the assets of the IBMC IBM Retirement Plan and required no cash contribution from IBM. There were no changes
to the amount of benefits payable to the Plan participants and beneficiaries. As a result of the transaction, the company recognized
a one time, non-cash, pre-tax, pension settlement charge of $0.4 billion in the fourth quarter of 2024.

===== PAGE 114 =====
(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:56) (cid:40)otes to the Consolidated (cid:33)inancial Statements
(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:40)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:22)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:20)
(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:22)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:12)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:75)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:66)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:26)(cid:1)
(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:12)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:9)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:9)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:69)
(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:24)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:75)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:66)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)
(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:69)
(cid:78)(cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:79)
(cid:31)efined Benefit Pension Plans (cid:40)onpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
(cid:47)(cid:64)S(cid:64) Plans (cid:40)on(cid:61)(cid:47)(cid:64)S(cid:64) Plans (cid:47)(cid:64)S(cid:64) Plan (cid:40)on(cid:61)(cid:47)(cid:64)S(cid:64) Plans
(cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:55) (cid:53)(cid:51)(cid:53)(cid:54)
Change in (cid:3)enefit o(cid:3)ligation
(cid:29)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:37)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:55) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:63)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:61)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:60)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:57)(cid:60)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:1)
(cid:46)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:63)(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1)
(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:63)(cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:63)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:61)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:63)(cid:1)
(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:73)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:78)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:59)(cid:62)(cid:63)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:61)(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:61)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:55)(cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:63)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:1)
(cid:29)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:60)(cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:61)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:31)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:26)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:63)(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:33)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:62)(cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:62)(cid:59)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)
(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:60)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:61)(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:63)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1)
Benefit o(cid:3)ligation at (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:63)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:61)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:59)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:54)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:1)
Change in plan assets
(cid:33)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:23)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:22)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:37)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:55) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:59)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:63)(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:71)(cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:61)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:63)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:57)(cid:63)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:1)
(cid:32)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:16)(cid:26)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:59)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:63)(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:18)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1)
(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:73)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:3)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1)
(cid:29)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:60)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:60)(cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:61)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:33)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:25)(cid:4)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:59)(cid:57)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:68)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:59)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:57)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:2)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)
(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:80)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:60)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:62)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:61)(cid:61)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:62)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:1) (cid:78)(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:33)air value of plan assets at
(cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:55)(cid:61)(cid:71)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:55)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:59)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:63)(cid:71)(cid:54)(cid:59)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:60)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:54)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1) (cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:1)
(cid:33)unded status at (cid:31)ecem(cid:3)er (cid:54)(cid:52) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:57)(cid:61)(cid:57)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:60)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:58)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:59)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:58)(cid:63)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:59)(cid:60)(cid:58)(cid:79)(cid:1)
(cid:28)(cid:4)(cid:4)(cid:22)(cid:14)(cid:22)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:79) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:55)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:63)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:56)(cid:57)(cid:59)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:62)(cid:61)(cid:1) (cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:71)(cid:55)(cid:56)(cid:62)(cid:1) (cid:41)(cid:80)(cid:28) (cid:41)(cid:80)(cid:28) (cid:41)(cid:80)(cid:28) (cid:41)(cid:80)(cid:28)
(cid:78)(cid:55)(cid:79)(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:46)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:5)(cid:22)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:29)(cid:28)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:24)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:37)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:55)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:16)(cid:23)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:13)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:76)(cid:36)(cid:29)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:9)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:71)(cid:77)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:5)(cid:5)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:7)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:69)(cid:1)
(cid:78)(cid:56)(cid:79)(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:56)(cid:54)(cid:56)(cid:58)(cid:71)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:46)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:44)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)
(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:19)(cid:22)(cid:5)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:2)(cid:13)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:14)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:66)(cid:48)(cid:69)(cid:46)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:31)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)
(cid:43)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:14)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:10)(cid:13)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:19)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:7)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:29)(cid:40)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:29)(cid:40)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:14)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:43)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:6)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:29)(cid:30)(cid:1)(cid:39)(cid:10)(cid:7)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:36)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:6)(cid:1)
(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:29)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:16)(cid:12)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:6)(cid:13)(cid:5)(cid:1)(cid:28)(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:30)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:8)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:15)(cid:22)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:26)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:2)(cid:4)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:69)
(cid:78)(cid:57)(cid:79)(cid:1)(cid:45)(cid:6)(cid:17)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:20)(cid:1)(cid:21)(cid:9)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:3)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:6)(cid:7)(cid:10)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:16)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:14)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:8)(cid:15)(cid:16)(cid:1)(cid:7)(cid:22)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:1)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:19)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:10)(cid:17)(cid:2)(cid:15)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:4)(cid:16)(cid:14)(cid:17)(cid:6)(cid:15)(cid:20)(cid:2)(cid:21)(cid:10)(cid:16)(cid:15)(cid:1)(cid:10)(cid:15)(cid:4)(cid:19)(cid:6)(cid:2)(cid:20)(cid:6)(cid:20)(cid:69)
(cid:41)(cid:80)(cid:28)(cid:67)(cid:41)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:1)(cid:2)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:13)(cid:10)(cid:4)(cid:2)(cid:3)(cid:13)(cid:6)

===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 113
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024 2023
Prepaid pension assets $ 4,651 $ 4,584 $ 2,842 $ 2,923 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0 $ 0
Current liabilities—compensation
and benefits (117) (119) (362) (366) (218) (202) (20) (17)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement
and nonpension postretirement
benefit obligations (1,160) (1,262) (5,766) (6,977) (2,033) (2,022) (473) (547)
Funded status—net $ 3,373 $ 3,202 $ (3,286) $ (4,420) $ (2,251) $ (2,224) $ (493) $ (564)
The following table presents the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in OCI
and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in AOCI for the
retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2024 2023 2024 2023 2024 2023 2024 2023
Net loss at January 1 $ 9,467 $ 8,617 $ 12,937 $ 11,219 $ 73 $ 94 $ 123 $ 86
Current period loss/(gain) (101) 959 (73) 2,125 115 (20) 0 34
Curtailments and settlements (1) (2,761) — (398) (7) — — 0 2
Amortization of net loss included in net
periodic (income)/cost (2) (452) (109) (516) (400) — — 1 1
Net loss at December 31 $ 6,153 $ 9,467 $ 11,950 $ 12,937 $ 188 $ 73 $ 125 $ 123
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1 $ 0 $ 0 $ 309 $ 330 $ (350) $ (379) $ (1) $ 0
Current period prior service costs/(credits) — — 56 (1) — — 0 (1)
Curtailments, settlements and other — — — — — — — —
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits
included in net periodic (income)/cost 0 0 (22) (20) 29 29 0 0
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31 $ 0 $ 0 $ 342 $ 309 $ (321) $ (350) $ (1) $ (1)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0 $ — $ — $ 0 $ 0
Total loss recognized in accumulated other
comprehensive income/(loss) (3) $ 6,153 $ 9,467 $ 12,293 $ 13,245 $ (133) $ (276) $ 124 $ 122
(1)In 2024, the amount related to U.S. Defined Benefit Pension Plans includes the impact of a pension settlement charge of $2.7 billion, and the amount
related to Non-U.S. Defined Benefit Pension Plans includes the impact of a pension settlement charge of $0.4 billion. Refer to the section above
entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,”for additional information.
(2)Increase in U.S. Plans Amortization of net loss included in net periodic (income)/cost in 2024 is due to theRBA that was effective January 1, 2024.
Refer to the section above entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional information.
(3)Refer to note R, “Equity Activity,” for the total change in AOCI, and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income for the components of net
periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in OCI for the retirement-related benefit plans.

===== PAGE 116 =====
114 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates
and mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
The following tables present the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations
for retirement-related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans
2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net periodic
(income)/cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate (1) (2) (3) 5.00 % 5.30 % 3.30 % 3.37 % 3.80 % 1.26 %
Expected long-term returns on plan assets (1) (2) (3) 5.08 % 5.50 % 4.33 % 4.89 % 4.44 % 2.97 %
Rate of compensation increase (4) 5.00 % N/A N/A 4.18 % 4.00 % 3.02 %
Interest crediting rate (1) (3) 3.80 % 4.40 % 2.07 % 0.28 % 0.34 % 0.26 %
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure benefit
obligations at December 31
Discount rate 5.50 % 5.00 % 5.30 % 3.61 % 3.36 % 3.80 %
Rate of compensation increase 4.00 % 5.00 % N/A 4.04 % 4.18 % 4.00 %
Interest crediting rate 4.30 % 3.80 % 4.40 % 0.32 % 0.28 % 0.34 %
(1)The Qualified PPP discount rate, expected long-term return on plan assets and interest crediting rate of 5.00 percent, 5.00 percent, and 3.80 percent,
respectively, for the period January 1, 2024 through August 31, 2024, changed to 5.00 percent, 5.25 percentand 3.80 percent, respectively, for the
period September 1, 2024 through December 31, 2024 due to remeasurement of the plan as a result of the changes described in the section above
entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes.”
(2)The Non-U.S. Plan discount rate and expected long-term return on plan assets of 4.60 percent, and 5.50 percent, respectively, for the period January
1, 2024 through October 29, 2024, changed to 4.70 percent and 4.50 percent respectively, for the period October 30, 2024 through December 31,
2024 due to remeasurement of the IBMC IBM Retirement Plan as a result of the changes described in the section above entitled “IBM Retirement Plan
Changes.”
(3)The Qualified PPP discount rate, expected long-term return on plan assets and interest crediting rate of 2.60 percent, 4.00 percent and 1.10 percent,
respectively, for the period January 1, 2022 through August 31, 2022, changed to 4.70 percent, 5.00 percent and 4.00 percent, respectively, for the
period September 1, 2022 through December 31, 2022 due to remeasurement of the plan as a result of the changes described in the section above
entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes.”
(4)The rate of compensation increase in 2024 is due to the RBA that was effective January 1, 2024. Refer to the section above entitled “IBM Retirement
Plan Changes,” for additional information.
N/A–Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
2024 2023 2022 2024 2023 2022
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net periodic
cost for the year ended December 31
Discount rate (1) 5.00 % 5.30 % 3.05 % 7.66 % 7.25 % 5.35 %
Expected long-term returns on plan assets N/A N/A N/A 8.12 % 8.05 % 6.64 %
Interest crediting rate (1) 3.80 % 4.40 % 2.16 % N/A N/A N/A
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure benefit
obligations at December 31
Discount rate 5.30 % 5.00 % 5.30 % 8.21 % 7.66 % 7.25 %
Interest crediting rate 4.30 % 3.80 % 4.40 % N/A N/A N/A
(1)The U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan discount rate and interest crediting rate of 2.30 percent and 1.10 percent, respectively, for the period
January 1, 2022 through July 31, 2022, changed to 4.10 percent and 3.65 percent, respectively, for the period August 1, 2022 through December 31,
2022 due to remeasurement of the plan as a result of the changes described in the section above entitled “IBM Retirement Plan Changes.”
N/A–Not applicable

===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 115
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Item Description of Assumptions
Discount Rate Changes in discount rate assumptions impact net periodic (income)/cost and the PBO.
For the U.S. and certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds is used to construct
a yield curve. Cash flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation payments are matched to the
yield curve to derive the discount rates.
In other non-U.S. countries where the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not as well developed,
a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used as a base, and a credit spread is added to simulate
corporate bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan. This is the benchmark for
developing the respective discount rates.
Expected Long- Represents the expected long-term returns on plan assets based on the calculated market-related value of
Term Returns on plan assets and considers long-term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and
Plan Assets strategies discussed on page 116. These rates of return are developed and tested for reasonableness
against historical returns by the company.
The use of expected returns may result in pension income that is greater or less than the actual return of
those plan assets in a given year. Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are designed to
approximate the actual long-term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income or loss recognition that
more closely matches the pattern of the services provided by the employees.
The difference between actual and expected returns is recognized as a component of net loss or gain in
AOCI, which is amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives or life
expectancy of the plan participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain
thresholds provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of plan assets recognizes changes
in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets
line in net periodic (income)/cost.
The projected long-term rate of return on plan assets for 2025 is 5.50 percent for U.S. and 4.86 percent for
non-U.S. DB Plans.
Rate of Compensation rate increases are determined based on the company’s long-term plans for such increases.
Compensation
Increases and Mortality assumptions are based on life expectancy and death rates for different types of participants and
Mortality are periodically updated based on actual experience.
Assumptions
Interest Crediting Benefits for participants in Cash Balance Plans are calculated using a cash balance formula. An assumption
Rate underlying this formula is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/cost and the
PBO. This provides the basis for projecting the expected interest rate that plan participants will earn on the
benefits that they are expected to receive in the following year.
Healthcare Cost For nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company determines healthcare cost trend rates based
Trend Rate on medical cost inflation expectations in each market and IBM’s plan characteristics. The healthcare cost
trend rate is an important consideration when setting future expectations for plan costs or benefit
obligations, taking into account the terms of the plan which limit the company’s future obligations to the
participants.
The company’s U.S. healthcare cost trend rate assumption for 2025 is 6.47 percent and is expected to
decrease to 4.50 percent over approximately 14 years.

===== PAGE 118 =====
116 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and measured at fair value. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations,
these fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market transactions.
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future
obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations will be settled depends on future events, including the retirement dates
and life expectancy of the plan participants. The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the current
economic environment and other pertinent factors described above. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strategy balances the
requirement to generate returns, using assets with higher expected returns such as equity securities, with the need to control risk in
the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity
values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the
portfolio among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on
economic growth, currency and other factors that affect investment returns. In 2024, the company changed its investment,
strategy, modifying asset allocation, primarily by increasing return-seeking assets and reducing debt securities. The change was
designed to improve expected returns for the plan given that the plan began accruing new liabilities in the form of Retirement
Benefit Accounts. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 11 percent equity securities, 70 percent fixed-income securities,
3 percent real estate and 16 percent other investments.
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and investment professionals who are employees of the company. They
are bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s management and are measured against specific benchmarks.
Among these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer concentration,
investment style and reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies.
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with $1,465 million of the Qualified PPP portfolio as of December 31, 2024 invested in
private market assets consisting of private equities, private real estate investments and private infrastructure equity, which are less
liquid than publicly traded securities and primarily measured at net asset value (NAV). In addition, the Qualified PPP portfolio had
$843 million in commitments for future investments in private markets to be made over a number of years. These commitments are
expected to be funded from plan assets.
Derivatives are used as an effective means to achieve investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s risk management
strategy. The primary reasons for the use of derivatives are fixed income management, including duration, interest rate
management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to manage currency strategies.
The non-U.S. Plans investment objectives are similar to those described previously, subject to local regulations. The weighted-
average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 16 percent equity securities, 63 percent fixed-income securities, 3 percent real
estate, 13 percent insurance contracts and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation decisions made by
the company’s management. In some countries, a higher percentage allocation to fixed income is required to manage solvency and
funding risks. In others, the responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a board that may include up to 50 percent
of members elected by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences compared with the strategies previously
described. The percentage of non-U.S. plans investment in assets that are less liquid is consistent with the U.S. plan. The use of
derivatives is also consistent with the U.S. plan and mainly for currency hedging, interest rate risk management, credit exposure and
alternative investment strategies.
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains a
nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit payments.

===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 117
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
December 31, 2024. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the
company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $ 655 $ — $ 7 $ 661 $ 67 $ 1 $ — $ 68
Equity mutual funds (2) 183 — — 183 — — — —
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 7,010 — 7,010 110 6,807 — 6,917
Corporate bonds (4) — 3,663 186 3,849 7 2,550 — 2,557
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 141 — 141 — 4 — 4
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 240 — — 240 — — — —
Insurance contracts (6) — — — — — 3,332 — 3,332
Cash and short-term investments (7) 670 (24) — 646 170 277 — 447
Private equity — — — — — — — —
Real estate — — — — — — 3 3
Derivatives (8) — 8 — 8 39 58 — 97
Other mutual funds (9) — — — — 20 — — 20
Subtotal 1,747 10,799 193 12,739 413 13,029 3 13,444
Investments measured at net asset
value using the NAV practical
expedient (10) — — — 4,852 — — — 11,807
Other (11) — — — 0 — — — (47)
Fair value of plan assets $ 1,747 $ 10,799 $ 193 $1 7,591 $ 413 $ 13,029 $ 3 $ 25,205
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $1 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of
$1 million.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $4 million.
(5) Invests predominantly in fixed-income securities.
(6) Primarily represents insurance policy contracts (Buy-In) in certain non-U.S. plans.
(7) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Includes interest-rate derivatives, forwards, exchange-traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(9) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(10)Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(11)Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $6 million were invested primarily in cash equivalents, categorized as
Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $14 million, primarily in Brazil,
and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and
corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.

===== PAGE 120 =====
118 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at
December 31, 2023. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the
company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total Level 1 Level 2 Level 3 Total
Equity
Equity securities (1) $ 631 $ — $ — $ 631 $ 243 $ — $ — $ 243
Equity mutual funds (2) 155 — — 155 5 — — 5
Fixed income
Government and related (3) — 9,861 — 9,861 — 7,700 — 7,700
Corporate bonds (4) — 7,074 709 7,783 — 2,691 — 2,691
Mortgage and asset-backed securities — 178 — 178 — 9 — 9
Fixed income mutual funds (5) 251 — — 251 — — 75 75
Insurance contracts (6) — — — — — 3,774 — 3,774
Cash and short-term investments (7) 495 119 — 614 264 315 — 579
Private equity — — 13 13 — — — —
Real estate — — — — — — 4 4
Derivatives (8) — — — — 51 258 — 309
Other mutual funds (9) — — — — 20 — — 20
Subtotal 1,532 17,231 722 19,485 584 14,747 78 15,409
Investments measured at net asset
value using the NAV practical
expedient (10) — — — 4,952 — — — 13,709
Other (11) — — — 0 — — — (59)
Fair value of plan assets $ 1,532 $ 17,231 $ 722 $ 24,437 $ 584 $ 14,747 $ 78 $ 29,059
(1) Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $1 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM common stock of
$2 million.
(2) Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(3) Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(4) The U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $16 million. Non-U.S. Plans include IBM corporate bonds of $5 million.
(5) Invests in predominantly fixed-income securities.
(6) Primarily represents insurance policy contracts (Buy-In) in certain non-U.S. plans.
(7) Includes cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(8) Includes interest-rate derivatives, forwards, exchange-traded and other over-the-counter derivatives.
(9) Invests in both equity and fixed-income securities.
(10)Investments measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient, including commingled
funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships.
(11)Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $10 million were invested in cash equivalents, categorized as Level 1 in
the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $23 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a
lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed-income securities and corporate
bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended
December 31, 2024 and 2023 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Equity Corporate Private
Securities Bonds Equity Total
Balance at January 1, 2024 $ — $ 709 $ 13 $ 722
Return on assets held at end of year (2) 4 — 2
Return on assets sold during the year 0 16 — 16
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 2 (545) (10) (554)
Transfers, net 7 1 (2) 6
Balance at December 31, 2024 $ 7 $ 186 $ — $ 193

===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 119
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Corporate Private
Bonds Equity Total
Balance at January 1, 2023 $ 721 $ 421 $ 1,142
Return on assets held at end of year (18) (5) (23)
Return on assets sold during the year 10 0 10
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (5) (404) (409)
Transfers, net 2 — 2
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 709 $ 13 $ 722
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended
December 31, 2024 and 2023 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Fixed Income
Mutual Funds Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2024 $ 75 $ 4 $ 78
Return on assets held at end of year — — —
Return on assets sold during the year 5 — 5
Purchases, sales and settlements, net (77) — (77)
Transfers, net — 0 0
Foreign exchange impact (3) (1) (4)
Balance at December 31, 2024 $ — $ 3 $ 3
($ in millions)
Fixed Income
Mutual Funds Real Estate Total
Balance at January 1, 2023 $ 9 $ 145 $ 155
Return on assets held at end of year 1 (66) (65)
Return on assets sold during the year — 56 56
Purchases, sales and settlements, net 63 (137) (74)
Transfers, net — 0 0
Foreign exchange impact 2 5 7
Balance at December 31, 2023 $ 75 $ 4 $ 78
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in
valuation techniques during 2024 and 2023.
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New York Stock Exchange. Mutual funds are typically valued based on
quoted market prices. These assets are generally classified as Level 1.
The fair value of fixed-income securities is typically estimated using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price
reported on the major market on which the individual securities are traded.
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value.
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or
Level 2.
Real estate valuations require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the
long-term nature of such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed periodically utilizing available and
relevant market data, including appraisals, to determine if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These assets are
classified as Level 3.
Exchange-traded derivatives are valued at the closing price reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are traded,
while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing models.
The models require a variety of inputs, including, for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign
exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.

===== PAGE 122 =====
120 Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Certain investments are measured at fair value using the net asset value (NAV) per share (or its equivalent) as a practical expedient.
These investments, which include commingled funds, hedge funds, private equity and real estate partnerships, are typically valued
using the NAV provided by the administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the value of the
underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding.
Contributions and Direct Benefit Payments
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in
applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it deems
appropriate.
The following table presents the contributions made to the non-U.S. DB plans, nonpension postretirement benefit plans, multi-
employer plans, DC plans and direct benefit payments for 2024 and 2023. The cash contributions to the multi-employer plans
represent the annual cost included in the net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated Income Statement. The
company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material impact on the company’s financial statements.
($ in millions)
For the years ended December 31: 2024 2023
Non-U.S. DB plans $ 67 $ 57
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans 194 233
Multi-employer plans 13 13
DC plans (1) 440 991
Direct benefit payments 578 552
Total $ 1,291 $ 1,847
(1)Decrease in DC plans is primarily due to the introduction of the RBA that was effective January 1, 2024. Refer to the section above entitled “IBM
Retirement Plan Changes,” for additional information.
In 2024 and 2023, $194 million and $256 million, respectively, of contributions to the non-U.S. DB plans and U.S. nonpension
postretirement benefit plans were made in U.S. Treasury securities. Additionally, in 2024 and 2023, contributions of $741 million
and $682 million, respectively, were made to the Active Medical Trust in U.S. Treasury securities. Contributions made with U.S.
Treasury securities are considered a non-cash transaction.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
In 2025, the company is not legally required to make any contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However,
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP
during the year.
In 2025, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately $100
million, the largest of which will be contributed to defined benefit pension plans in Japan and India. This amount generally
represents legally mandated minimum contributions.
Financial market performance in 2025 could increase the legally mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which require
monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally mandated
amount based on market conditions or other factors.
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants subsequent to the
retirement plan changes, as described in ‘IBM Retirement Plan Changes’ section above.These payments have been estimated
based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2024 and include benefits attributable to
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments Payments
2025 $ 1,136 $ 121 $ 1,833 $ 248 $ 3,338
2026 1,178 119 1,760 224 3,282
2027 1,214 116 1,749 221 3,300
2028 1,202 114 1,710 217 3,243
2029 1,186 111 1,705 218 3,221
2030-2034 5,671 507 8,049 1,016 15,243

===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements 121
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The 2025 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets
(underfunded plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Balance
Sheet.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants. These
payments have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ APBO at December 31, 2024.
($ in millions)
Qualified Nonqualified Total Expected
U.S. Plan Non-U.S. Plans Non-U.S. Plans Benefit
Payments Payments Payments Payments
2025 $ 230 $ 16 $ 26 $ 272
2026 237 17 27 280
2027 249 18 27 293
2028 253 18 27 299
2029 246 19 28 293
2030-2034 1,090 107 153 1,350
The 2025 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan
assets represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Balance Sheet.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of
plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, refer to the table
on page 112.
($ in millions)
2024 2023
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets $ 16,216 $ 8,811 $ 18,345 $ 9,621
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets 16,194 8,789 18,029 9,604
Plans with plan assets in excess of PBO 26,493 33,985 36,369 43,875
The following table presents information for the nonpension postretirement benefit plan with APBO in excess of plan assets. For a
more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans, refer to the table on
page 112.
($ in millions)
2024 2023
Benefit Plan Benefit Plan
At December 31: Obligation Assets Obligation Assets
Plans with APBO in excess of plan assets $ 2,764 $ 20 $ 2,820 $ 32
Plans with plan assets in excess of APBO — — — —
NOTE V. SUBSEQUENT EVENTS
On January 28, 2025, the company announced that the Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $1.67 per common
share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2025 to stockholders of record on February 10, 2025.
On February 10, 2025, the company issued $3.6 billion of Euro fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities ranging from 5 to 20
years and coupons ranging from 2.9 to 3.8 percent; and $4.75 billionof U.S. dollar fixed-rate notes in tranches with maturities
ranging from 3 to 30 years and coupons ranging from 4.65 to 5.7 percent.

===== PAGE 124 =====
122 Performance Graphs
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
COMPARISON OF ONE-, THREE-AND FIVE-YEAR CUMULATIVE TOTAL RETURN FOR IBM, S&P 500 STOCK INDEX AND S&P
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY INDEX
The following graphs compare the one-, three- and five-year cumulative total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable
cumulative returns of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock
Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index used for
comparison may be a published industry or line-of-business index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such an index. IBM is
also included in this index.
The graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons assume that all dividends are reinvested. On November 3, 2021, we
completed the separation of Kyndryl. IBM stockholders received one share of common stock in Kyndryl for every five shares of IBM
common stock held at the close of business on October 25, 2021, the record date for the distribution. The effect of the Kyndryl
transaction is reflected in the five-year graph in the cumulative total return as reinvested dividends.
One-Year Three-Year
160 250
200
140
150
120
100
100
50
80 0
12/23 3/24 6/24 9/24 12/24 12/21 12/22 12/23 12/24
Five-Year
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
12/19 12/20 12/21 12/22 12/23 12/24
One-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 12/2023 3/2024 6/2024 9/2024 12/2024
— International Business Machines $ 100.00 $ 117.81 $ 107.77 $ 138.96 $ 139.27
• • • • S & P 500 $ 100.00 $ 110.56 $ 115.29 $ 122.08 $ 125.02
- - - - S & P Information Technology $ 100.00 $ 112.69 $ 128.24 $ 130.31 $ 136.61
Three-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2021 2022 2023 2024
— International Business Machines $ 100.00 $ 110.70 $ 134.92 $ 187.91
• • • • S & P 500 $ 100.00 $ 81.89 $ 103.42 $ 129.29
- - - - S & P Information Technology $ 100.00 $ 71.81 $ 113.34 $ 154.83
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar) 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
— International Business Machines $ 100.00 $ 99.04 $ 115.88 $ 128.29 $ 156.35 $ 217.76
• • • • S & P 500 $ 100.00 $ 118.40 $ 152.39 $ 124.79 $ 157.59 $ 197.02
- - - - S & P Information Technology $ 100.00 $ 143.89 $ 193.58 $ 139.00 $ 219.40 $ 299.72

===== PAGE 125 =====
Stockholder Information 123
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078, (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare
Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should
call (781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found online at www.ibm.com. Financial results, news on IBM products, services and
other activities can also be found at that website.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports
on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (www.ibm.com/investor) contains a significant amount of information about IBM, including the company’s annual
report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports filed or
furnished pursuant to Sections 13(a) and 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 as soon as reasonably practicable after such
material is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC. These materials are available free of charge on or through IBM’s website.
The SEC maintains a website (www.sec.gov) that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other information
regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC.
Computershare Investment Plan (CIP)
The Computershare Investment Plan brochure outlines a number of services provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM
investors, including the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM stock certificates for safekeeping. The
brochure is available at www.computershare.com/ibmcip or by calling (888) IBM-6700. Investors residing outside the United
States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York 10504.
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange and the NYSE Chicago under the symbol “IBM”.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders can get quarterly financial results and voting results from the Annual Meeting by calling (914) 499-7777, by sending
an e-mail to infoibm@us.ibm.com, or by writing to IBM Stockholder Relations, New Orchard Road, M/D 325, Armonk, New York
10504.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday, April 29, 2025, at 1 p.m. (ET).
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078, Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078, (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s
business. The 10-K report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released by the end of April, July and October.
IBM believes that corporate responsibility drives long-term value not just in our business, but also for IBM stakeholders. Our 2023
Impact Report is available online at https://www.ibm.com/impact.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive account information and answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts
online at www.ibm.com/investor. Stockholders of record can also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy
Statements online through this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the
United States, Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.

===== PAGE 126 =====
124
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
BOARD OF DIRECTORS
Marianne C. Brown Arvind Krishna Peter R. Voser
Former Chief Operating Officer Chairman, President and Retired Chief Executive Officer
Global Financial Solutions, Fidelity National Chief Executive Officer Royal Dutch Shell plc
Information Services, Inc. IBM Chairman
ABB Ltd.
Thomas Buberl Andrew N. Liveris
Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and Frederick H. Waddell
AXA S.A. Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and
The Dow Chemical Company Chief Executive Officer
David N. Farr Northern Trust Corporation
Retired Chairman and Frederick William McNabb III
Chief Executive Officer Retired Chairman and Alfred W. Zollar
Emerson Electric Co. Chief Executive Officer Former Executive Advisor
The Vanguard Group, Inc. Siris Capital Group, LLC
Alex Gorsky
Former Chairman and Michael Miebach
Chief Executive Officer Chief Executive Officer
Johnson & Johnson Mastercard Incorporated
Michelle J. Howard Martha E. Pollack
Retired Admiral President Emerita
United States Navy Cornell University
SENIOR LEADERSHIP
Jonathan H. Adashek James J. Kavanaugh Alex Stern
Senior Vice President Senior Vice President and Senior Vice President
Marketing and Communications Chief Financial Officer Strategy and Mergers & Acquisitions
Mohamad Ali Arvind Krishna Robert D. Thomas
Senior Vice President Chairman, President and Senior Vice President
IBM Consulting Chief Executive Officer IBM Software and
IBM Chief Commercial Officer
Kelly C. Chambliss
Senior Vice President Nickle J. LaMoreaux Brien Wierzchowski
IBM Consulting, Americas Senior Vice President and Vice President and Treasurer
Chief Human Resources Officer
Gary D. Cohn Joanne Wright
Vice Chairman Ric Lewis Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President Transformation and Operations
Jane P. Edwards IBM Infrastructure
Vice President Kareem Yusuf
Assistant General Counsel and Secretary Dinesh Nirmal Senior Vice President
Senior Vice President, Products Product Management and Growth
Nicolás Fehring IBM Software IBM Software
Vice President and Controller
Anne E. Robinson
Darío Gil Senior Vice President and
Senior Vice President and Director Chief Legal Officer
IBM Research

===== PAGE 127 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road
Armonk, New York 10504
914-499-1900
Db2, IBM, IBM Cloud, IBM Cloud Pak, IBM Garage, IBM Q
Network, IBM Quantum, IBM Z, Instana, Nordcloud, Octo,
IBM Partner Plus, Power, Randori, 7Summits, Taos, TruQua,
Turbonomic, Waeg, watsonx, WebSphere, z15, z/OS and z
Systems are trademarks of International Business Machines
Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Kyndryl is a
trademark of Kyndryl, Inc. Azure and Microsoft Edge are
trademarks of Microsoft. The registered trademark Linux is
used pursuant to a sublicense from the Linux Foundation,
the exclusive licensee of Linus Torvalds, owner of the mark
on a worldwide basis. Red Hat, Ansible, OpenShift and
StackRox are trademarks of Red Hat, Inc. or its subsidiaries
in the United States and other countries. UNIX is a registered
trademark of The Open Group in the United States and other
countries. Other company, product and service names may be
trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on papers harvested to
sustainable standards.
Printed in U.S.A. COL03002-USEN-21

===== PAGE 128 =====
