

===== PAGE 1 =====
M 
-tf' V V 
im 
Annual Report 
1968 


===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Annual Report 
for the year ended December 31, 
1968 
International Business Machines 
Corporation 
Cover: At a temperature of more than 
1,000 degrees centigrade this gaseous diffu-
sion furnace at Endicott adds elements to 
silicon wafers to produce certain electrical 
characteristics. The circular wafers, which 
resemble candles in this edge-on view, are 
about the size of a half dollar. Each wafer 
is later cut into several hundred square chips, 
an essential part of all integrated circuits 
used in modern computers. 
Contents: 
2 
4 
7 
4 3 
4 4 
4 6 
50 
56 
63 
Highlights of the Year 
Letter to Stockholders 
Report to Stockholders 
Opinion of Independent Accountants 
Earnings and Retained Earnings 
Balance Sheet 
Source and Application of Funds 
Ten -Year Statement of Operations 
Directors and Officers 


===== PAGE 4 =====
Highlights of the year: 
At end of year: 
Gross income from sales, service and rentals 
Net earnings before income taxes 
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per shofe 
Cash dividends 
Per share 
Stock dividend 
Stock split 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property. 
Total assets 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Long-term indebtedness 
Net current assets 
Number of employees 
Number of stockholders 


===== PAGE 5 =====
6 , 8 8 8 , 5 4 9 , 2 0 9 
1 , 8 6 4 , 4 9 7 , 9 9 1 
9 9 3 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
8 7 1 , 4 9 7 , 9 9 1 
$ 7-71 
2 9 2 , 6 4 6 , 1 5 7 
$ 
2.6O 
100% 
1 , 1 5 6 , 5 7 8 , 7 9 4 
6 , 7 4 3 , 4 3 1 , 1 6 1 
3 , 4 1 5 , 0 3 9 , 1 8 7 
5 4 5 , 0 9 0 , 5 1 4 
1 , 7 7 0 , 0 6 9 , 9 9 6 
2 4 1 , 9 7 4 
5 0 1 , 3 9 0 
5 , 3 4 5 , 2 9 0 , 9 9 3 
1 , 2 9 7 , 4 9 9 , 5 5 8 
6 4 6 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
6 5 1 , 4 9 9 , 5 5 8 
$ 
5-8I 
2 4 3 , 1 7 2 , 8 3 6 
$ 
2.17 
2V2% 
1 , 4 6 9 , 9 4 1 , 1 5 2 
5 , 5 9 8 , 6 7 0 , 3 9 2 
3 , 4 9 6 , 3 0 7 , 2 0 4 
5 2 1 , 4 5 9 , 7 0 2 
9 1 6 , 3 8 2 , 9 9 3 
2 2 1 , 8 6 6 
3 5 9 , 4 9 5 
Stock Transfer Offices: 
International Business Machines Corporation, 
Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022 
Continental Illinois National Bank and 
Trust Company of Chicago, 
231 South LaSalle Street, Chicago, Illinois 60690 
Trust General du Canada, 
IBM Building, Place Ville Marie, 
Montreal 113, 
Quebec, Canada 
Wells Fargo Bank, 
464 California Street, San Francisco, California c,^i20 
National Trust Company Limited, 
21 King Street East, Toronto i, Ontario, Canada 
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, 
30 WestBroad^vay, New York, New York 10015 
The First National Bank of Chicago, 
38 South Dearborn Street, Chicago, Illinois 60690 
Montreal Trust Company, 
777 Dorchester Boulevard West, Place Ville Marie, 
Montreal lis, 
Quebec, Canada 
Crocker-Citizens National Bank, 
79 New Montgomery Street, 
San Francisco, California 94105 
Montreal Trust Company, 
15 King Street West, Toronto i, Ontario, Canada 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Thomas J. Watson, Jr., IBM Chairman 
1968 was a particularly significant and 
eventful year for the IBM Company. It was 
a year in which many new trends in the 
growth of the data processing industry be-
came apparent, as well as a year of con-
tinued strong demand for the Company's 
established products and services through-
out the world. 
J968 IBM Financial 
Results 
Consolidated gross income f r o m world-
wide operations amounted to 16,888,549,209, 
an increase of 11,543,258,216 over 1967. 
Earnings were $871,497,991, a $219,998,43 3 
increase over the prior year. 
Earnings per share were $7.71 based on 
the 112,968,369 shares outstanding at the 
end of the year. This compares with earn-
ings of $5.81 per share on the 112,228,558 
shares outstanding on December 31,1967, 
adjusted for the 100% stock split effected 
May 9,1968. 
Operations outside the United States, 
included in consolidated results, showed 
gross income of $2,040,184,359, an increase 
of $415,193,617 over 1967. This is the 
first year IBM World Trade Corporation's 
gross income exceeded the $2 billion 
mark. Earnings f r o m these operations were 
$270,546,255, an increase of $61,185,795 
over the year before. 
D u r i n g the year 1968, IBM's gross income 
and earnings showed abnormally high rates 
of growth, primarily because of a major in-
crease in the level of outright sales of data 
processing equipment. Independent com-
puter leasing companies' purchases of IBM's 
System/360 accounted for most of this un-
usually high level of outright sales. Although 
total gross income increased by 28.9%, 
gross income f r o m rentals and service 


===== PAGE 7 =====
increased only 15.4%. W e believe the latter 
figure is the better measure of the basic 
progress of the business for the year. 
Because IBM's data processing business 
is primarily rental, we have pointed out 
to stockholders on several previous occa-
sions that outright sales, unlike rentals, 
increase current income at the expense 
of future periods. W h i l e it is impossible 
to predict the future, we do not expect 
the high level of outright sales to continue, 
because of the volume of the total pur-
chases already made, and because of the fact 
that many of our System/360 products 
have been on the market for over four years. 
Should there be a marked decline in 
purchase activity during a future reporting 
period, income comparisons would then 
appear unfavorable, perhaps even to the 
extent of showing a decline in income 
for that period. 
This aspect of accounting period com-
parisons does not alter the fundamental 
prospects for IBM's business, which 
we believe continue to be very good. This 
belief is supported by a continued high 
level of orders and production of IBM 
products throughout the world. 
Litigation 
O n January 17, 1969, the Department 
of Justice filed a civil antitrust complaint 
against IBM charging it with monopoliza-
tion of the data processing industry. 
The Government requests that IBM be 
forced to desist f r o m certain practices 
which it claims lead to a monopoly. T h e 
complaint also contains a general state-
ment asking the court to give such other 
relief as it may consider necessary or 
appropriate, by way of divorcement, 
divestiture or reorganization, to dissipate 
the effects of the practices cited and to 
restore competitive conditions. 
W e deny the Government's charges. Since 
we believe this industry to be highly compet-
itive, we intend to make a vigorous defense 
against the allegations of the complaint. 
Previously, two civil antitrust suits had 
been filed against IBM by competitors 
charging violation of the antitrust laws. 
Control Data Corporation filed a com-
plaint on December 11, 1968, alleging 
damages in an imspecified amount and 
asking for injunctive relief. O n January 3, 
1969, a complaint was filed by the Data 
Processing Financial & General Corporation, 
a computer leasing company. It accuses 
IBM of various violations of antitrust laws 
and asks for treble damages totaling 
$1,054,500,000. 
These suits were filed despite the fact 
that the data processing industry is one 
of the healthiest and most competitive in 
the nation, an industry which is growing 
at a faster rate than the IBM Company. 
T h e computer business, which virtually did 
not exist 20 years ago, has grown into a 
multi-billion dollar industry that has 
attracted more than 60 systems manufac-
turers and some 4,000 companies dealing 
in related equipment, support and services. 
There are more than twice as many com-
puter manufacturers today as there were 
in i960, and increasing competition has 
brought with it great improvements in 
system capacity and speed as well as sharp 
reductions in cost to the user. Technolog-
ical advances have come at a very rapid rate, 
and from all corners of the industry, not 
just from IBM. N e w firms continue to 
be attracted to this field of great opportu-


===== PAGE 8 =====
nity and have been able to succeed in 
it whether they have a competence in elec-
tronics, a background in business machines, 
or simply a technical innovation which 
can be developed into a business. 
This is a competitive industry and IBM 
denies the allegations in both of the pri-
vate suits brought against it. It denies that 
its conduct has at any time been adverse 
to the legitimate business interests of Con-
trol Data Corporation or Data Processing 
Financial & General Corporation. As in the 
case of the Government complaint, we will 
defend against these suits forcefully in court. 
New Data Processing Industry Trends 
1968 was another year of rapid techno-
logical advances for our business. Some 
of our product announcements and 
new engineering and programming devel-
opments are described in this report. 
Of particular significance has been the 
acceleration of the growing trend toward 
complex and comprehensive informa-
tion systems in every area of business, gov-
ernment, education, and science. Such 
systems offer the promise for the future of 
providing access to the vast information 
storage and calculating power of the com-
puter to people in all walks of life. 
The result is a growing opportunity for 
IBM and other companies in our industry 
to provide a broad range of new products 
and services to meet this new market re-
quirement. Several representative applica-
tions which give an indication of these 
potentialities are described in a special sec-
tion of this report. 
A further indication of fast changing 
data processing market conditions was our 
announcement on December 6,1968, that 
as the result of a study being conducted by 
the Company, we expect to make changes, 
by July I, 1969, in the way we charge for 
and support our data processing systems. 
The need for support of the information 
systems referred to above, is growing more 
rapidly than anticipated. In addition, new 
support requirements are arising from 
leasing companies and other owners of IBM 
equipment as they relocate and reapply 
their systems. W e believe that the ultimate 
effect of any changes to meet these re-
quirements should benefit the data process-
ing industry and its customers by expanding 
available equipment and service offerings 
and markets. 
IBM Resources Expanded 
To provide the expanded capacity needed 
to meet growing customer requirements, 
a number of new or enlarged facilities 
became operational or were started in the 
United States and in 10 other countries. 
During the year, employment increased by 
20,000 to over 241,000 as IBM's personnel 
resources were expanded to staff our world-
wide operations. The Company's greatest 
asset has always been its employees, and we 
feel confident that their dedication to out-
standing performance will continue. Their 
resourcefulness and creativity enable us 
to look forward with confidence to the new 
challenges and opportunities before us. 
January 28, 
1969 
By order of the Board of Directors 
Chairman of the Board 


===== PAGE 9 =====
N e w data processing products and a high 
level of new computer orders and installa-
tions highlighted the Company's efforts 
during 1968. 
The Company's development laboratories 
extended System/360 with new large 
and small models and brought out major ad-
ditions in peripheral devices—providing 
new ways for customers to get information 
into and out of their computers. 
The introduction of the Model 85 in 1968 
offered large-system users new expansion 
possibilities within System/360. Many tech-
nical innovations contribute to the Model 
8 5's ultra-high performance, including a main 
core memory with a capacity of up to 4 
million characters, and a ""buffer" memory 
that operates in 6o-billionths of a second 
by making use of fast new monolithic cir-
cuits. In monolithic technology, one or 
more complete circuits are fabricated in the 
base material in a single process sequence. 
The Model 25 was introduced in 1968 to 
provide new users and IBM 1400 and 
Model 20 customers with a wider choice in 
utilizing System/360. 
Two new versions of System/360 Model 
20 were announced during the year, aimed at 
filling users' needs at the low end of the line. 
A low-cost computer, the IBM 1450 bank 
data processing system, designed to meet 
the requirements of small banks, was also in-
troduced. It can handle a broad range of 
applications, including mortgage loans and 
savings accounting, with available com-
puter programs. 
Major additions were made to the IBM 
line of peripheral devices. A self-threading 
magnetic tape unit—the IBM 2420— 
joined the IBM family of tape units. One 
model of the 2420 can record the equivalent 
of a 53,000-word book in one second, 
nearly twice as fast as previously available 
standard IBM tape drives. A n operator 
can install a reel of tape in just eight seconds 
—less than half the time required to thread 
manually. 
The IBM 50 magnetic data inscriber and 
the IBM 2495 cartridge reader were intro-
duced as another way for System/360 users 
to get information into their computers 
in applications where punched cards are not 
required as a record. From the keypunch-
like keyboard of the inscriber, information 
is recorded on magnetic tape housed in a 
small plastic cartridge, which is then placed 
in the reader to automatically feed infor-
mation into computer storage. 
The new IBM 1288 optical page reader 
represented a major expansion of IBM's 
capabilities in the rapidly growing field of 
optical character recognition. It can read 
information from a variety of documents 
directly into the computer at a rate of 
about 840 single-spaced standard type-
written pages an hovir. Information printed 
on smaller documents, such as utility bills, 
can be read into the computer at the rate of 
nearly 20,000 an hour. 
A new graphic communications link with 
a remote System/360 was introduced. T h e 
IBM 2265 display station makes it possible 
for branch offices geographically remote 
from the headquarters computer to query 
the computer's data files and have the in-
formation displayed in seconds on the unit's 
television-like screen. N e w data can be en-
tered into the computer using a typewriter-
like keyboard on the terminal. 
Another visual display device intro-


===== PAGE 10 =====
Assisted by IBM process control equipment, 
operators in this central dispatching room 
monitor and control the flow of electricity for 
a network of 1 2 power companies. 
duced during the year, the IBM 2760, uses a 
film cartridge to project information and 
questions onto the screen. Presented with a 
question and a list of possible answers, 
the user simply points an associated light pen 
at the appropriate response. This is then 
transmitted automatically to the computer. 
The 2760 makes it possible for people 
who may know nothing about a computer 
to use one simply by answering the com-
puter's step-by-step questions. Potential 
applications include maintenance of patient 
records by nurses, manufacmring cost 
estimation by engineers, and the planning 
of client coverage by insurance agents. 
Another addition to the display capa-
bility of computers is the IBM 2285 display 
copier which automatically produces a 
"hard" photocopy of the drawings, diagrams, 
charts, words or numbers displayed on the 
screen of a 2250 display unit. 
The IBM 1800 Data Acquisition and 
Control System and the IBM 1130 small sci-
entific and general purpose computing sys-
tem continued to find a growing acceptance 
in the market. Orders for both systems were 
at their highest levels during the past year. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
N e w releases of Operating System/360 
and Disk Operating System/360 provided 
marked improvements in the customer's 
ability to produce more work more effec-
tively. An operating system is a master 
control program of step-by-step instruc-
tions that schedules the flow of work 
through the computer. 
A new version of Operating System/360 
provides multiprogramming capabilities 
that enable intermediate System/360's to 
handle more than a dozen different jobs 
at one time. In addition, OS/360 support 
was extended to graphics, to the sharing 
of data files by multiple systems, and to job 
classification. 
The Disk Operating System/360 was 
enhanced by improved capabilities in multi-
programming and tele-processing. It also 
can handle a broader range of programming 
languages. 
The Company continued its efforts in the 
development of generalized application 
programs—the programs that make the com-
puter perform specific jobs such as inven-
tory management, engineering design 
assistance and automated chemical analysis. 
Another major programming achieve-
ment during the year was the implementa-
tion of the Programmed Airlines Reserva-
tion System (PARS). PARS is a complete 
programming package containing all the 
elements needed to plan, test, install and 
operate real-time systems for handling 
passenger reservations, flight inventories, 
seat availabilities and related operations. 
During 1968 a number of airlines success-
fully installed this entire system. 
A unique program package called Pro-
gram Language Analyzer (PLAN) was 
announced. The package allows a user to 
create a dictionary of terms he uses in 
his work and to enter it into the computer. 
H e can then—in his own terms—direct 
the computer to solve his problem. 
A terminal-oriented programming 
system was introduced last year to allow 
users with IBM System/360 Models 30,40 
and 50 to store, edit, update and retrieve 
information from their computer through 
remote terminals. This set of programs, 
called Administrative Terminal System/360, 
is an improved and easier-to-use version 
of a technique introduced by IBM three 
years ago. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
The IBM 2250 Display Unit is hterally a 
"window" through which the user can bring 
into view information from the computer 
and study or change it quickly and conven-
iently. Robert L. Gard, of IBM'S Houston 
Scientific Center, is testing a method of 
composing and revising aeronautical charts. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
Electronic computers first became generally 
available to industry, science and govern-
ment in the early 1950's. Now, after little 
more than 15 years of unprecedented 
development, change and growth, the data 
processing industry finds itself on the 
threshold of even greater involvement in 
these activities—involvement that can 
bring benefits limited only by man's curi-
osity and inventiveness. 
The future is clearly indicated by the 
accelerating trend toward using computers 
as the basis for on-line, real-time informa-
tion systems. For it is in these applica-
tions that the powerful and versatile 
equipment achieved by advanced technol-
ogy can be used most effectively. 
The terms "on-line" and "real-time" now 
common within the data processing industry 
will soon be familiar to everyone. The first 
refers to the accessibility of the computer; the 
second refers to the speed with which the 
computer can respond. 
"On-line" terminals, connected to the 
computer, are devices through which a 
person communicates directly with a com-
puter, either to give it information or to 
ask for and receive the results of computation 
or a file search. 
Terminals take many forms. Some are 
similar to typewriters, accepting information 
and queries through a keyboard and re-
sponding by typing out the answer. Others, 
called graphic displays, look like television 
sets, on the screen of which appear words, 
diagrams and drawings. And still others, 
as simple as a touch-tone telephone, 
respond with spoken words generated by 
the computer. 
These terminals, in various combinations. 
are attached by communications lines to a 
computer across a room or across the 
country. The resulting network, which ac-
cepts data and provides answers at any 
point on demand, is the basis of modern 
information systems. 
"Real-time" means that the persons using 
these terminals exchange information, 
questions and data processing results with 
the computer immediately. Modern data 
processing equipment is so fast and can store 
and manipulate such huge amounts of in-
formation that it can converse with dozens 
of users at what appears to be the same 
time, solving problems and finding infor-
mation for each of them in time for 
effective action to be taken. W h e n a com-
puter is used in this manner by more 
than one person for more than one job, the 
process is known as time-sharing. 
The effect of these developments has been 
a dramatic change in the entire concept of 
what computers are and how they are being 
used. N o longer are they limited to doing 
batch or one-job-at-a-time data processing, 
nor is it necessary to take the work to the 
computer room and return some hours or 
days later to pick up the results. The com-
puter has been extended to an on-the-scene 
working tool to be used by anyone who 
needs information to make decisions. 
Because man and machine can communi-
cate quickly and easily and because the 
machine can store and process large amounts 
of information quickly, the machine is now 
used to identify, analyze and define problems, 
suggest courses of action and evaluate alter-
natives. Management information systems, 
for example, show potential for changing 
the concept of management from what has 


===== PAGE 14 =====
been, at best, educated guesswork to de-
cision making based on current facts and 
scientific projections. 
Tliere are hundreds of examples of how 
computers with this new capability are 
becoming more and more involved with our 
daily lives: 
• 
A bank officer, for instance, can analyze and 
project activity on a trust account by having 
information and alternatives displayed on 
a computer terminal in his office. 
• 
An engineer, again using a graphic termi-
nal, can draw a design on the screen with 
a ""light pen" and then see the design from 
several perspectives by merely asking the 
computer to vary its output. 
• 
Stockbrokers can query a computer through 
their telephone and have it tell them the 
latest quotes and transactions. 
• 
A business executive, with a terminal in his 
office, can examine up-to-the-minute in-
formation on sales, inventory, costs and other 
critical factors needed to take effective action. 
• 
A police chief, in one of the many computer-
equipped police departments throughout 
the country, can have the computer, through 
a terminal, display information on wanted 
persons and property, such as stolen automo-
biles, guns and other items which bear an 
identifying serial number. 
• 
A scientist can store the results of experiments 
in a computer and recall the information at 
any time in the form of terminal-displayed 
charts or graphs for more thorough study. 
A nurse, from her hospital station, can ex-
change data with the laboratory, the phar-
macy, the admitting office and other hospital 
functions concerned with the treatment 
and well-being of the patient. 
It is quite apparent that much of the 
growth in data processing lies in the exten-
sion of the on-line and real-time capability. 
In IBM's view, this clearly defined trend 
presents both a challenge and an opportunity. 
The challenge: to see that its traditional 
marketing skill and technical excellence re-
main responsive to needs and ideas. The 
opportunity: to maintain the Company's 
growth in the exciting and still devel-
oping world of data processing. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
Using a computer can be as easy as using 
a telephone. This real estate agent is calling 
an IBM computer miles from his office to 
get details on over 2,000 homes in his sell-
ing area. The audio response unit replies 
in seconds, identifying homes that have the 
price range, design, and other character-
istics that the customer prefers. About 1,600 
member real estate firms and their agents 
consult by phone v^ith the computer in 
this application. 
Perhaps the strongest indication of long-
range growth in the data processing industry 
is the fact that thousands of students in 
colleges and universities throughout the 
nation are learning about computing 
equipment and its capabilities as a part of 
their regular studies. These junior col-
lege students have access to an IBM System/ 
360 through a display terminal in this 
study lounge. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
In Tokyo, Japan's national broadcasting 
corporation has installed what many 
consider the most advanced information 
and control system in the broadcasting 
industry. Two IBM System/360's and 
two IBM 1800 computers maintain sched-
ules and budgets for 640 television shows 
and 1,200 radio programs in production plus 
controlling the actual broadcasting of 
five others that are on the air. The system 
also allocates facilities and equipment; as-
signs personnel; maintains inventories of 
broadcast materials; provides management 
reports; and does general accounting. 
Nearly 200 visual display terminals, such 
as the one in the right foreground, allow 
immediate access to computer-generated 
information from any part of the business. 
The system was a joint effort of the IBM 
World Trade Corporation and the IBM Fed-
eral Systems Division. 
At reservation centers for a major airline, 
each reservation agent is equipped with an 
IBM display terminal (unit at agent's 
right hand). The terminals being operated 
by these agents are part of a nationwide 
system of 1,100 terminals now in use. Even-
tually more than 2,200 terminals will be 
on-line, linked to a single System/360 which 
responds within seconds to a transaction 
at any terminal. With this real-time network 
the airline will respond to almost 4,000,000 
calls a month ranging from a request for 
flight arrival time to arranging an around-
the-world tour. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
Mrs. Huyler VanBuren watches as husband 
receives $75,000 suggestion award. The 
Kingston technician devised a way to save 
previously rejected memory devices. IBMers 
in the United States and abroad earned 
over $3.3 million in 1 9 6 8 for their ideas. 
Significant 1968 achievements in the area 
of computer manufacturing fell primarily 
into three categories: additional build-
ing, which has increased production and 
efficiency; first customer shipments of new 
IBM products; and technological advances 
to improve quality and reduce costs. 
During the year, the Company com-
pleted or began construction of major ex-
pansions at plants in Boulder, Colorado; 
Rochester, Minnesota; Burlington, Vermont; 
San Jose, California; and Poughkeepsie 
and East Fishkill, N e w York. In Boca Raton, 
Florida, where manufacturing is being 
done in temporary facilities, ground was 
broken for a new plant. The Company 
also announced that a new Components Di-
vision engineering and manufacturing 
facility for advanced components and circuit 
packages will be established at Manassas, 
Virginia, with an initial construction pro-
gram of 250,000 square feet. 
IBM's newest manufacturing plant, in 
the Bedford-Stuyvesant community of 
Brooklyn, N e w York, began operations dur-
ing 1968. This new facility not only pro-
vides for growing manufacturing needs, but 
also allows IBM to address the needs of 
the community by providing jobs in an area 
where the needs have been great and the 
opportunities few. Approximately 130 peo-
ple, hired from the community, are now 
manufacturing cables for the Company's 
standard computer line. The growth to 
300 locally hired people by the end of 
1969 will involve the introduction of addi-
tional computer-related products. 
A table on page 40 describes IBM's 
construction projects around the world 
during the past year. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
With the establishment of a manufacturing 
plant in the Bedford-Stuyvesant area of 
Brooklyn, N e w York, IBM provides meaning-
ful jobs in a community where unemploy-
ment is a major problem. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
In 1968, first shipments of these 
new or improved products were made from 
Systems Manufacturing Division plants: 
The IBM 1287 Optical Reader from 
Rochester, Minnesota, in January. 
A new version of the 1130 computer from 
San Jose, California, in January. 
The IBM 1056 Model 3 Card Reader from 
Raleigh, North Carolina, in March. 
The IBM 1058 Model 2 Printing Card Punch 
from Poughkeepsie, N e w York, in March. 
The IBM 2740 Model 2 Communications 
Terminal from Raleigh in July. 
The IBM 1259 Magnetic Character Reader 
from Endicott, N e w York, in July. 
The IBM 2250 Model 4 Display Unit from 
Kingston, N e w York, in August. 
The IBM System/360 Model 25 from Endi-
cott in October. 
The IBM 2420 Magnetic Tape Unit from 
Boulder, Colorado, in November. 
The IBM System/360 Model 20 in a new 
lower cost configuration from Boca Raton, 
Florida, in November. 
During 1968, monolithic circuitry was 
introduced in several new IBM systems. 
A monolithic high-speed buffer memory 
was announced as part of System/360 
Model 85. With its 6o-nanosecond (bil-
lionths of a second) cycle time it becomes 
the fastest memory of its size in an IBM 
product. Monolithic control storage was in-
corporated in the System/360 Model 25. 
The high-speed operation of this device in 
reading and storing interim instructions 
and data during computation permits in-
creased processing speeds in the Model 25. 
A computer-operated manufacturing and 
test system came into greater use during 
the past year. At the Boulder plant, for ex-
ample, a central IBM System/ 360 controls 
remotely located processes in the testing 
and control of tape head manufacmring. 
Information such as quality reports, pro-
duction control reports and final test data 
are transmitted automatically to the cen-
tral computer. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
Election night—1968. IBM equipment helps 
C B S newsmen in providing viewers a minute-by-
minute report of the voting estimates through-
out the country. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
This photo specialist at the Company's Burlington 
facility inspects glass-mounted artwork used to 
make advanced thin-film memory circuits. This en-
larged artwork will be photographically reduced 
to the proper size. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
IBM composing systems help the English-
language newspaper, The Hong 
Kong 
Standard, 
meet its deadline. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
While the Company's marketing, service 
and manufacturing organizations were 
building a successful record with our cur-
rent products, other divisions continued to 
explore the techniques, technologies and 
applications for future data processing and 
related products. 
An experimental Image Distribution 
System developed by the Advanced Systems 
Development Division allows the use of 
standard television monitors as computer 
terminals in a new information network 
operated by a customer in California. 
Under the control of an IBM 1800 computer, 
the system makes it possible to display 
computer-generated text, graphics or numer-
ical information on the screens of more 
than 30 television monitors together with 
still pictures for a complete information 
package. 
The Company continued to conduct 
field tests of computers in medical appli-
cations. At St. Mary's Hospital in Rochester, 
Minnesota, a specially built patient mon-
itoring system, which utilizes a standard 
television set in the hospital room, is 
being tested. The system, controlled by an 
IBM 1800 computer, monitors eight vital 
signs such as blood pressure and heart 
action and updates the display to inform 
the medical staff. 
In another area, nearly two dozen educa-
tional instimtions were using the IBM 
1500 Instructional System for exploring 
further the potential of computer-assisted 
instruction. System 1500 includes a 
variety of ways for stizdents to commu-
nicate with a computer, such as a keyboard, 
display screen, "light pen," and a new 
audio unit that lets a student hear voiced 
messages from the system. 
In addition to their development efforts 
which led to products announced during 
the year. Systems Development Division 
engineers and programmers were at 
work on a variety of advanced technologies 
for possible use in products of the future. 
N e w machine organization concepts are 
being explored to take advantage of densely 
packed solid state circuits. Advancing 
fabrication technology that allows micro-
miniature components to perform more 
and more electronic functions makes it pos-
sible to consider totally different approaches 
to how a computer can be constructed. 
IBM engineers are also pursuing advanced 
technologies for recording and retrieving 
stored data. One experimental large-capacity 
optical memory demonstrated the use of 
a high-speed light deflector to control a laser 
beam projected through a hologram and 
onto an array of light detectors. The object 
is faster access to very large amounts 
of stored data than present mechanically 
limited machines can provide. 
Exploratory work in the efficient use of 
computer programs to perform character 
recognition logic now handled by special-
purpose machines could make it possible 
for general purpose computers to recognize 
printed material while also performing 
other data processing work. 
Also under investigation are new tech-
niques by which computers could electron-
ically synthesize natural-sounding "voice" 
answers to queries. This could lead to com-
puter "vocabularies" not limited to the 
range of pre-recorded sounds which are 
used in today's audio response equipment. 
Related studies, based on the fact that a 


===== PAGE 24 =====
Scientists at the IBM Research Center in Zurich, 
Switzerland, have created this new transistor 
which operates at the rate of 1 2 billion cycles 
per second. For size comparison, the large 
bar at right is a human hair. 
person's voice, like his fingerprints, is 
unique, are aimed at developing a device 
by which a computer could verify a speak-
er's identity by the characteristics of his 
speech. 
Chemists in IBM's Research Division 
have developed computer programs that 
permit highly accurate calculations of 
certain molecular configurations and simple 
chemical reactions. Using these programs, 
it is possible that exploratory chemistry 
may someday be done in computers prior to 
verification in test tubes. In one demon-
stration, the computer indicated that the 
product of a certain reaction should be 
stable as a gas, although experiments had 
indicated that it was not. More extensive 
conventional experiments proved that 
the computer was correct. With such rapid 
progress now being made in this area, a 
considerable range of chemical reactions 
should soon be computable. 
In another development, IBM scientists 
fabricated an experimental transistor 
which operates at extremely high frequen-
cies—12 billion cycles per second, much 
faster than any transistor in regular use 
today. This extremely high frequency 
was obtained by making the electrodes only 
about 40 millionths of an inch wide, 
and carefully controlling the semiconductor 
surface. Calculations indicate that even 
higher frequencies should be possible with 
this type of transistor. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
A blur of paper erupts from an experimental 
high-speed card transport mechanism 
under test at Rochester. The cards are moving 
at about 25 miles per hour. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Outside the United States, the Company's 
business is conducted by a wholly owned 
subsidiary, the IBM World Trade Corpora-
tion. More than 87,000 World Trade 
employees currently work in 330 sales 
offices, 17 manufacturing plants, seven 
development laboratories and other facili-
ties in 106 countries around the world. 
By year's end. World Trade customers 
were using System/360's and other IBM 
products for a wide variety of sophisticated 
purposes. 
In Switzerland, a chemical manufac-
turer is using a System/360 to operate an 
automated warehouse. Merchandise is 
contained on pallets which are stored in 
and retrieved from some 20,000 bins by 
9 unmanned cranes directed by the com-
puter. In the United Kingdom, three IBM 
System/360's form the core of British 
Overseas Airways Corporation's new man-
agement information system, BOADICEA. 
Many advanced applications, involving 
all aspects of BO Ac's activities, are already 
operational. This includes calculation of 
tariffs, management statistics, flight plans, 
evaluation of the airline's future plans, 
including provisioning of the new jumbo-
jets and much of BOAC's administration 
work. 
In Sweden, a paper processing company 
uses an IBM Data Acquisition and Con-
trol System to regulate operations in a mill 
manufacturing paper used for the corru-
gated layer in cardboard for boxes. In West 
Germany, an oil firm uses an IBM com-
puter to help maintain its refinery perform-
ance at peak efficiency. In a Luxembourg 
steel plant, another IBM system indicates to 
the operator how to regulate the volume 
of oxygen to be used in order to obtain the 
required steel temperature and composition. 
In Spain, an IBM 1130 system is being 
used by a civil engineering firm to plan and 
construct dams and by a meat packer to 
help produce sausages and other meat prod-
ucts that are uniform in taste and texture. 
As in the United States, IBM tele-
processing systems around the world were 
being used in a wide range of applica-
tions. In France, for instance, such a system 
permits a large group of insurance com-
panies to maintain contact via terminals 
with its claim department widely decen-
tralized in 40 cities. A n automobile 
claim, which formerly might take days to 
submit and settle, can now be processed 
in minutes. In West Germany, as clerks for 
a wholesale drug house receive orders from 
customers by telephone, they enter them 
into a central IBM System/360 through re-
mote terminals. At any given moment, 
the amount of stock on hand is available, 
giving greater assurance of optimum 
inventory balances. 
One of the faster growing segments of 
World Trade's business has been its Data 
Center Services, which offer data processing 
services for a fee in 72 countries. A t year's 
end, 238 of these Data Centers were in 
operation around the world. 
Sales of office products continued to 
reach record levels. T h e impressive sales of 
traditional office products like electric 
typewriters were matched by success in the 
selling of the new IBM Composers, IBM 
Magnetic Tape Composers, Magnetic Tape 
72 Typewriters and dictating equipment 
and systems. Three composer systems, for 
example, now set the type for The 
Hong 


===== PAGE 27 =====
By simulating test track conditions on an IBM 
computer an auto manufacturer in Italy can 
design for braking, steering and shifting with-
out relying on this manned test run. 
Federal Systems 
Division 
Kong Standard, that colony's largest English 
language newspaper. 
To accommodate the growing needs of its 
larger market, World Trade increased its 
facilities. In Madrid and Manila, new 
headquarters buildings were completed. In 
Boeblingen, West Germany, a new plant 
for the manufacture of disk packs became 
fully operational. And with the opening 
of the 37,ooo-square-foot resident Education 
Center in Amagi, Japan, there are now 
Education Centers in 72 cities around the 
world making the latest data processing 
technology available to IBM customer per-
sonnel and IBM employees. 
Through new and continuing government 
contracts, IBM's Federal Systems Division 
is deeply involved in programs ranging from 
the development of new communications 
techniques to putting computers on wheels 
to continuing support of the nation's space 
and defense programs. 
Digital communications is an emerging 
technology that is helping customers send 
and receive more information than ever 
before, and with greater accuracy. During 
the past year, FSD engineers and program-
mers have developed a range of digital 
communications techniques and equip-
ment that operates at extremely high speeds 
and with great accuracy. One device auto-
matically corrects errors in data being 
transmitted over telephone lines or by radio. 
These errors may be caused by a variety 
of interferences such as an electrical storm. 
A digital television system is another 
developing technology in this expanding 
field. Digital television combines the 
visual impact of television with the speed 
and accuracy of the computer, and dis-
plays information directly onto standard 
television monitors. 
During 1968, FSD successfully adapted 
an IBM System/360 for over-the-road 
use by the Army. The computer with its 
supporting equipment is installed in 
four 35-foot trailer vans and several iVi-
ton Army trucks. Five of these Combat 
Service Support Systems, known as CS3, 
have been delivered to the Army after a 
series of rugged acceptance tests. CS3 
pools logistics and personnel records into a 
central computer and provides field com-
manders with information ranging from the 
number of troops and vehicles ready for 


===== PAGE 28 =====
duty to the amount and type of supplies in 
stock and in logistics channels. 
IBM people and computers continued their 
support of the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration's Apollo/Saturn moon 
program during 1968. In both the highly 
successful 11-day flight of Apollo 7 in Octo-
ber, and in the historic December trip 
around the moon by three American astro-
nauts, the Instrument Unit guided and 
controlled the stages of the Saturn vehicle 
during launch and earth orbital opera-
tions. T h e unit is assembled, programmed, 
and tested by IBM in Huntsville, Alabama. 
Also supporting these 1968 missions were 
IBM people and equipment at Cape Kennedy, 
Florida; Houston, Texas; and Greenbelt, 
Maryland. 
A Telemetry Data Center at the W h i t e 
Sands Missile Range, N e w Mexico, was 
turned over to the Army in 1968. Here an 
IBM System/360 converts raw telemetry 
data from missile flights into information 
suitable for recording or displaying during 
the flight instead of days or months after-
ward as previously required. 
IBM's System/4 
^ suitcase-size, 
ruggedized computer is continuing to be 
used for a number of land, sea, air and 
space applications, including the A-7D (Air 
Force) and A-YE (Navy) aircraft programs. 
In 1968 IBM continued to assist state and 
local governments in their efforts to solve 
the problems of society. In law enforcement 
applications, IBM is designing a system for 
the N e w York City Police Department to re-
duce the time required to dispatch police 
to the scene of an emergency. Special motor 
vehicle registration information systems 
were set up in Hawaii, Delaware and Ohio. 
In Florida and Georgia, IBM is working on 
computer systems to automate school infor-
mation. A hospital information network 
is now being designed for the state of Ver-
mont to unify record keeping, speed 
processing and reduce costs. Weather and 
air pollution monitoring systems are 
now being set up in Washington, D. C., and 
the state of Illinois. 


===== PAGE 29 =====
The portable EXECUTARY Model 224 is 
the perfect note taker for this visiting nurse 
to carry while making her daily rounds. 
In 1968 the Office Products Division's 
growth was evidenced by new products, an 
increasing number of installations and 
an expansion of its manufacturing facilities. 
N e w m o d e l s of IBM's EXECUTARY 
dictation and transcription units were 
introduced. The new equipment incorpo-
rates more than twenty improvements to 
make the dictation-transcription process 
more efficient. For example, the dictation 
unit features a retractable microphone 
while the transcription unit features a retract-
able earset and automatic tuning. 
Deliveries of the IBM Braille Electric 
Typewriter began in June. It is the only pow-
ered machine for individual use in origi-
nating Braille, and can be operated by any-
one, sighted or blind, who knows how to type. 
Sales of IBM's regular electric typewriter 
line remained strong, led by the continued 
success of the SELECTRIC Typewriter. This 
unique machine, which features a single 
typing element and a stationary carriage, has 
gained wide acceptance throughout the 
business world. 
The IBM Magnetic Tape SELECTRIC Type-
writer continues to make dramatic break-
throughs in the marketplace. This machine, 
which records material on magnetic tape, 
is capable of automatically producing final 
copy at a speed of 150 words per minute. 
The total number of MT/ST'S in use at the 
end of 1968 was nearly double the total 
at the end of 1967. 
The MT/ST can now also be used to enter 
data directly into System/360 through use 
of a new tape cartridge reader announced by 
the Data Processing Division. This new 
capability greatly expands the potential 
m a r k e t f o r t h e MT/ST. 


===== PAGE 30 =====
The behavior of these monkeys under various 
conditions is being studied at the Max Planck 
Institute in West Germany. The results, analyzed 
with the help of IBM computers, may lead 
to new ways to understand human behavior. 
• 1 
Installations of IBM's Magnetic Tape 
SELECTRIC Composer, a system which pro-
duces camera-ready copy, began in January. 
Announced in late 1966, the cold-type-
setting system is now being used by an in-
creasing number of commercial printers, 
newspapers, and companies having their own 
reproduction and publishing departments. 
During the year, the Office Products 
Division completed a i50,ooo-square-foot 
expansion of its manufacturing facilities 
in Austin, Texas. T h e addition brought that 
plant to a total size of 462,000 square feet. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Across the country, growth in the use of 
punched cards was particularly evident in 
special feature applications that ranged 
f r o m helping a food distributor speed in-
voices, to polling college students on 
their presidential preferences. 
In 1968, the Information Records Divi-
sion went to full-scale production of 
IBM 1287 optical scanning forms for read-
ing hand-printed numbers directly into 
a computer. In one application, 7,000 sales-
m e n in a chain of more than 800 retail 
stores are using the 1287 forms as sales slips 
for this method of data entry. 
T h e division also announced a new service 
to convert information f r o m magnetic tape 
to microfilm. One firm using the service has 
reduced a pricing file of 32,000 index cards 
to 15 sheets of microfilm and considerably 
improved the accuracy and retrieval of 
pricing information. 
T h e IBM Information Recorder 3000, 
which can collect a broad range of on-site 
information for direct entry into a com-
puter, was announced during 1968. Users, 
such as a survey taker, laboratory tech-
nician or inventory inspector, insert a pre-
perforated punched card into the recorder 
and punch into the card through the overlays 
which list specific questions or categories. 
T h e division is now in its second year of 
manufacturing IBM Series/500 magnetic 
tape. In 1968, Company designers and engi-
neers received a national award for their 
design of a new Series/500 magnetic tape 
storage container which is easier to 
handle and store. 
T h e Service Bureau Corporation, a wholly 
owned and independently operated IBM 
subsidiary, offers data processing services 
and computer programming services to 
virtually every level of American industry 
f r o m locations across the country. SBC's 
customers range f r o m small businesses whose 
basic data processing needs are handled on 
a regular basis to some of the nation's largest 
companies for w h o m SBC can provide ex-
pert assistance in dealing with even the most 
sophisticated data processing tasks. 
During the year SBC centralized its 
research and development activities at a 
new laboratory in San Jose, California. 
Here, the Company's technical development 
staff concentrates on the design and imple-
mentation of pre-programmed computer 
applications and time-sharing services which 
will make the problem-solving capabilities 
of the computer available on a broader and 
more economical basis than ever before. 
Also during 1968, IBM transferred its 
information marketing activities to SBC. 
T h e new SBC operation will offer time-shar-
ing services to its customers, including 
two new systems introduced in 1968— 
C A L L / 3 6 0 BASIC a n d C A L L / 3 6 0 DATATEXT. 
CALL/360 BASIC allows subscribers to 
communicate with a System/360 using 
English and simple algebraic expressions. 
Scores of users may communicate with 
the system at the same time and obtain prob-
lem solutions printed at their own terminals 
within seconds. 
CALL/360 DATATEXT allows subscribers 
to use an IBM terminal to prepare and 
revise text and maintain files and records. 
W i t h the system, construction and engi-
neering specifications, technical manuals 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Brokerage services provided through 
SBC's computer network help this stockbroker, 
Mason & Company, Inc., and many others 
across the country, process daily transactions 
and reports quickly and efficiently. 
and library catalogs can be prepared and 
updated with a m i n i m u m of clerical effort. 
The system provides significant improve-
ments over the original version introduced 
by IBM in 1966. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Below: Sand, water and waves vividly 
demonstrate erosion to these students using 
SRA's program in earth science. 
IBM's wholly owned subsidiary, Science 
Research Associates, Inc., continued to ex-
pand its product line during 1968, add-
ing new educational programs in mathe-
matics, reading, social studies, language 
arts and science, and providing new services 
in testing. 
A new mathematics program. 
Computing 
Concepts 
in Mathematics, 
was introduced 
for students at the twelfth grade level. 
It is designed to enable the student to learn 
about computing and computers while 
studying mathematics. 
The SRA Elementary Mathematics Pro-
gram for kindergarten through sixth grade 
was also introduced in early 1968. This 
supplements SRA's Greater Cleveland Mathe-
matics Program designed for more ad-
vanced students in the same grade levels. 
T h e Inquiry Development Program 
in Earth Science, introduced during the last 
year, utilizes experimental kits, rock dis-
plays, books, films, maps, and a sand table 
for students to formulate and test their 
own theories to account for geological 
phenomena they observe. 
A College Reading Program, particu-
larly suitable for junior colleges, was intro-
duced in 1968. 
By making greater utilization of comput-
ers f6r the analysis of test data, SRA has 
been able to add several new testing services 
for schools and industrial customers. T h e 
new services on the SRA Achievement Tests, 
the new Modern Math Tests, the Junior 
College Placement Program and Vocational 
Planning Inventory are all programmed 
for IBM System/360. 
A n IBM System/360 Model 40 was added 
at the experimental center for the study of 
computer-assisted instruction. T h e center, 
opened in 1967, continued its development 
and testing of computer-related curricu-
lum materials. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
To conduct its business throughout the 
world, the IBM Company is organized into 
11 divisions and three wholly owned 
subsidiaries. 
Divisions: 
Advanced 
Systems Development: 
ex-
plores product and business areas new to 
the Company, establishes their potential 
value, and then transfers responsibility to 
another operating group for further de-
velopment, manufacturing and marketing. 
Components: 
develops, manufactures 
and purchases electronic components used 
in IBM data processing systems. 
Data Processing: markets IBM's full line 
of information-handling systems, equip-
ment and supplies through ofl&ces across the 
United States. 
Federal Systems: concentrates on ad-
vanced technology and systems for the 
ground-based, airborne and spaceborne in-
formation-handling and control needs of 
the U. S. Government. 
Field Engineering: 
provides mainte-
nance and related services for the Company's 
domestic information-handling systems 
and equipment. 
Information 
Records: develops and man-
ufactures data processing cards and paper 
forms, magnetic tape and other consumable 
products used in information-handling 
systems. Its product line also includes systems 
and services for the storage, retrieval, 
distribution and display of business records. 
Office Products: develops, manufactures, 
markets and services electric typewriters, 
magnetic tape typewriters, dictation equip-
ment, cold-type composing equipment, 
and related supplies. 
Real Estate and Construction: 
arranges 
for the design, construction, purchase, 
or lease of facilities, including the planning 
and location of sites. 
Research: develops advanced concepts, 
technologies, devices and computer 
applications to provide new and better 
solutions to customers' information-
handling requirements. 
Systems Development: 
develops, through 
a multinational effort, IBM's regular prod-
uct line of information-handling systems and 
equipment, including system-related pro-
gramming support. 
Systems Manufacturing: 
manufactures 
equipment and systems in the IBM informa-
tion-handling product line. 
Subsidiaries: 
IBM World Trade Corporation: 
conducts 
IBM's business outside the United States 
directly or through subsidiaries. 
Science Research Associates, 
Inc.: 
develops and publishes a full range of 
modern learning and guidance materials 
and intelligence, aptitude and achievement 
tests for schools, government, and industry. 
The Service Bureau Corporation: 
offers 
to American business data processing 
services as well as computer programming 
services on a daily, weekly, monthly, or 
one-job basis. 


===== PAGE 35 =====
The C5 Galaxy, now in production for the 
U. S. Air Force, is the world's largest airplane. 
IBM equipment helped engineers evaluate 
various design alternatives before actual pro-
duction began. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Gross Income 
Gross income from worldwide IBM 
operations amounted to $6,888,549,209 last 
year, an increase of $1,543,258,216 over 
the $5,345,290,993 total for 1967. 
During 1968, sales, service and rentals of 
data processing machines and systems ac-
counted for approximately 81 % of gross in-
come, other regular products and services 
accounted for 15%, while special products 
and services for United States space, de-
fense and other agencies contributed 4%. 
Earnings 
The Company's earnings before taxes 
totaled $1,864,497,991, which was $566,-
998,433 more than the $1,297,499,558 
earned in 1967. 
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 
were $993,000,000 in 1968, an increase of 
$347,000,000 over the $646,000,000 in 1967. 
IBM's earnings after taxes were $871,-
497,991, or $219,998,433 more than the 
$651,499,558 earned in 1967. 
IBM's earnings in 1968 equaled $7.71 a 
share on the 112,968,369 shares of capital 
stock outstanding on December 31,1968. 
This compares with $5.81 a share earned on 
the 112,228,558 shares outstanding at the 
end of 1967, adjusted for the 100% stock 
split effected May 9,1968. 
Cash Dividends 
Cash dividends totaling $292,646,157 
were paid to stockholders in 1968 compared 
with $243,172,836 in the previous year. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend pay-
able March 10,1969, will be at the rate of 
$.80 per share, an increase of $.15 a share 
over the previous rate. This dividend 
will be IBM's 216th consecutive quarterly 
cash dividend. 
Borrowings 
Short-term loans payable decreased by 
$184,098,072, reflecting the repayment of 
$200,000,000 borrowed from a group of 
banks in 1967. Long-term indebtedness in-
creased by $23,630,812 as the result of 
borrowings by subsidiaries operating in 
other countries. 
Capital Expenditures 
During 1968, IBM's growing business, 
together with its need to replace obsolete 
equipment, required a worldwide invest-
ment of $1,156,578,794, in plant, rental 
machines and other property. 
Retirements amounted to $794,797,723, 
covering obsolete and dismantled equip-
ment, as well as rental machines sold which 
previously were under lease to customers. 
These write-offs were charged against re-
serves provided out of prior and current 
years' earnings, or to cost of sales. 
Listed on the following page are the new 
facilities and expansions that were com-
pleted or under construction throughout 
the world during the year. Also in 1968, 
the Company occupied a number of newly 
leased or purchased facilities. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
United States 
Purpose 
Square Feet 
Other Countries 
Furpose 
Square Feet 
Chicago, Illinois 
Aim. 
Stuttgart, West Germany Ad7n. 
488,000 
6- Mktg. 1,830,000 
t Toronto, Canada 
Mfg. 
250,000 
t East Fishkill, New York Mfg. 
* Madrid, Spain 
Adm. 
& Dev. 
640,000 
* Madrid, Spain 
& Mktg. 
178,000 
Boca Raton, Florida 
Mfg. 
t Sindelfingen, 
& Dev. 
636,000 
West Germany 
Mfg. 
146,000 
White Plains, New York Adm. 
627,000 
t Boeblingen, 
* Austin, Texas 
Mfg. 
462,000 
West Germany 
Dev. 
140,000 
t San Jose, California 
Mfg. 
346,000 
t La Gaude, France 
Dev. 
137,000 
*t Burlington, Vermont 
Mfg. 
Havant, England 
Mfg. 
117,000 
& Dev. 
300,000 
t Mainz, West Germany 
Mktg. 
107,000 
t Gaithersburg, Maryland Dev. 
Hannover, 
& Adm. 
266,000 
West Germany 
Mktg. 
100,000 
*t Boulder, Colorado 
Mfg. 
* Manila, Philippines 
Adm. 
& Dev. 
261,000 
* Manila, Philippines 
b Mktg. 
88,000 
t Rochester, Minnesota 
Mfg. 
Bogota, Colombia 
Adm. 
&Dev. 
184,000 
& Mktg. 
87,000 
*t Harrison, New York 
Adm. 
150,000 
*t Boeblingen, 
t Owego, New York 
Mfg. 
100,000 
West Germany 
Mfg. 
84,000 
t Poughkeepsie, New York Mfg. 
100,000 
Havant, England 
Adm. 
62,000 
t Huntsville, Alabama 
Dev. 
52,000 
t Montpellier, France 
Mfg. 
54,000 
*t Sherman, Texas 
Mfg. 
34,000 
Lidingo, Sweden 
Mktg. 
53,000 
* Amagi, Japan 
Mktg. 
37,000 
Osaka, Japan 
Mfg. 
28,000 
t Uithoorn, Netherlands 
Dev. 
20,000 
* Completed in 1968. 
t Expansion of existing facilities. 
Annual Meeting of Stockholders 
This year's stockholders' meeting will be 
held at the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium 
in Santa Monica, California, on Monday, 
April 28th at 10:00 a.m. On or about March 
14th, a notice of the meeting, proxy 
statement, and proxy voting card will be 
mailed to stockholders. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Gross I n c o m e 
f r o m Sales, Service 
and Rentals 
N e t Earnings 
• 
and Income Taxes • 
Capital Expenditures 
7,200 
6,400 
5,600 
4,800 
4,000 
3,200 
2,400 
1,600 
800 
In millions of dollars 
O 
2,025 
1,800 
1,575 
1,350 
1 , 1 2 5 
900 
675 
4 5 0 
2 2 5 
In millions of dollars 
o 
1959 '60 '61 '62 '63 '64 '65 '66 '67 '68 
m 
1959 '60 '61 '62 '63 '64 '65 '66 '67 '68 
1 9 0 
In millions of dollars 
o 
1959 '60 '61 '62 '63 '64 '65 '66 '67 '68 


===== PAGE 39 =====
The IBM Board of Directors conducts one of its 
regular meetings during a visit to the Com-
pany's plant and laboratory facilities in Boulder, 
Colorado. Clockwise, from left foreground, 
Arthur K. Watson, William H. Moore, Walker 
G. Buckner, Frank T. Cary (partially hidden), 
T. Vincent Learson, Grayson Kirk, Albert L. 
Williams, Thomas J. Watson, Jr., Louis H. 
LaMotte, Sherman M. Fairchild, John R. Opel, 
Vice President, Finance and Planning (partially 
hidden), Amory Houghton, Jr., Paul L. Davies, 
G. Keith Funston and George L. Hinman. 
To the Stockholders of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements present fairly the financial 
position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December ^i, 
1^68, the results of their operations and the 
supplementary information on funds for the year, 
in conformity with generally accepted account-
ing principles applied on a basis consistent with 
that of the previous year. Also, in our opinion, 
the comparative statement of operations for 
the past ten years presents fairly the financial 
information included therein. Our examination 
of these statements was made in accordance 
with generally accepted auditing standards and 
accordingly included such tests of the account-
ing records and such other auditing procedures 
as we considered necessary. 
January 2 8 , P r i c e Waterhouse & Co. 
New York, New York 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings and 
Retained Earnings for the year ended December 31: 
1968 
1967 
Gross Income from Sales, Service and Rentals 
Cost of sales, service and rentals, operating expenses, and 
development and engineering expense, exclusive of 
depreciation 
Depreciation of plant, rental machines and other property 
Amortization of goodwill 
Interest on indebtedness 
Other income, principally interest 
Net earnings before income taxes 
Provision for U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes, estimated 
Net Earnings for the year 
Per share ( 1 9 6 7 adjusted for the 1 0 0 % stock split 
effected May 9, 1 9 6 8 ) 
$ 4 , 0 6 6 , 1 2 1 , 4 8 3 
9 7 5 , 2 1 4 , 2 0 5 
40,844,026 
6,888,549,209 
Retained Earnings, January i 
Total 
Cash dividends 
Stock dividend . . . 1 , 3 6 3 , 7 2 3 shares, involving transfer from 
retained earnings to capital stock account of 
Retained Earnings, December 31 
The notes on pages 50/0 55 are an integral part of this statement. 
5 , 0 8 2 , 1 7 9 , 7 1 4 
1,806,369,495 
58,128,496 
1,864,497,991 
993,000,000 
871,497,991 
$7-71 
2 9 2 , 6 4 6 , 1 5 7 
1,894,673>304 
2,766,17 1,495 
2 9 2 , 6 4 6 , 1 5 7 
2 , 4 7 3 , 5 2 5 , 3 3 8 
$ 5,345,290,993 
3,173,976,030 
8 6 3 , 6 1 1 , 3 6 6 
8,018,655 
37,417,864 
4,083,023,915 
1,262,267,078 
35,232,480 
1,297,499,558 
646,000,000 
651,499,558 
2 , 0 1 1 , 3 8 0 , 0 5 5 
2,662,879,613 
2 4 3 , 1 7 2 , 8 3 6 
5 2 5 , 0 3 3 , 2 7 3 
768,206,109 
$ 1,894,673,504 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Assets 
1968 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
$ 
216,838,060 
Marketable securities, valued at lower of cost or market. 
1,609,086,088 
Notes and accounts receivable... less reserve: 
1968, $22,445,133; 1967, $17,227,950 
1,201,466,663 
Inventories, valued at lower of average cost or market. . 
226,286,172 
Prepaid insurance, taxes, etc 
47,394,211 
$ 3,301,071,194 
Ot^er Investments and Sundry Assets 
27,3 20,7 7 9 
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property ...at cost: 
Land 
112,633,018 
Buildings 
663,655,612 
Factory, laboratory and office equipment 
1,132,448,170 
1,908,736,800 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
889,007,180 
1,019,729,620 
Rental machines and parts 
5,088,453,536 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
2,693,143,969 
2,395,309,567 
3 , 4 1 5 , 0 3 9 , 1 8 7 
Patents and Goodwill 
i 
$ 6,743,431,161 
The notes on pages 50 
5 5 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Consolidated Balance 
Sheet at December 31: 
Assets 
1968 
Current 
Assets: 
Cash 
$ 
2 1 6 , 8 3 8 , 0 6 0 
Marketable securities, valued at lower of cost or market. 
1,609,086,088 
Notes and accounts receivable... less reserve: 
1 9 6 8 , $ 2 2 , 4 4 5 , 1 3 3 ; 1 9 6 7 , $ 1 7 , 2 2 7 , 9 5 0 
1 , 2 0 1 , 4 6 6 , 6 6 3 
Inventories, valued at lower of average cost or market. . 
226,286,172 
Prepaid insurance, taxes, etc 
47,394,211 
$ 3 , 3 0 1 , 0 7 1 , 1 9 4 
Ot^er Investments 
and Sundry 
Assets 
2 7 , 3 2 0 , 7 7 9 
P/ant, Rental 
Machines 
and Other Property ...at 
cost: 
L a n d 
1 1 2 , 6 3 3 , 0 1 8 
Buildings 
663,655,612 
Factory, laboratory and office equipment 
1,132,448,170 
1 , 9 0 8 , 7 3 6 , 8 0 0 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
889,007,180 
1 , 0 1 9 , 7 2 9 , 6 2 0 
Rental machines and parts 
5,088,453,536 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
2,693,143,969 
2 , 3 9 5 , 3 0 9 , 5 6 7 
3 , 4 1 5 , 0 3 9 , 1 8 7 
Patents and Goodwill 
i 
1 9 6 7 
6 , 7 4 3 , 4 3 1 , 1 6 1 
The notes on pages 50 
55 
an integral part of this statement. 
^54,^19,595 
5 6 1 , 0 4 3 , 7 7 0 
1 , 0 1 3 , 4 1 7 , 6 2 2 
2 1 4 , 1 2 4 , 5 2 2 
3 5 , 6 8 9 , 2 5 8 
2 , 0 7 8 , 5 5 4 , 7 6 7 
2 3 , 8 0 8 , 4 2 0 
8 6 , 8 6 3 , 5 5 4 
5 7 6 , 0 7 7 , 1 7 1 
983,989,541 
1 , 6 4 6 , 9 3 0 , 2 6 6 
745,652,992 
9 0 1 , 2 7 7 , 2 7 4 
4 , 9 8 8 , 4 7 8 , 9 9 9 
2 , 3 9 3 , 4 4 9 , 0 6 9 
2 , 5 9 5 , 0 2 9 , 9 3 0 
3 , 4 9 6 , 3 0 7 , 2 0 4 
I 
$ 5 , 5 9 8 , 6 7 0 , 3 9 2 
Liabilities 
and Capital 
1968 
Current 
Liabilities: 
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes... estimated.... $ 
567,631,316 
Accounts payable and accruals 
899,033,842 
Loans payable 
64,336,040 
$ 1 , 5 3 1 , 0 0 1 , 1 9 8 
Deferred 
Income Taxes 
5 1 , 8 9 6 , 2 2 0 
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities 
and 
Retirement 
Plans 
4 6 , 3 0 3 , 0 5 5 
Long-Term Indebtedness 
5 4 5 , 0 9 0 , 5 1 4 
Capital 
Stock...V&tYahiet'^.oo 
Vet S>h?Lte 
2 , 0 9 5 , 6 1 4 , 8 3 6 
Authorized: 120,000,000 shares 
Issued and outstanding: 1968: 112,968,369 shares; 
1 9 6 7 : 
5 6 , 1 1 4 , 2 7 9 shares 
Retained 
Earnings 
: 
2 , 4 7 3 , 5 2 5 , 3 3 8 
4 , 5 6 9 , 1 4 0 , 1 7 4 
6 , 7 4 3 , 4 3 1 , 1 6 1 
3 2 1 , 0 6 0 , 1 3 1 
5 9 2 , 6 7 7 , 5 3 1 
2 4 8 , 4 3 4 , 1 1 2 
1 , 1 6 2 , 1 7 1 , 7 7 4 
4 7 , 8 1 9 , 8 5 1 
3 5 , 6 1 6 , 2 9 9 
5 2 1 , 4 5 9 , 7 0 2 
1 , 9 3 6 , 9 2 9 , 2 6 2 
1 , 8 9 4 , 6 7 3 , 5 0 4 
3 , 8 3 1 , 6 0 2 , 7 6 6 
5 , 5 9 8 , 6 7 0 , 3 9 2 


===== PAGE 43 =====
The versatile SELECTRIC typewriter, intro-
duced in 1961, continues to be a highly 
popular and successful machine both in busi-
ness and with students and teachers of typing. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
Consolidated Statement of Source and Application 
of Funds for the year ended December 31: 
1 9 6 8 
1 9 6 7 
Nef current assets at beginning of year 
Funds provided during year: 
Net earnings 
Depredation and other charges against net earnings which 
did not require the current outlay of funds 
Total from operations 
Sale of capital stock under employee plans 
Increase in long-term indebtedness 
Miscellaneous 
Total funds provided during year 
Total funds 
Funds applied during year: 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 
Less: Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized in 
rental machines 
Cash dividends 
Total funds applied during year 
Net current assets at end of year 
; 
9 1 6 , 3 8 2 , 9 9 3 
8 7 1 , 4 9 7 , 9 9 1 
1 , 1 7 9 , 4 2 9 , 8 4 2 
2 , 0 5 0 , 9 2 7 , 8 3 3 
1 5 8 , 6 8 5 , 5 7 4 
2 3 , 6 3 0 , 8 1 2 
( 3 , 5 1 2 , 3 5 9 ) 
2 , 2 2 9 , 7 3 1 , 8 6 0 
3 , 1 4 6 , 1 1 4 , 8 5 3 
1 , 1 5 6 , 5 7 8 , 7 9 4 
7 3 , 1 8 0 , 0 9 4 
1 , 0 8 3 , 3 9 8 , 7 0 0 
2 9 2 , 6 4 6 , 1 5 7 
1 , 3 7 6 , 0 4 4 , 8 5 7 
1 , 7 7 0 , 0 6 9 , 9 9 6 
7 2 3 , 0 9 6 , 4 1 4 
6 5 1 , 4 9 9 , 5 5 8 
1 , 0 1 7 , 2 0 3 , 3 0 1 
1 , 6 6 8 , 7 0 2 , 8 5 9 
9 5 , 5 7 8 , 6 0 8 
6 2 , 5 8 8 , 1 8 4 
( 4 , 6 2 3 , 4 7 0 ) 
1 , 8 2 2 , 2 4 6 , 1 8 1 
2 , 5 4 5 , 3 4 2 , 5 9 5 
1 , 4 6 9 , 9 4 1 , 1 5 2 
8 4 , 1 5 4 , 3 8 6 
1 , 3 8 5 , 7 8 6 , 7 6 6 
2 4 3 , 1 7 2 , 8 3 6 
1 , 6 2 8 , 9 5 9 , 6 0 2 
9 1 6 , 3 8 2 , 9 9 3 
Notes to 
Consolidated Financial Statements 
Principles of Consolidation: 
The consolidated financial statements include 
the accounts of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its domestic and 
foreign subsidiary companies. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Foreign Operations: 
December 31, ic)68 
December 31, 
1967 
Net assets employed in foreign operations are summarized below together with a comparison 
of gross income and net earnings from these operations. 
Current assets 
Current liabilities 
Net current assets 
Other investments and sundry assets 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
Deferred income taxes 
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 
in certain countries 
Long-term indebtedness 
Net assets employed in foreign operations 
Gross income from sales, service and rentals in foreign countries 
Net earnings from foreign operations 
Foreign assets and liabilities have been translated to U. S. dollars at year-end exchange 
rates, except that plant, rental machines and other property and long-term indebtedness 
have been translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired or incurred. 
$ 1,014,355,746 
613,401,737 
400,954,009 
26,859,933 
1,202,386,835 
1,630,200,777 
25,899,816 
46,303,055 
308,090,514 
380,293,385 
$ 1,249,907,392 
Year 1 9 6 8 
$ 2,040,184,359 
$ 
270,546,255 
680,198,513 
452,248,580 
227,949,933 
23,209,599 
1,176,035,183 
1,427,194,715 
24,961,991 
35,616,299 
273,709,702 
334,287,992 
1,092,906,723 
Year 
1967 
$ 1,624,990,742 
$ 
209,360,460 
Income and expense items have been translated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year, except depreciation which has been calculated at the approximate 
rates prevailing when the properties were acquired. 
Long-Term Indebtedness: 
December 31, 
ig68 
December 31, 
1967 
International Business Machines Corporation... 
payable to The Prudential Insurance Company of America: 
3 Vi % promissory note, due in annual installments, 
January i, 1970 to 1985 
promissory note, due in annual installments. 
May I , 1970 to 1988 
promissory notes, due December 1,1971 
Subsidiaries operating in foreign countries... average interest 
rate—6.3% 
Consolidated long-term indebtedness 
92,000,000 
95,000,000 
50,000,000 
237,000,000 
308,090,514 
5 4 5 , 0 9 0 , 5 1 4 
97,750,000 
100,000,000 
50,000,000 
247,750,000 
273,709,702 
521,459,702 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Consolidated long-term indebtedness at 
December 31,1968 was payable: 
1970 
$ 
51,232,118 
1971 
138,250,668 
1972 
34374,471 
1973 
50,849,997 
197 4 
20,183,022 
1975-1979 
155,688,056 
1980-1988 
94,512,182 
$ 545,090,514 
Renegotiation: 
The Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
and Retained Earnings includes estimated 
provision for renegotiation of U. S. Govern-
ment contracts. 
Depreciation: 
With minor exceptions, depreciation 
of domestic properties is computed using 
the sum of the years-digits method. Depre-
ciation of foreign properties is generally 
computed using the straight-line method. 
However, methods which provide higher 
charges in early years of asset life, such as 
the declining-balance method, are used 
by certain foreign subsidiaries. 
Significant 
Litigation: 
On January 17,1969, the Department of 
Justice filed a civil antitrust complaint 
against IBM, charging the Company with 
monopolizing the data processing industry. 
In the suit, filed under Section 2 of the 
Sherman Act, the government requests that 
IBM be forced to desist from certain 
practices which it claims lead to a monop-
oly. The complaint also contains a gen-
eral statement asking the court to give such 
other relief by way of divorcement, dives-
titure and reorganization as it may deem 
necessary to dissipate the effects of the prac-
tices complained of. 
On December 11,1968, Control Data 
Corporation instituted a lawsuit against 
IBM alleging violations of the Federal anti-
trust laws. The complaint seeks injunctive 
relief and damages to be fixed by the Court. 
On January 3,1969, a complaint was filed 
by the Data Processing Financial & Gen-
eral Corporation. This computer leasing 
company accuses IBM of various viola-
tions of antitrust laws and asks for treble 
damages totaling $1,054,500,000. 
IBM denies the charges in all three cases. 
The Company intends to vigorously de-
fend itself against the allegations of anti-
trust violations in each of these suits. 
Stock Purchase Flan for IBM Employees: 
Under the Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
approved by stockholders in 1966, employ-
ees on the annual offering date, each July 
I, who are not participants in a Stock Option 
Plan, may purchase IBM's unissued capital 
stock one share at a time through payroll 
deductions not exceeding 10% of their com-
pensation. The price an employee pays for 
a share of stock is equal to 85 % of the 
market price on the annual offering date or 
on the date he has accumulated enough 
money to buy the share—whichever price is 
lower. 
Employees purchased 645,816 shares in 
1968, for which $148,618,391 was paid to 
IBM and credited to the capital stock account. 
At December 31,1968,1,307,298 shares 
were reserved for sale under the 1966 Plan. 
Numbers of shares reflect the 100% stock 
split effected May 9,1968. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
Stock Option Plans: 
In April 1966, stockholders approved the 
continuation of a Stock Option Plan for 
officers and other key employees. Under the 
1966 Plan,as under the 1956 and 1961 Plans, 
options may be granted for the purchase of 
IBM's unissued capital stock at 100% of the 
market price on the day the option is granted. 
Options granted after January i, 1964 
run for a five-year term and purchases can 
only be made in installments commencing 
one year after the date of grant and extend-
ing over a period of the next four years. 
Options granted prior to January i, 1964 
under earlier Plans have a term of ten years 
and purchases can only be made in install-
ments commencing two years after the date 
of grant and extending over a period of 
the next eight years. 
In accordance with the Plans, the number 
of shares that may be purchased and the price 
per share are adjusted for stock dividends 
and splits effected after the option is granted. 
The following summary reflects the trans-
actions for the Plans during 1968: 
Number of Shares 
Under 
Option 
Balance, 
January i, 1968 
451,114 
Options granted 
140,280 
Options terminated . . 
(7,695) 
Options exercised.... (93,996) 
Reserved under the 
1966 Plan 
— 
Balance, 
December 31, 1968 . .489,703 
Exercisable at 
December 31, 1968 . . 176,415 
IBM received $10,067,183 for the 93,996 
shares purchased during 1968, which 
amount was credited to the capital stock 
account. The 489,703 shares under op-
tion at December 31, 1968 were held by 
655 executives at option prices ranging 
from $71.72 to I333.63 per share. These 
prices represent 100% of the market 
price on the date of each grant from 1959 
to date, adjusted for stock dividends 
and splits that occurred after the dates on 
which the options were granted. The 
336,545 shares available for future option 
grants are all under the 1966 Plan. 
'Retirement Plans: 
T h e Company and its domestic subsidi-
aries have had for many years a trusteed, 
non-contributory retirement plan covering 
substantially all their employees. Certain 
subsidiaries outside the United States 
have retirement plans under which funds 
are deposited with trustees, reserves are 
provided, or annuities are purchased under 
group contracts. T h e cost of all plans 
totaled approximately $80 million for the 
year 1968. 
Available 
for Option 
163,940 
( 140,280) 
5,385 
307,500 
336,545 


===== PAGE 48 =====
At end of year: 
Gross income from sales, service and rentals. 
Net earnings before income taxes 
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share (see note) 
Cash dividends 
Ver share (see note) 
Stock dividends and splits"'"': 
Ver cent 
Shares issued 
Shares sold 
Number of shares outstanding 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property , 
Long-term indebtedness 
Net current assets 
Number of stockholders 
Note: Adjusted for stock dividends and splits. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
1 9 6 8 
1 9 6 7 
1 9 6 6 
1 9 6 5 
1 9 6 4 
1 9 6 3 
1 9 6 2 
1 9 6 1 
i 9 6 0 
1 9 5 9 
Gross income from sales, service and rentals 
Net earnings before income taxes 
U. S. Federal and foreign income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share (see note) 
Cash dividends 
Per share (see note) 
Stock dividends and splits"''": 
Per cent 
Shares issued 
Shares sold 
Number of shares outstanding 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Long-term indebtedness 
Net current assets 
Number of stockholders 
At end of year: 
6 , 8 8 8 , 5 4 9 , 2 0 9 
1 , 8 6 4 , 4 9 7 , 9 9 1 
9 9 3 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
8 7 1 , 4 9 7 , 9 9 1 
I 7-7X 
• 
2 9 2 , 6 4 6 , 1 5 7 
$ 
2.60 
* I O O % 
5 6 , 2 3 0 , 4 2 0 
6 2 3 , 6 7 0 
1 1 2 , 9 6 8 , 3 6 9 
3 , 4 1 5 , 0 3 9 , 1 8 7 
5 4 5 , 0 9 0 , 5 1 4 
1 , 7 7 0 , 0 6 9 , 9 9 6 
5 0 1 , 3 9 0 
Note: Adjusted for stock dividends and splits. 
5,345,290,993 
1,297,499,558 
6 4 6 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
651,499,558 
$ 5-8I 
2 4 3 , 1 7 2 , 8 3 6 
$2.17 
21/2% 
1 , 3 6 3 , 7 2 3 
3 0 2 , 3 5 6 
$ 3 , 4 9 6 , 3 0 7 , 2 0 4 
$ 
5 2 1 , 4 5 9 , 7 0 2 
$ 
9 1 6 , 3 8 2 , 9 9 3 
359,495 
4 , 2 4 7 , 7 0 6 , 0 9 1 
1 , 0 5 4 , 1 3 0 , 1 9 2 
5 2 8 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
5 2 6 , 1 3 0 , 1 9 2 
$4-71 
2 3 0 , 6 7 1 , 1 6 8 
$2.10 
1 7 , 6 4 5 , 9 8 5 
1,577,301 
5 4 , 4 4 8 , 2 0 0 
3 , 0 9 8 , 6 1 8 , 6 1 4 
4 5 8 , 8 7 1 , 5 1 8 
7 2 3 , 0 9 6 , 4 1 4 
3 2 8 , 4 2 7 
3 , 5 7 2 , 8 2 4 , 7 1 9 
9 5 9 , 9 0 2 , 4 9 0 
4 8 3 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
4 7 6 , 9 0 2 , 4 9 0 
I 4-40 
2 1 0 , 7 6 7 , 4 8 2 
$ 1.93 
1 7 6 , 6 5 5 
3 5 , 2 2 4 , 9 1 4 
2 , 3 0 3 , 5 0 9 , 0 0 0 
3 9 8 , 8 4 9 , 6 0 4 
6 9 8 , 6 5 2 , 8 4 8 
2 7 5 , 6 5 0 
3,239,359,581 
897,159,766 
4 6 6 , 0 0 0 , 0 0 0 
4 3 1 , 1 5 9 , 7 6 6 
$ 4.00 
1 6 5 , 9 6 4 , 4 5 2 
$ 1.54 
* 2 5 % 
6 , 9 9 0 , 1 4 0 
1 3 6 , 2 9 7 
3 5 , 0 4 8 , 2 5 9 
1 , 7 4 7 , 9 2 4 , 4 5 7 
3 7 0 , 4 2 9 , 5 3 6 
8 9 9 , 9 3 8 , 2 4 3 
2 6 6 , 0 8 6 
2 , 8 6 2 , 7 3 2 , 7 2 7 
7 7 7 , 8 2 8 , 4 0 4 
4 1 3 , 5 7 3 , 4 2 6 
3 6 4 , 2 5 4 , 9 7 8 
$3-39 
1 1 8 , 0 3 9 , 9 7 1 
$ 
I.II 
114,212 
2 7 , 9 2 1 , 8 2 2 
1 , 5 8 5 , 5 8 1 , 3 6 7 
549,590,394 
8 8 5 , 4 3 5 , 0 6 0 
2 3 3 , 7 6 1 
2 , 5 9 1 , 2 6 8 , 5 7 2 
6 5 2 , 4 3 7 , 6 4 1 
347,711,296 
3 0 4 , 7 2 6 , 3 4 5 
$2.85 
8 2 , 9 5 6 , 8 0 5 
$ 
.78 
1 1 6 , 6 0 4 
2 7 , 8 0 7 , 6 1 0 
1 , 5 3 3 , 9 6 6 , 6 9 4 
5 9 0 , 6 6 6 , 3 2 7 
6 8 1 , 2 1 7 , 8 6 4 
2 3 0 , 2 3 5 
2 , 2 0 2 , 4 6 5 , 0 0 9 
5 4 6 , 4 9 4 , 7 8 4 
2 9 2 , 3 7 5 , 6 6 6 
2 5 4 , 1 1 9 , 1 1 8 
$2.39 
6 3 , 2 9 9 , 8 9 5 
$ 
.60 
" 5 0 % 
9 , 2 0 4 , 5 1 5 
94,794 
2 7 , 6 9 1 , 0 0 6 
1 , 4 1 8 , 5 8 8 , 6 9 0 
5 8 5 , 1 2 9 , 7 4 7 
519,474,419 
197,509 
1 , 8 1 6 , 8 8 2 , 2 5 9 
4 3 8 , 3 9 4 , 0 5 8 
233,478,553 
2 0 4 , 9 1 5 , 5 0 5 
$ 1.93 
5 4 , 8 9 8 , 8 4 2 
$ 
.52 
43,401 
1 8 , 3 9 1 , 6 9 7 
1 , 2 0 3 , 5 6 6 , 4 5 9 
5 3 7 , 6 6 1 , 3 6 4 
4 6 8 , 7 5 1 , 4 7 7 
1 2 7 , 4 7 8 
1 , 6 1 3 , 1 9 0 , 0 0 5 
3 8 0 , 2 7 4 , 4 3 8 
2 0 4 , 2 1 3 , 0 4 3 
1 7 6 , 0 6 1 , 3 9 5 
$ 
1.66 
3 7 , 0 9 6 , 8 6 5 
$ 
-35 
2V2% & "=^50% 
6,402,610 
44,769 
1 8 , 3 4 8 , 2 9 6 
1,038,771,643 
520,034,035 
447,276,137 
108,915 
56 
5 7 
58 


===== PAGE 50 =====
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman of the Board 
T. Vincent Learson 
President 
Arthur K. Watson 
Vice Chairman of the Board 
Albert L. Williams 
Chairman, Executive Committee 


===== PAGE 51 =====
Richard H. Bullen 
Senior Vice President 
Management Committee 
Frank T. Gary 
Senior Vice President 
Warren C. Hume 
Senior Vice President 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Senior Vice President 
Management Gommittee 
Burke Marshall 
Senior Vice President 
Management Committee 
McLain B. Smith 
Vice President 
Management Gommittee 


===== PAGE 52 =====
Eugene G. Fubini 
Vice President and Group Executive 
Robert W Hubner 
Vice President and Group Executive 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Vice President and President 
IBM World Trade Corporation 
John R. Opel 
Vice President 
Finance and Planning 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Vice President and General Counsel 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Vice President and Chief Scientist 


===== PAGE 53 =====
A logical step in the evolution of computer 
displays will be the eventual addition of a color 
capability. This experimental apparatus in 
operation at our Kingston laboratory shows 
promise for producing the extremely sharp, 
well-defined color image that must be achieved 
to be useful in a future product. 


===== PAGE 54 =====
Board of Directors: 
Walker G. Buckner 
Senior Partner, Buckner & Co., investment i 
Frank T. Gary 
Senior Vice President and General Manager, Data Processing Group. 
Paul L. Davies 
Senior Partner, Lehman Brothers, investment hankers. 
Sherman M. Fairchild 
Chairman of the Board, Fairchild Camera & Instrument Corporation, 
and Chairman of the Board, Fairchild Hiller Corporation. 
John Clifford Folger 
Chairman of the Board, Folger, Nolan, Fleming & Co., Incorporated, 
investment hankers. 
*John M. Fox 
Chairman of the Board, United Fruit Company. 
G. Keith Funston 
Chairman of the Board, Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation. 
George L. Hinman 
Senior Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, attorneys at law. 
Amory Houghton, Jr 
Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works. 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University. 
Louis H. LaMotte 
Retired Executive Vice President. 
T. Vincent Learson 
President. 
William H. Moore 
Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company. 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Vice President and Chief Scientist. 
Arthur K. Watson 
Vice Chairman of the Board, and 
Chairman of the Board of IBM World Trade Corporation. 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr 
Chairman of the Board. 
Albert L. Williams 
Chairman of the Executive Committee. 
Bruce Bromley 
Honorary Director. Partner, Cravath, Swaine & Moore, attorneys at law. 
Executive Committee: 
Albert L. Williams, Chairman 
Sherman M. Fairchild 
T. Vincent Learson 
John Clifford Folger 
Arthur K. Watson 
Louis H. LaMotte 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Officers: 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr 
Chairman of the Board 
T. Vincent Learson 
President 
Arthur K. Watson 
Vice Chairman of the Board 
Richard H. Bullen 
Senior Vice President 
Frank T. Cary 
Senior Vice President 
Warren C. Hume 
Senior Vice President 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Senior Vice President 
*Burke Marshall 
Senior Vice President 
McLain B. Smith 
Vice President, Management Committee 
Eugene G. Fubini 
Vice President and Group Executive 
Robert W Hubner 
Vice President and Group Executive 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Vice President 
John R. Opel 
Vice President 
George B. Beitzel 
Vice President 
James W Birkenstock 
Vice President 


===== PAGE 55 =====
Kenneth N. Davis, Jr 
Vice President 
Young P. Dawkins 
Vice President 
John W Gibson 
Vice President 
Jerrier A. Haddad 
Vice President 
Lincoln L. Horn 
Vice President 
*Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Vice President and General Counsel 
Paul W Knaplund 
Vice President 
Dean R. McKay 
Vice President 
John C. McPherson 
Vice President 
H. Wisner Miller, Jr 
Vice President 
Gordon M. Moodie 
Vice President 
"Walter J. Pedicord 
Vice President 
Dean E Phypers 
Vice President 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Vice President and Chief Scientist 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice President and Controller 
Orland M. Scott 
Vice President 
*Harry M. Sibley 
Treasurer 
Henry W Trimble, Jr 
Secretary 
Hilary A. Faw, Jr 
Assistant Treasurer 
George H. Ryniker 
Assistant Treasurer 
Karl W Kaufmann 
Assistant Controller 
John H.Grady 
Assistant Secretary 
Division and Subsidiary 
Chief 
Executives: 
Arthur G. Anderson 
Director of Research 
John E. Bertram 
General Manager, Advanced Systems Development Division 
Charles E. Branscomb 
President, Systems Development Division 
Robert B. Dunlop 
President, Systems Manufacturing 
Division 
Bob O. Evans 
President, Federal Systems Division 
John W Gibson 
President, Components Division 
Richard A. Giesen 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Herbert R. Keith 
Chairman of the Board, The Service Bureau Corporation 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
President, IBM World Trade Corporation 
H. Wisner Miller, Jr 
President, Real Estate and Construction Division 
Gordon M. Moodie 
President, Office Products Division 
Roy E. Piatt 
General Manager, Information Records Division 
Francis G. Rodgers 
President, Data Processing Division 
Orland M. Scott 
President, Field Engineering Division 
*Effective 
1/28/69 
International Business Machines Corporation 
Armonk, New York 10504 
Stockholder Relations Department 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 56 =====


===== PAGE 57 =====
