

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents : 
1 
Highlights of the Year 
2 
Letter to Stockholders: 
Management comments on the year's 
financial results and the outlook for continuing 
growth in IBM's business 
6 
More Productivity 
20 
Stockholder Information 
2 1 
Financial Report 
40 
I B M Organization 
43 
Progress Report on other 1981 developments 
involving IBM employees and business programs 
48 
Directors and Officers 
IBM's Operations : 
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are 
in the field of information-handling systems, 
equipment and services to solve the increasingly 
complex problems of business, government, 
science, space exploration, defense, education, 
medicine and many other areas of human activity. 
IBM's products include data processing machines 
and systems, telecommunications systems and 
products, information distributors, office systems, 
typewriters, copiers, educational and testing 
materials, and related supplies and services. Most 
products are both leased and sold through IBM's 
worldwide marketing organizations. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Annual Report 
for the year ended December 31,1981 
International Business Mpchines 
Corporation 
Highlights of the year: 
(Dollars in millions 
except per share amounts) 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services. 
Earnings before income taxes 
U.S. Federal and non-US. income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and 
other property 
Return on stockholders' equity 
29,070 
5 , 9 8 8 
2,680 
3 . 3 0 8 
$ 5 - 6 3 
6,845 
19.1% 
26,213 
5 . 8 9 7 
i . 3 3 5 -
3,562 
$ 6.10 
2,008 
$ 3.44 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and 
other property 
Working capital 
Long-term debt 
Stockholders' equity 
Number of employees 
Number of stockholders 
29,586 
17,278 
2 , 9 8 3 
2,669 
18,161 
3 5 4 . 9 3 6 
742,162 
$ 
26,703 
$ 
1 5 , 0 1 7 
$ 
3.399 
$ 
2,099 
$ 
16,453 
341,279 
737,230 
Cover: IBM's teclinological leadership in computer 
circuit packaging is reflected in this 24 x 28-inch copper 
wiring plane in the IBM 3081, the company's most 
powerful system. Part of the densest circuit packaging yet 
reported in the industry, the plane is one of 20 layers 
in a /s-inch-thick printed circuit board that contains more 
than a kilometer of wire interconnections. Each board 
helps connect 225,000 logic circuits and more than 1.5 
million memory bits of information. By shortening 
the distance electrical signals must travel, the high-density 
packaging contributes to improved internal perform-
ance of the IBM 3081. The packaging design also enhances 
reliability and reduces production costs. 
M . i d i l o i iiltl,l 
t 
^.iiiiii.^ 


===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders: 
J o h n R . O p c l , President Lind Cliicf E.xccutive O f f i c e r / F r a n k T . Gary, C h a i r m a n of the Board 
1981 was a good year for IBM. Orders and product shipments were strong, although earnings 
were down because of currency translation. Major capital expenditures over the past several 
years have established a foundation for long-term growth. 
Worldwide net earnings for the year ended December 31, 1981, were $3,308 million, 
compared with $3,562 million for 1980. Net earnings were $5.63 per share on 587.8 million 
shares, the average number outstanding during the period, compared with $6.10 per share 
on 583.5 million shares, the average number outstanding in 1980. 
Consolidated gross income was $29,070 million, compared with $26,213 million in 1980. 
Net earnings for the quarter ended December 31, 1981, were $1,081 million, or $1.83 
per share, compared with $1,233 million, or $2.11 per share, for the same period in 1980. Gross 
income was $8,993 million, compared with $7,805 million for the fourth quarter of 1980. 
Operations outside the United States during 1981, included in consolidated results, yielded 
net earnings of $1,239 million, compared with $1,902 million in 1980. Gross income from 
those operations was $13,982 million, compared with $13,787 million in the prior year. 
The stronger U. S. dollar, relative to other major currencies during 1981, had a severe impact 
on period-to-period comparisons of financial results. While the translation of assets and 


===== PAGE 5 =====
liabilities resulted in exchange gains, the translation of income and expenses of the non-U. S. 
operations had a significantly adverse effect on results. 
The translation of assets and liabilities recorded or denominated in currencies other than 
the U. S. dollar was the principal factor in the exchange gains of $94 million and $24 million in 
1981 and 1980 respectively. The fourth quarter of 1981 results include exchange losses of $4 
million compared with gains of $36 million in the final quarter of 1980. These gains and losses 
from translation are principally unrealized. 
The effects of currency rate changes on business volumes, pricing and other operating 
decisions which have an impact on income and expenses of non-U. S. operations cannot be quanti-
fied. However, disregarding these economic effects, it is estimated that if the currency rates used 
to translate income and expense had remained the same as in 1980, gross income would have been 
over $2 billion greater and consolidated net earnings would have been over $600 million greater. 
Gross income from sales of data processing equipment for the year and the fourth quarter 
increased substantially over the corresponding periods of 1980. Gross income from all sales, 
including data processing equipment, increased 18.2% over 1980. Gross income from rentals and 
services increased 5.7%, with services increasing 20.4% and rentals decreasing .3% over the 
corresponding 1980 amounts. 
Incoming orders and shipments of data processing equipment were at high levels and showed 
strong growth rates during 1981, with the year-end backlog of orders somewhat higher than 
in the previous year. 
Large Growth Potential 
World economies have an almost universal need for greater productivity as they struggle with 
inflation and intensifying competition. As a consequence, we find a large and growing demand 
for information products-a demand that from every indication will be long-term. The major part 
of IBM's growth will continue to come from our traditional business base-the application of data 
processing and office products in business, science, government and education. 
Basic Business Goals 
In order to take full advantage of the demand potential, we have three basic IBM goals for the 1980s: 
First, it is our goal to be the product leader-to excel in technology, reliability, maintain-
ability and value. We want to be foremost in quality, providing machines and systems that are as 
defect-free as they can be made. 
Second, it is our goal to be the most efficient company in our industry-not only in manu-
facturing, but also in the development, marketing and service of our products. 
Third, it is our goal to compete in, and grow with, the information industry in all its aspects. 
Ensuring Quality 
Product quality has played a key role in the company's success over the years. Today, because 
of our more advanced products, our larger product volumes, and the variety of ways customers 
are installing and using our systems, the quality challenge is more imposing than ever. To help 
meet it, we have established a corporate function to coordinate all our quality programs 
worldwide. Emphasis in every part of the business will be on doing each job right the first time. 
Productivity in IBM Operations 
As we have so often in the past, we are making many changes and adopting new methods 
to improve our own productivity-in the laboratories and plants and throughout our marketing, 
distribution, service and administration. We expect productivity gains from a realignment of our 
worldwide marketing structures. The three U. S. divisions that marketed larger computers, 
smaller computers and office products have been consolidated into two new divisions that sell 
our full line of information systems and products. A single marketing team can now supply all of 
a customer's product needs. We are making a similar realignment outside the U. S., where 


===== PAGE 6 =====
we had a separate division marketing small computers and office products in 20 countries. That 
activity has now been consolidated into our IBM World Trade subsidiaries. 
We are also realigning U. S. plant and laboratory operations into two new groups to take 
better advantage of new technology and improve long-range planning. 
At the plant/laboratory locations, we continue to increase our use of advanced 
technology in the manufacture, design and testing of products. Further savings are coming from 
computer-controlled automation of IBM warehouses and from new tools and techniques that 
simplify the installation and service of our products. 
New Products 
To aid customer productivity, we brought significant new products and technology to 
market in 1981 across the full range of our product line. Through technical innovation, we con-
tinued to lower the cost of information processing and also offered customers a broader set 
of price/performance options. Among the new product developments: 
...We began shipping the industry's most advanced computer disk file, the IBM 3380, which 
uses "thin film" technology to read or write data at 3 million characters a second. 
...A new model of our most powerful computer, the IBM 3081, has internal speeds up to 
40% faster than previous models. The logic and memory packaging in the IBM 3081 is the 
densest available in the industry. 
...The IBM Personal Computer can be used in many productive ways in the office or at home. 
...The IBM Datamaster is the company's newest low-priced computer designed specifically for busi-
ness applications. It is easy to use and can handle text processing as well as data processing. 
...Several new models of the IBM 4300 and IBM 8100 processors simplify system use and 
give customers added flexibility in choosing the computing power and memory size that will best 
meet their processing needs. 
...The IBM Displaywriter, an office system widely installed in many countries, now has greater 
file processing and communications capabilities, enabling it to handle many more office tasks. 
...A new IBM voice message distribution system utilizing the IBM Series/i permits people 
using telephones to record, play back, change and forward messages to one or several persons, 
under computer control. 
Higher-Volume Marketing 
These and other IBM products are doing more and more work at lower cost, stimulating 
new uses of our equipment. As a result, we are dealing with larger numbers of customers and 
prospective customers. In response to that, we are introducing new marketing approaches to 
make our products more readily available. Twenty-one IBM retail product centers for office 
machines and small systems were opened in 1981, bringing the total to 33. Of those, 13 are 
in the U. S. and 20 in other countries. 
We began marketing the IBM Personal Computer through Sears, Roebuck and Co.'s 
business systems stores, as well as through some 190 ComputerLand Corp. dealers in the U. S. and 
Canada. We also began marketing through distributors, authorizing seven U. S. firms to sell 
certain smaller IBM products, including a computer display terminal and a keyboard printer. 
In addition, we expanded sales to other manufacturers, offering an IBM disk file assembly 
for integration into systems marketed by the other firms. 
Expansion to Meet Demand 
In expanding our capacity to meet record demand and to grow with the industry, we have 
completed close to 1 1 million square feet of new plant and laboratory buildings in 1 1 countries 


===== PAGE 7 =====
over the past three years. Counting leased faciUties, we have added more than 22 milUon square 
feet of plant and laboratory space in the past five years-one-third of our current total. 
As these facilities come on line, we are realizing an increasing return from our sizable capital 
spending for greater productive capacity That capacity is helping us ship products in quantities 
of hundreds of thousands each year. We are currently building nearly 4 million square feet of 
additional plant and laboratory space worldwide. 
Justice Department Ends Lawsuit 
On January 8, 1982, the United States Justice Department withdrew its 13-year-old antitrust 
lawsuit against IBM. After a comprehensive review of the case, the department's Antitrust Divi-
sion concluded that the case was "without merit and should be dismissed." In withdrawing 
the suit, the Justice Department in effect affirmed the rulings of many Federal courts and what 
we have contended from the start: Our industry is healthy and competitive, and IBM has not 
violated the antitrust laws. The case was burdensome, and while we never doubted its ultimate 
outcome, we are happy that it will not have to drag on through the courts for years to come. 
Our General Counsel, Nick Katzenbach, has led our legal affairs over the entire period, 
and we are very indebted to him. Our deep thanks also go to the many IBM people who worked 
long and hard on IBM's defense, and to Tom Barr and his Cravath, Swaine & Moore litigation 
team that so ably represented the company throughout these stressful times. 
In June, 1981, the United States Supreme Court let stand a lower court's directed verdict 
in favor of IBM in an antitrust suit filed by the Memorex Corporation. 
Since 1968, a total of 25 antitrust suits have been brought against IBM, none of which has 
been substantiated in the courts. Two remain on appeal from court decisions that favored IBM. 
The European Economic Community continues to seek modification of certain IBM 
business practices in the Common Market area, tiowever, most of the practices involved have 
already been held by U. S. courts to be legitimate competition. 
The difficult period of U. S. antitrust litigation is now behind us. We are gratified that 
so much opinion, in and out of the courts, has supported our conviction that IBM has achieved 
its business success through fair and ethical competition. 
D. R. McKay to Retire 
On February 28, 1982, Dean R. McKay will retire as IBM Senior Vice President after nearly 
36 years of service, more than 20 of those years as a corporate officer. Few executives have 
contributed to IBM in so many varied ways. For the last several years, he has been a member of 
the Board of Directors and the Corporate Office. His broad understanding of the business, 
knowledge of international issues and astute judgment have made him a most valuable asset to 
the company. 
For the Future 
In meeting the competitive tests of a changing industry, IBM's most important asset is 
the tremendous resource of skill and experience represented by IBM men and women in the many 
countries where we operate. We are deeply grateful for their hard work, creativity and dedi-
cation. Our people are IBM's best assurance of quality-in our products and service and in all else 
we do to take advantage of the opportunities that promise so much in the years ahead. 
January 26, 1982, by order of the Board of Directors 
Frank T. Cary 
(y 
Chairman of the Board 
John R. Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer 


===== PAGE 8 =====
W JL w 
X 
X W 
T 
y 
• • 
• 
At a time when world economies are straining for answers to high inflation and lapsing output, 
the demand for information products continues to outrun supply. 
Why? The answer lies in the world's need for more productivity. Manufacturers seek 
lower costs on the p ant floor, while improving quality and maintainir g schedules. Governments 
at all levels search for ways to serve many needs while staying within limited bud'^ets. 
Farmers strive for healthier crops and livestock while making optimum use of feeds, fuel 
and equipment. Smr ll businessmen find they must tighten manu^ement of inventory, sales and 
receivables to match increased competition. 
For these and many other needs, information prof'ucts can be an important part of the 
answer. They are almost infinitely adapiitble to tach user's reouirements. Th^y are availrble 
at many price and performance options. Users can choose sm. 11 or larg^ files for quick stoiuge 
and retrieval of information...versatile low-cost computers easy to set up and use...oJice 
systems with many features that simplify and speed paperwork...powerful computers for com-
plex tasks... communications systems that let widely separated parts of an organization 
operate smoothly as part of the whole. 
And the cost of all this capability, per unit of work, keeps going down. 
Because information products meet many needs so well, they are appearing everywhere-in the 
warehouse, in the emergency room, at the sales counter, in the classroom, at the secretary's 
desk, in the fire station, in the home, outside the bank and in the town hall. And no limit to 
this multiplying use throughout society appears in sight. 
Pictured here and on the following pages are some of the ways that IBM customers, as well as 
IBM's own operations, are finding more productive ways to get their work done. 
The Government of Brazil uses an IBM computing 
center to process its census of 123 million pp-^-le, as well 
as to study he best economic uses' 
e, 
transportation, communications and otner national 
resources. 
I B IBP IPWP 
SBI Wi WK WB 
Wt^ M IW BB ' B B M i 
IBM ip8i Annual Report 


===== PAGE 9 =====
/H 
A large furniture manufacturer in Japan uses IBM 
computer display terminals to offer customers different 
color combinations of office decor. In addition, 
the company has installed more than 175 IBM color or 
monochrome display units for greater productivity in 
purchasing, inventory, production control and 
personnel, as well as office planning. 
IBM computer graphics are used by a large 
U. S. mining corporation to evaluate the potential 
of exploration opportunities. 
•M. 
® 
i " 
Field surveys of animal and plant life for use in land 
development are among many government applications of 
IBM computers that serve the growing population of 
Australia's Northern Territory. 
The Los Angeles County Fire Department fights fires 
and meets other emergencies with the use of IBM computers 
for optimum dispatching of 700 vehicles and 2,200 
uniformed employees from 128 fire stations. 
An agricultural association in Reims, France, 
uses an IBM System/38 computer to help more than 4,000 
farmers and wine producers, such as this champagne-
producing family business, efficiently manage all phases of 
their accounting. 
7 
IBM ip 81 Annual Report 


===== PAGE 10 =====
More User Productivity, 
A large Pacific Coast aircraft manufacturer has installed 
25 IBM Displaywriters for more productive text editing and 
administrative typing in its advanced technology, com-
puter services, legal and other departments. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
A Brooklyn hospital is one of many hundreds in the 
U. S. and other countries around the world that use IBM 
computers for greater operational productivity. IBM 
systems aid doctors and staffs in departments such as 
pediatrics, pharmacy, radiology and physical therapy and 
also meet many administrative needs. 
A wheat cooperative serving 56,000 farmers in Alberta, 
Canada, operates a network of IBM computers installed at 
more than 120 grain elevators for daily inventory and 
sales accounting. Farmers use the system to obtain up-to-
the-minute information on wheat prices. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
The International Committee of the Red Cross, Geneva, 
Switzerland, uses an IBM computer to keep records that help 
trace more than 500,000 "boat people." Hundreds of letters 
are processed in order to help restore communication and 
reunite separated families in all parts of the world. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
More Productive New Products... 
Business applications, such as accounts receivable 
and word processing, can be run on the new IBM Personal 
Computer, as well as applications covering personal 
finance and video educational games for the family. Pro-
grams are available on magnetic tape or diskette (below). 
New IBM computers and office machines 
offer customers greater productivity across the 
company's product line-from IBM's lowest-
cost system, the IBM Personal Computer, to the 
most powerful computer the company has yet 
developed, the IBM 3081 Model Group K. 
With internal operating speeds up to 
40% faster than current processors, the new IBM 
3081 model provides as many as 32 million 
characters of main memory and 24 channels for 
the transfer of data. 
The large-scale IBM 3081 processors feature 
very dense packaging of circuits, shortening 
the electrical paths. IBM design engineers have 
eliminated an entire level of computer packaging-
the circuit card-permitting direct connection 
of logic and memory chip modules to larger 
circuit "boards." 
Also introduced were new models of the 
IBM 3033 processors, now serving as the power-
ful central computers for hundreds of large 
customer installations. Enhancing the perform-
ance of the IBM 3033 and IBM 3081 processors 
are more advanced versions of IBM's large-system 
control programs-Multiple Virtual Storage and 
Virtual Machine/370. 
Advanced Disk File Shipped 
Customers began receiving delivery of the 
IBM 3380 disk file-high-capacity storage for large 
IBM systems. The file's "thin film" head can 
read and write data at 3 million characters a 
second-the first device in a commercial product 
to achieve such a rate. The IBM 3380 also 
offers the largest information capacity per disk 
file yet delivered in the industry-2.5 billion 
characters. 
Compared with the industry's first disk 
file, the IBM RAM AC 305 of the mid-1950s, the 
new IBM 3380 stores 6,000 times as much 
information per square inch of disk surface and 
retrieves data 37 times faster, at i/i50th 
the cost per character. 
Personal Computer Introduced 
The company's smallest system-the new 
IBM Personal Computer-is an easy-to-use system 
designed for business, school and home use. It 
sells for as little as $1,565. A starter system includes 
a powerful microprocessor with a movable 
keyboard. It can be connected through adapters 
to any color or black and white television set. The 
computer can be expanded to include its own 
display, an 8o-character-per-second printer with 
12 different type styles, and storage tape cas-
settes and diskettes. The system can generate and 
display charts, graphs, text and numerical infor-
mation in a wide variety of hues on a standard 
color television set. 
Program packages developed for the IBM 
Personal Computer by several other firms cover 
selected business, education and home appli-
cations. IBM has also established a software pub-
lishing department that will publish programs 
written for the IBM Personal Computer by IBM 
employees working on their own time, as 
well as programs from independent software firms 
and other authors. 
Low-Cost Business System 
Another small computer introduced in 
1981-the IBM System/23 Datamaster-is the 
company's lowest-priced system developed specifi-
cally for commercial use. It is designed to 
handle a broad variety of business applications 
for small firms or departments of large 
corporations. Customers may combine data 
processing-including payroll, billing and 
inventory-with word processing, such as indi-
vidualized business correspondence. A basic 
Datamaster installation consists of a computer 
workstation, diskette storage and printer. 
The system's BASIC language compatibility with 
the larger IBM System/34 offers customers 
a convenient growth path in data processing. 
Intermediate Processor Models 
IBM significantly broadened its intermediate-
size computer offerings during the year. Four 
new IBM 4300 processors were introduced. In-
cluded were an entry-level IBM 4321 and a more 
powerful IBM 4331 processor. Simplified control 
programming for those two systems reduces 
the data processing skills needed to install and 
operate them. In addition, new and enhanced 
models of the more powerful IBM 4341 computer 
give customers broader flexibility in choosing 
the price/performance options best suited to their 
processing needs. 
Three new IBM 8100 processor models were 
introduced, providing up to 60% more process-
ing power and twice the memory size previously 
available. They help users expand distributed 
processing networks more productively. 
Enhanced Displaywriter System 
IBM has significantly enhanced the low-cost 
IBM Displaywriter system, which has been in-
stalled by thousands of customers in the U. S. and 
36 other countries. The addition of information 
file processing plus communications pro-
gramming support makes the IBM Displaywriter a 
multifunction text processing terminal for 
a wide range of office applications. Customers 
can merge text and arithmetic data to produce 
correspondence, statistical summaries and 
management reports. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
More Productive New Products... 
Office Systems Communication 
Enhancements of the IBM Display writer, 
IBM 5520 administrative system and IBM 8100 
information system are part of a planned series of 
measures to provide communications support 
across different IBM office systems offerings. 
Operators of the different systems will now have 
much greater flexibility in handling tasks involv-
ing both word processing and data processing. 
High-Performance Office Products 
An improved model of the IBM 6670 infor-
mation distributor permits data to be sent and 
received at more than 1,000 characters a second. 
The IBM 6670 combines electronic commu-
nication with high-speed laser printing for both 
word processing and computing applications. 
The new Model II prints multiple sets of docu-
ments more efficiently and simplifies use of 
the machine's many type styles. 
The quality of IBM "Selectric" typewriters 
was demonstrated at the 1981 Intersteno 
Congress in Mannheim, Germany, where IBM 
'Selectrics" were used by the new world cham-
pions in both speed and perfection typing. 
The gold medal championship speed was 683 
characters per minute, while the top perfection 
rate was 591 characters per minute. The 
silver and bronze medalists also used IBM 
'Selectrics." Of the 330 contestants from 16 
countries, more than 80% used IBM "Selectrics." 
Phone Message Productivity 
A telephone voice distribution system that 
uses a computer to process spoken messages was 
introduced during the year. The IBM Audio 
Distribution System (ADS) enables people using a 
telephone in widely different time zones to 
record, hear, change and transmit messages con-
veniently to one or several other persons. 
The system's many easy-to-use functions can 
improve productivity for managers, professionals 
and others who frequently communicate by 
phone. For example, ADS permits distribution of 
messages to predetermined lists of people. 
Or, a user may send a voice message and specify 
the date and time of its delivery. Each ADS-
an IBM Series/i computer with communications 
adapters and software developed by IBM-can 
serve up to 1,000 designated users. The system 
connects to public or private telephone networks. 
Through a standard telephone handset, 
the user's voice message is recorded and placed in 
the computer's disk storage, then transmitted 
to be heard by one or more other persons as speci-
fied by the originator. The computer reconverts 
digital pulses into voice tones recognizable as the 
originator's. ADS will call repeatedly until a 
busy line is free and also permit senders to learn 
if and when messages are received. Through 
security passwords, users can control access to 
confidential messages. 
The system originated in the Research 
Division, where prototypes have been operational 
for several years. 
Products for Specific Needs 
A variety of new IBM computer products 
are designed to meet the requirements of different 
industries. For example, the IBM 4700 banking 
system offers higher performance than previous 
products, compact size and user-comfort design 
for greater productivity in the processing of 
savings, loan, checking and other transactions. 
Equipment includes displays, keyboards, magnetic 
stripe reader/encoder, printers and commu-
nication controller-all compatible with existing 
IBM teller banking products. 
A new tabletop IBM printer for use with 
the IBM System/34 computer can print more than 
10,000 graphic symbols, or ideographs, of the 
Japanese and Chinese languages. 
Users of IBM's new voice message distribution 
system employ standard touch-key telephones to give a 
wide variety of message-handling instructions. 
New Analytical Instruments 
Three high-performance analytical instru-
ments were introduced by IBM Instruments, Inc., 
in 1981. A microprocessor-controlled liquid 
chromatograph helps chemists separate complex 
mixtures into component parts. It has many 
applications in research, quality control and envi-
ronmental analysis. A new infrared spectrometer 
is designed to analyze gases, liquids and solids 
for a broad range of applications in the phar-
maceutical, food, petrochemical, semiconductor 
and biomedical fields. A new spectrometer with 
a superconducting magnet enables chemists 
to study the molecular structure of hydrocarbons 
and other compounds. It has applications 
in the chemical and petroleum industries and in 
biomedical research. 
New IBM "Synergetix" furniture can be quickly 
adjusted to convenient positions by users of computer 
terminals and office systems. Other adjustable units 
include a desk, tabletop extensions and upholstered chairs. 
The furniture is offered in a variety of colors. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
Many features that simplify installation and operation 
by first-time computer users are built into the new 
IBM System/23 Datamaster. Eighty of the small business 
systems were demonstrated at this IBM seminar for 
customers and prospects in New Jersey. 
Left: Key members of the design team discuss new 
"extended architecture" they helped develop for the 
large-scale IBM 3081 computer. Their design extension 
permits direct addressing of 2 billion characters 
of main memory, as well as a doubling-to more than 
4,000-of the number of storage and input-output 
devices that can be simultaneously linked to the system. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
More Productive Marketing and Service 
Toll-free telephone and mail sales of IBM office 
machines and supplies increased by one-third in the U. S. 
during 1981. Sizable telephone/mail sales gains were 
also recorded in other countries where IBM employs such 
marketing techniques-Australia, Canada, the 
Netherlands, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. 
IBM announced a realignment of its marketing 
structures in the U.S. and IBM World Trade coun-
tries in 1981 to permit more productive sale 
and distribution of computers and office products. 
The realignment facilitates the marketing of 
a full line of products to a customer by one mar-
keting team (details, page 40). 
IBM also continued to broaden and expand 
its marketing channels, while finding productive 
new ways to meet customer service needs. 
Retail product centers for IBM office machines 
and small computers were opened in 8 more 
U. S. cities and 10 more outside the U. S. A total of 
30 stores are now operating in such cities as 
Baltimore, Boston, Brussels, Buenos Aires, Chicago, 
London, Los Angeles, Paris, Philadelphia, San Fran-
cisco, Stockholm, Sydney and Washington, D.C. 
The product centers, which complement IBM's 
sales force, provide customers with a convenient 
way to see and buy a wide range of IBM products, 
supplies and services. The U. S. stores, for 
example, offer demonstrations of the new IBM 
System/23 Datamaster and the IBM Personal 
Computer, as well as IBM typewriters, copiers and 
dictation equipment. The product offerings vary 
in countries outside the U. S. 
Small product centers in three New York 
City branches of The Chase Manhattan Bank were 
opened in 1981-lBM's first sales outlets in bank 
branches. Staffed by IBM specialists, the small 
stores offer a selection of products sold at the 
larger IBM centers. 
Sales through other retailers were inaugu-
rated during the year. The new IBM Personal Com-
puter is being marketed through Sears, Roebuck 
and Co.'s new business system centers now 
open in five U. S. cities. It is also being sold by 
more than 190 ComputerLand Corp. dealers in all 
parts of the U. S. and Canada. 
Marketing through distributors was 
also begun in 1981 with the designation of seven 
U. S. firms to distribute selected IBM products. 
These authorized distributors sell the products of 
other manufacturers as well. They offer custom-
ers configurations of equipment to meet particular 
needs, technical support and special terms and 
conditions. Being marketed in this way are an IBM 
computer display terminal and a multiple-use 
keyboard printer. These are relatively low-priced 
products of the kind that distributors market 
efficiently in large volumes. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
Dominant red theme and pedestal spotlighting of 
product demonstrations are design features of the new 
IBM retail product centers now open in the U S . 
Sales to other manufacturers were also ini-
tiated in 1981. The IBM 680 disk assembly, 
which stores 64 million characters on six 8-inch 
disks, is being sold to other manufacturers 
for integration into their own system offerings. 
Greater service productivity is resulting from 
a variety of IBM technical advances in 1981 and 
recent years. These include (i) original design of 
products for increased reliability and service-
ability, (2) better service tools and techniques such 
as the diagnostic "briefcase" computer carried 
by IBM personnel at customer sites, (3) a central diag-
nostic computer data bank that customers can 
reference through their own terminals, (4) emphasis 
on "customer setup," permitting computer units 
or entire systems to be installed with little need for 
IBM assistance, (5) highly automated warehouses 
that reduce costs and the time required for parts 
distribution, and (6) a toll-free telephone service 
that permits U.S. customers using many IBM 
program products or system control programs to 
obtain software information at any hour, seven 
days a week. 
IBM is installing new communication centers in some 
30 U. S. cities to improve productivity in answering 
customer equipment service calls. The computer-assisted 
radio dispatch system uses display screens to tell 
operators quickly which customer engineer can best be 
assigned to meet a particular service need. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
More Productive Manufacturing... 
The quality of thousands of computer circuit parts is 
being ensured by advanced-technology IBM test systems 
used in both design and production. In less than a 
minute, this computer-controlled device can test a silicon 
wafer with more than loo logic and memory chips 
that contain thousands of transistors. 
IBM is now producing hundreds of thousands of computer 
input/output products worldwide each year. The newly 
announced IBM 3232 desktop printers shown coming 
off the line at the company's new Charlotte, N.C., plant can 
print up to 450 characters a second. 
IBM's substantial investment in new facilities to 
meet record worldwide demand is steadily 
raising output as new construction comes on line. 
Being incorporated into the new buildings are 
advanced-technology processes designed to ensure 
product quality in all phases of development 
and manufacture. 
High Construction Rate 
In 1981, IBM completed 4.5 million square 
feet of plant and laboratory space companywide, 
bringing the total for the last three years to 
nearly 11 million square feet in 11 countries. The 
production buildup is continuing, with close 
to 4 million square feet of new plants and labora-
tories now under construction in the U. S. and 
five other countries. In mid-1982, for example. 
IBM will start operations in a new 758,000-square-
foot facility in San Jose, Calif., with advanced 
processes to increase production of the IBM 3380 
"thin film head" disk file and other new high-
capacity disk files using the same technology. 
Scheduled for early 1982 startup is a 
second IBM manufacturing site in Italy-a 303,000-
square-foot plant at Santa Palomba. IBM Italy's 
Vimercate plant has recently been enlarged by 
342,000 square feet, or 40%. The two plants pro-
duce the bulk of Europe's requirements for small 
IBM computers and office systems, as well as 
retail store systems and terminals. 
Counting leased space plus new con-
struction, IBM in the past five years has expanded 
its manufacturing and laboratory facilities by 
more than 22 million square feet. 
Premium on Quality 
IBM's continuing program to ensure product 
quality places increasing emphasis on automatic 
testing, exemplified by high-technology circuit 
test operations at East Fishkill, N.Y. More than 
50 computer-controlled systems designed 
by IBM engineers are currently testing more than 
6,500 different computer circuit parts on pro-
duction lines. Emphasis is also on testing new cir-
cuitry in the design stage, when detecting sources 
of error will prevent problems in production or 
later during customer use. Memory testers at the 
facility can check circuits at the rate of 100 
million per second. 
Other advanced IBM circuit test facilities 
are in Burlington, Vt., Manassas, Va., and 
Poughkeepsie, N.Y., as well as in Essonnes, France, 
and Sindelfingen, Germany. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
The productivity of IBM Japan's Yasu computer plant 
is enhanced by an automated materials distribution 
center that supplies production lines with more than 
55,000 different parts. 
Automated Warehouse Productivity 
IBM manufacturing plants are saving 
millions of dollars annually through operation of 
highly automated materials distribution ware-
houses. The computer-controlled facilities supply 
production lines with tens of thousands of 
different parts as needed. Six such warehouses 
are now operating in the U.S., Canada, France 
and Japan. Under construction are warehouses at 
IBM plants in Austin, Tex.; Boca Raton, Fla.; Char-
lotte, N.C.; Endicott, N.Y.; and Tucson, Ariz.; as 
well as in Berlin, Germany; Bromont and Toronto, 
Canada; Fujisawa, Japan; Greenock, Scotland; 
and Jarfalla, Sweden. Similar IBM automated ware-
houses are used in France, Germany and the 
U.S. for field distribution of IBM products 
and replacement parts. For example, a 300,000-
square-foot IBM warehouse complex nearing 
completion in Mechanicsburg, Pa., will store and 
retrieve more than 90,000 different IBM 
maintenance parts, speeding response to some 
1.7 million field requests annually. 
Controlling the warehouses are a variety of 
IBM computers linked to multiple display units 
and other terminals. Materials-handling and con-
trol equipment includes laser scanners, auto-
matic cranes, power-driven conveyors, driverless 
transport systems and optical and magnetic 
label-reading devices. Typical cost savings have 
ranged from 20% to 40%, compared with 
non-automated installations. 
Supplementary Vendor Production 
As record demand stretches capacity, IBM 
plants and laboratories are using vendor resources 
to help meet requirements. IBM produces sub-
stantially all its own advanced electronic devices. 
However, in 1981 the company purchased 
some 12,000 different types of electronic com-
ponents worldwide from more than 200 
outside suppliers. IBM works closely with many 
suppliers on quality control measures aimed 
at preventing defects during production processes. 
Overall, IBM plants and laboratories 
purchase more than one-quarter million different 
products, parts and assemblies from nearly 
100,000 suppliers. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
More Productive Technology... 
Quality-testing of every magnetic disk used in IBM 
computers is provided by advanced IBM-designed test 
machines. This highly automated equipment has 
special read/write heads that can detect imperfections 
as minute as a few millionths of an inch in diameter. 
An IBM-designed electron-beam machine is now 
interconnecting circuits on as many as 2,000 high-density 
computer chips per hour.This is the fastest production 
rate reported for the lithographic electron beam process. 
A beam narrower than 1 /io,oooth of an inch traces 
intricate circuit patterns under computer control. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
Experimental IBM computer memory chip (% inch 
long) can store over z88,ooo bits of information-four 
times as much, in only twice the area, as the densest 
chips currently manufactured by IBM.The chip's three-
dimensional features are shown by different color 
light rays, directed at low angles over its surface. 
The 133 electronic chips on each 3V2-inch-square 
substrate in the new IBM 3081 Model Group K computer 
are part of the densest circuit packaging yet reported 
in the industry Each such unit contains 10,000 
logic circuits and 300,000 memory bits of information. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
Stockholder Information... 
The Annual Report is only one of the sources of infor-
mation available 
to IBM stockholders and the general 
public. 
Stockholders regularly receive the 
following: 
IBM robotic machines are being test-marketed 
for general-purpose applications in light manufacturing 
and assembly.The multifunction, programmable 
machines are designed for interactive computer control 
of industrial tasks that place a premium on speed, 
accuracy and product quality. 
A separate service processor for the large IBM 3081 
computer constantly monitors the system's j,i 10,000 
logic circuits through 26,000 sensing points. Advanced 
software enables the service processor to identify 
most error conditions automatically and recommend 
corrective action. 
The Notice of Annual Meeting and Proxy Statement, 
mailed to each stockholder in March, describes 
the items of business to be voted on at the Annual 
Meeting. The Proxy Statement also provides 
biographies of the Board's nominees for director, 
their IBM shareholdings, their principal affiliations 
with other companies or organizations, and 
other information about the company. 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
published in June, summarizes the activities 
at the Annual Meeting, including the President's 
report on the company, questions and answers 
of general interest, and the results of voting on 
items of business. 
The following 
additional 
information 
may be obtained 
without charge from the IBM Stockholder 
Relations 
Department, 
yiy Fifth Avenue, 
New York, N. V. 
10022: 
The Form lo-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission pro-
vides further details on IBM's business, including a 
list of subsidiaries not contained in the Annual 
Report. Form lo-K is available in April. 
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting. 
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of addi-
tional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs 
in the United States are outlined in a document 
that describes programs for women, minorities, 
handicapped persons, disabled veterans and 
Vietnam-era veterans, and also reviews IBM's 
affirmative action efforts in the community. 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles that 
the company sets for the conduct of its business. 
The booklet was first issued in 1961. The current 
edition has been translated into 15 languages. 
IBM U.S. Retirement Plan Information, 
which is given to all regular U.S. employees, in-
cludes the principal provisions of the plan, options 
available, a list of the trustees and a summary 
report on the plan's financial status. 
IBM support programs 
for education, community service, hospitals, the 
arts and other areas are summarized in a report 
to U.S. employees. 
IBM Operations in South Africa 
are summarized in a report of the company's 
business in that country This report contains a 
statement of personnel principles and practices 
to which IBM adheres in doing business in 
South Africa. 
IBM Annual Report translations and recordings 
are available. The report is translated into 
French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette 
recording in English is available for the blind. 
Service for Deaf Stockholders. 
The IBM Stockholder Relations Department has a 
service that enables deaf stockholders who have 
access to a teletypewriter to communicate with the 
department's New York City office. Stockholders 
who wish to use the service should dial the 
IBM number (212) 223-3150 between 9 a.m. and 
5 p.m.. New York time, on any weekday. 
IBM Stock Transfer. 
The IBM Stockholder Relations Department, 
located at 717 Fifth Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022, 
maintains the stockholder records, transfers 
stock, and can answer questions regarding stock-
holders' accounts. Stockholders wishing to 
transfer stock to someone else or to change the 
name on a stock certificate should contact the 
department for instructions. Stock certificates are 
valuable and should be safeguarded, since 
replacement takes time and requires payment of 
a surety bond premium by the stockholder. 
If a stock certificate is lost, stolen or destroyed. 
Stockholder Relations should be notified. Registered 
mail should be used whenever stock is mailed. 
The 1982 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held in the Civic 
Auditorium, Jacksonville, Florida, on Monday, 
April 26th, at 10 a.m. A notice of the meet-
ing, proxy statement, and proxy voting card will 
be mailed to stockholders in late March. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
Contents 
21 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
22 
Earnings 
23 
Management Discussion-Results of Operations 
24 
Financial Position 
25 
Management Discussion-Financial Condition 
26 
Funds Flow 
28 
Stockholders' Equity 
29 
Notes to Financial Statements 
37 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
3 8 
Supplemental Fi nanc ial I n format ion 
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of 
the financial information presented in this 
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The 
accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles, applying certain estimates 
and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of internal 
accounting control. It consists, in part, of 
organizational arrangements with clearly defined 
lines of responsibility and delegation of authority. 
We believe this system provides reasonable 
assurance that transactions are executed in accor-
dance with management authorization, and that 
they are appropriately recorded, in order to permit 
preparation of financial statements in conformity 
with generally accepted accounting principles 
and to adequately safeguard, verify and maintain 
accountability of assets. An important element 
of the system is an on-going internal audit program. 
To assure the effective administration of 
internal control, we carefully select and train our 
employees, develop and disseminate written 
policies and procedures, provide appropriate com-
munication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of 
controls. We continue to believe that it is essential 
for the company to conduct its business affairs 
in accordance with the highest ethical standards, 
as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct 
Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into 
numerous languages, are distributed to employees 
throughout the world, and reemphasized 
through internal programs to assure that they are 
understood and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial 
statements. Their accompanying report is based 
on an examination conducted in accordance with 
generally accepted auditing standards, including 
a review of internal accounting controls and tests of 
accounting procedures and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of Direc-
tors is composed solely of outside directors, and 
is responsible for recommending to the Board 
the independent accounting firm to be retained for 
the coming year, subject to stockholder approval. 
The Audit Committee meets periodically and 
privately with the independent accountants, with 
our internal auditors, as well as with IBM manage-
ment, to review accounting, auditing, internal 
accounting controls and financial reporting matters. 
John R.Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Dean R Phypers 
Senior Vice President, Finance & Planning 
Report of 
Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders 
and Board of Directors of International 
Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 22, 
24, 26 and 28 through 37, present fairly the finan-
cial position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiary companies at 
December 31, 1981 and 1980, and the results of 
their operations and changes in funds for the 
years 1981, 1980 and 1979, in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles con-
sistently applied. Also, in our opinion, the Five-Year 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data for 1977 
through 1981 presents fairly the financial informa-
tion included therein. Our examinations of 
these statements were made in accordance with 
generally accepted auditing standards and accord-
ingly included such tests of the accounting 
records and such other auditing procedures as we 
considered necessary in the circumstances. 
65?-
January 26,1982 
New York, N.Y. 
Price Waterhouse 


===== PAGE 24 =====
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross Income: 
Sales 
Rentals 
Services 
Cost of sales 
Cost of rentals 
Cost of services 
Selling, development and engineering, and 
general and administrative expenses. . . 
Interest expense 
Other income, principally interest 
Earnings before income taxes 
Provision for U.S. Federal and 
non-U. S. income taxes 
Net Earnings 
Per share 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1981-587,803,373 
1980-583,516,764 
1979-583,373,269 
S 12,901 
10,839 
5»330 
4,152 
2,543 
11,027 
407 
$ 29,070 
23>450 
5,620 
368 
5,988 
2,680 
s 
3,308 
$ 5-63 
10,91 9 
10,869 
4,4^5 
4,197 
3,771 
2,181 
10,324 
273 
26,213 
20,746 
5,467 
430 
5,897 
2 , 3 3 5 
s 
3,562 
$ 6.10 
$ 
9,473 
10,069 
3,321 
3,267 
3,491 
1,655 
9,205 
141 
$ 22,863 
5,104 
_ „ 4 4 9 
5,5 5 3 
2,542 
$ 
3,011 
S 
v i 6 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Results of Operations 
Advances in technology continued at a rapid 
pace, resulting in the delivery to users of greater 
productivity at lower cost. This trend has led 
to substantial expansion of the customer base, with 
many new users finding utility in IBM information 
processing products. High levels of orders and 
product shipments, and expanding services con-
tinued worldwide in 1981 in spite of a general 
downturn in the economy. 
Total gross income increased 10.9% over 
1980. Gross income from U.S. operations was 
$15,088 million, an increase of 21.4% over 1980. 
Gross income from non-US. operations amounted 
to $13,982 million. This increase of only 1.4% 
resulted principally from the effects of the 
strengthening U.S. dollar. Net earnings before 
income taxes increased 1.5% over 1980. After pro-
viding for income taxes, net earnings for the year 
were down S254 million from 1980, a decrease 
of 7.1%. 
Sales of data processing equipment were 
$9,449 million, an increase of 23.9% over 1980. 
Although there were substantial new rental 
machine installations during the year, as well as 
selective price increases, worldwide data pro-
cessing rental income remained flat. U. S. data 
processing equipment rentals increased by 12.6%, 
while non-U S. rentals showed a period-to-
period decline. The high level of sales of installed 
rental equipment in recent periods and the 
translation effect of a stronger U. S. dollar held 
down rental income growth. Gross income from 
maintenance, program products, and other 
support services continued strong throughout the 
business, showing an increase of 20.4% over 1980. 
Gross income and earnings from office prod-
ucts reflected the general weakness in the 
economy, as well as the shift of word processing 
workload from stand-alone products to new 
higher-function products and systems. 
The rapid fall of major foreign currencies 
against the U. S. dollar in late 1980 and in 
1981 was unprecedented in recent times (graphs 
illustrating these relationships appear on page 31). 
While a strong dollar may benefit the United 
States economy in many ways, the abruptness and 
magnitude of these currency changes had an 
adverse effect on IBM's consolidated financial 
results. Had currency rates remained constant year-
to-year, and if the effects of currency rate changes 
on business volumes, pricing and other operating 
decisions were disregarded, it is estimated that 
consolidated gross income for 1981 would have 
been over $2 billion greater, and net earnings over 
S600 million greater. 
Gross profit margins on both sales and 
rentals have been eroded by high front-end costs 
of new products, changing product mix, and 
major expenditures for productive capacity. 
In addition, the strong surge in U. S. currency has 
significantly affected period-to-period margin 
comparisons. For example, non-U. S. gross income 
from rentals was adversely affected by the current 
exchange rates, but with no favorable impact 
on depreciation costs which are translated at his-
torical exchange rates. Overall margins have 
also been impacted by the faster growth of lower 
margin service activities, such as maintenance and 
support services. The margins on these services 
are improving. 
The strengthened U S. dollar had a beneficial 
effect on selling, development, engineering and 
general and administrative expense by reducing 
the non-U. S. component of these expenses when 
translated into dollars. 
The company recorded exchange gains in 
1981 of $94 million. These gains resulted primar-
ily from the translation of assets and liabilities 
recorded or denominated in currencies other than 
the U. S. dollar. This compares with an exchange 
gain of S24 million for 1980. Such gains are 
principally unrealized. 
The consolidated effective income tax rate in 
1981 was 44.8%, compared to 39.6% in 1980. 
The variance reflects higher effective tax rates on 
non-U. S. earnings which resulted primarily from 
the impact of currency translation, and from 
adjustments made in 1980 for prior period tax 
liabilities. The 1981 effective tax rate is more in 
line with rates in recent years preceding 1980. 
The company's goals are to continue to 
be the high-quality, low-cost producer; to accelerate 
real growth and achieve greater financial returns. 
Through substantial investments in research and 
development, in high-technology manufacturing 
processes and equipment, and through effective 
cost and expense controls, IBM intends to 
achieve these objectives and continue to offer new 
products to our customers at lower cost for 
similar or improved function. New methods of 
marketing and maintenance have been initiated. 
Quality programs are expected to yield significant 
cost savings from more reliable products that 
require less service support. 
The substantial investment in additional 
capacity and the development of new channels of 
distribution, have positioned the company to 
more efficiently supply the requirements of its 
rapidly growing customer base. Economic uncer-
tainty will likely persist. Sharp changes in foreign 
currency rates may again have short-term effects. 
But the increasing demand for IBM products 
and services, and the productivity they deliver, 
should assure a long-range trend of steady 
and sustained real growth in business volumes 
and financial performance. 
Gross Income: Sales 
Rentals • 
Services 
in millions of dollars 
3 5,000 
3 1 , 5 0 0 
28,000 
2 4 , 5 0 0 
z 1 , 0 0 0 
1 7 , 5 0 0 
1 4,000 
1 0 , 5 0 0 
7 , 0 0 0 
3 , 5 0 0 
1977 
'78 
'79 


===== PAGE 26 =====
1981 
1980 
(Dollars in millions) 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market . .. 
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, less allowance: 
1981, $187; 1980,$195 
Other accounts receivable 
Inventories 
Prepaid expenses 
Rental Machines and Parts 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Plant and Other Property 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Deferred Charges and Other Assets 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
Loans payable 
Accounts payable 
Compensation and benefits 
Deferred income 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
Deferred Investment Tax Credits 
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 
Long-Term Debt 
Stockholders' Equity: 
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 
Shares authorized, 650,000,000 
Issued: 1981-592,293,614; 1980-584,262,074 
Retained earnings 
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 
1980-455,242 shares 
454 
i»575 
4,382 
410 
2,805 
^Jl 
17,241 
7^651 
12,895 
5.207 
$ 10,303 
9,590 
7,688 
2,005 
$ 29,586 
2,412 
773 
872 
1.556 
389 
1,318 
$ 
7,320 
252 
1,184 
2,669 
4.389 
13.772 
18,161 
18,161 
$ 29,586 
281 
1,831 
4,562 
315 
2-,i93 
643 
15,352 
6,969 
I ] ,01 8 
4,384 
$ 
9,925 
8,383 
6,634 
1,761 
$ 26,703 
2,369 
591 
721 
1,404 
305 
1,136 
$ 
6,526 
182 
' , 4 4 3 
2,099 
3,992 
12,491 
16,483 
30 
16,453 
26,703 


===== PAGE 27 =====
Financial Condition 
The company has increased its investment 
substantially over the past several years to 
take advantage of expanding market opportuni-
ties. In the last three years, IBM's investments in 
capital assets and research and development 
have totalled $24 billion. Capital expenditures in 
1981 amounted to S6.8 billion, of which one-
third was invested in plant and equipment, with 
the remainder in rental machines. In addition, 
the company invested S1.6 billion in research and 
development in 1981. 
Although funds for IBM's expansion continue 
to be generated principally from operations, 
the investment in rental machines, plant and equip-
ment, and inventory required additional external 
sources of capital during 1981. Management 
initiated a variety of actions to maintain a strong 
capital structure while obtaining funds at rela-
tively low cost. New long-term borrowings con-
sisted primarily of $360 million of Eurodollar 
notes and a $168 million Swiss franc loan. The 
company established the IBM Credit Corporation 
as a wholly owned subsidiary to finance customer 
installment payment agreements; it raised 
funds through the employee stock purchase plan 
by using authorized unissued stock and discon-
tinuing the purchase of treasury shares; it entered 
into agreements with several companies to 
purchase their unutilized tax credits and related 
deductions under the provisions of the Economic 
Recovery Tax Act of 1981; and it negotiated 
currency swap agreements with the World Bank, 
which effectively eliminated the foreign exchange 
risk associated with the $254 million German 
mark and $112 million Swiss franc loans under-
taken in 1980. 
Despite periodic shortages of capital, high in-
terest rates, and dramatic shifts in currency ex-
change rates, IBM has been able to utilize its high 
credit rating and acquire appropriate levels of 
financing through worldwide sources. IBM has 
frequently borrowed in currencies other than the 
U. S. dollar. While there are risks associated 
with foreign currency obligations, there are also 
clear advantages. Interest rates are often much 
lower than comparable dollar loans, and the 
exchange loss risk associated with repayment is 
minimized by the availability of foreign source in-
come in most major countries. Consequently, the 
company has considerable financing flexibility 
in many different currencies throughout the world. 
In addition, IBM has approximately $3.2 billion of 
unused lines of credit, mostly short-term. 
Mindful of the high cost of borrowing and 
the long lead-time before technological investments 
yield payback, management has placed increased 
emphasis on the effective employment of assets. 
Internal measurements on managerial performance 
emphasize return on invested capital, inventory 
turnover, cash flow, payback and other indices of 
asset management. 
Large capital investments are expected to 
exert pressure on operational cash flow. The 
ability to assess the resulting funding require-
ments is complicated by uncertain economic con-
ditions, particularly inflation, volatile interest 
rates, and foreign currency fluctuations. In 
addition, cash flows are substantially affected by 
the customer's largely unpredictable decision to 
purchase or lease equipment. In this environment, 
the company's ability to generate or obtain 
cash on a timely basis is of primary importance. 
IBM's strong balance sheet position and high 
credit rating allow management to consider a full 
range of financing options for future capital 
needs. The choices will ultimately depend upon 
the prevailing financial market and economic 
conditions. 
To set forth cash flow information more 
clearly, IBM's financial statements now include a 
Statement of Funds Flow, which replaces the 
Statement of Changes in Financial Position. Years 
1980 and 1979 have also been restated. The 
Statement of Funds Flow depicts the sources of 
cash and cash equivalents, how they were used, 
and how much remains available. 
Management feels certain that growth 
prospects for IBM's business will remain strong. 
National policies regarding tax relief, capital 
formation, and deregulation are likely to have 
substantial positive effects on industry in general. 
Internal and external forecasts point to con-
tinuing high demand for information products, 
and IBM is confident that it has the resources and 
the people to meet the challenges of the changing 
marketplace. 
Net Earnings 
Cash Dividends Paid 
in millions of dollars 
3,780 
3,360 
z,940 
1,680 _ 
I 
1,260 
•79 
'80 
'81 


===== PAGE 28 =====
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January i 
$ 2,112 
s 3,771 
$ 4,030 
Provided from Operations: 
Sources: 
Net earnings 
$ 3,308 
$ 3,562 
$ 3,01 I 
Depreciation charged to costs 
and expenses 
2,899 
2,362 
1 , 9 7 0 
Depreciation of manufacturing 
facilities capitalized in 
rental machines 
4 3 0 
3 9 7 
3 5 1 
Net book value of rental machines 
and other property retired or sold 
1,255 
1,009 
779 
Other 
(189) 
90 
3 5 3 
7 , 7 0 3 
7,420 
6,464 
Uses: 
Investment in rental machines 
4,610 
4 , 3 3 4 
4,212 
Investment in plant and other property.... 
2,258 
1 , 7 7 9 
6,845 
6 , 5 9 2 
5 , 9 9 1 
Increase in deferred charges and 
other assets 
244 
275 
338 
Net change in working capital 
(excluding cash, marketable securities, 
loans payable and dividend payable). . . . 
( 1 5 1 ) 
310 
3 4 3 
6 , 9 3 8 
7 , 1 7 7 
6,672 
Net provided from operations 
7 6 5 
243 
(208) 
Provided from External Financing: 
Net change in long-term debt 
5 7 0 
510 
1,304 
Net change in loans payable 
182 
( 3 4 2 ) 
691 
Net provided from external financing . . 
7 5 2 
168 
1,995 
Provided from (used for) Employee Stock Plans 
4 ^ 3 
(62) 
(38) 
4 , 0 5 2 
4,120 
5 , 7 7 9 
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 
2,023 
2,008 
2,008 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December j z 
$ 2,029 
$ 2,1 12 
$ 3 , 7 7 1 
The notes on pages 29 through 36 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 29 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (in millions) 
Summary of Uses of Funds on 
$7,703 Operations 
$423 Employee Stock Plans 
$751 New Long-Term Debt 
82 Net Change in Loans Payable 
millions) 
$4,610 Rental iMachines 
k 
$2,235 Plant and Other Property 
$181 Reduction of Long-Term Debt 
$93 Other Assets (net) 
$2,023 Cash Dividends 
Capital Expenditures 
During 1981, IBM's growing business, 
together with the company's need to replace obso-
lete equipment, required a worldwide 
investment of $6,845 million, including $4,610 
million for rental machines. 
Retirements, covering obsolete and 
dismantled equipment, as well as rental machines 
sold that previously were under lease to 
customers, amounted to $3,079 million in 1981, 
including $2,721 million of rental machines. 
These retirements were charged against amounts 
provided out of prior and current years' earnings, 
or against cost of sales. 
The major IBM facilities that were completed 
or under construction throughout the world in 
1981 are listed below. 
Sq. Ft. 
Completed 
Purpose 
(in thousands) 
+ Rochester, Minnesota 
Mfg. <& Dev. 
699 
t Burlington, Vermont 
Mfg. ir Dev. 
482' 
tBoeblingen, Germany 
Mfg. 
457' 
t Austin, Texas 
Mfg. 
&Dev. 
4 1 0 ' 
fVimercate, Italy 
Mfg. 
342 
Santa Palomba, Italy 
Mfg. 
303 
t Raleigh, North Carolina 
Mfg. 
&Dev. 
287" 
t Manassas, Virginia 
Mfg. & Dev. 
247 
t Mainz, Germany 
Mfg. 
232' 
+ Endicott, New York 
Mfg. 
224 
t Boca Raton, Florida 
Mfg. <& Dev. 
202' 
fEssonnes, France 
Mfg. 
167 
Charlotte, North Carolina 
Mfg. 
&Dev. 
158 
t Hannover, Germany 
Mfg. 
1 5 3 
tYasu, Japan 
Mfg. 
1 5 0 
Under Construction 
New York, New York 
Mktg. 
1 0 3 1 
t San Jose, California 
Mfg. & Dev. 
926 
t Chariotte, North Carolina 
Mfg. & Dev. 
7 1 4 
Kawasaki, Japan 
Mktg. 
440 
t Manassas, Virginia 
Mfg. 
&Dev. 
425 
Milan, Italy 
Distr. Center 
424 
t Portsmouth, England 
Adm. 
365 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
Mktg. 
347 
St. Louis, Missouri 
Mktg. 
308 
London, England 
Mktg. 
300 
t Toronto, Canada 
Mfg. 
2.77 
Stuttgart, Germany 
Adm. (irMktg. 
276 
t Greenock, Scotland 
Mfg. 
266 
Herrenberg, Germany 
Mktg. 
225 
t Jarfalla, Sweden 
Mfg. 
2 1 9 
f B o c a Raton, Florida 
Mfg. 
188 
t Austin, Texas 
Mfg. (& Dev. 
186 
t Burlington, Vermont 
Mfg. 
&Dev. 
145 
t Endicott, New York 
Mfg. 
1 1 6 
t Additions to existingfacilities. 
* Excludes square footage completed in years 1979 and/or 1980. 


===== PAGE 30 =====
Capital Stock 
Retained Earnings 
Treasury Stoci< 
Total 
(Dollars in millions) 
1979 
1980 
1981 
Stockholders' Equity, January i, 1979 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(391,300 shares) 
Purchases (6,357,500 shares) and sales 
(6,3 J 9,289 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee plan-net 
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to 
employee plans 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1979 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(288,816 shares) 
Purchases (7,674,300 shares) and sales 
(7?597?773 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee plan-net 
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to 
employee plans 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1980 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(8,031,550 shares) 
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee plan 
Tax reductions applicable to stock related to 
employee plans 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1981 
$ 
3,942 
24 
3 , 9 7 4 
16 
3,992-
394 
$ 
4,389 
$ 
9,576 
3,011 
(1,506) 
(69) 
I 1,01 2 
3,562 
(2,008) 
(75) 
12,491 
3,308 
(2,023) 
(4) 
$ 13,772 
$ 
(24) 
(25) 
(5) 
(30) 
30 
13,494 
3,01 I 
(1,506) 
24 
(70) 
8 
14,96 I 
3,562 
(2,008) 
16 
(80) 
16,453 
3,308 
(2,023) 
394 
26 
3 
$ 18,161 


===== PAGE 31 =====
International Business Machines Corporation 
Notes to 
and Subsidiary Companies 
Consolidated Financial Statements: 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles of Consolidation: 
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its U S . and non-US. subsidiary companies, other than IBM Credit 
Corporation, a wholly owned financing subsidiary The equity method is used to account for 
the investment in IBM Credit Corporation and for investments in joint ventures and 
affiliated companies in which IBM has 50% or less ownership. 
Translation of Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
Assets and liabilities denominated in currencies other than U S . dollars are translated to US. 
dollars at year-end exchange rates, except that inventories and plant, rental machines and other 
property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. Income and expense 
items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year, except that inven-
tories charged to cost of sales and depreciation are translated at historical rates. Exchange 
gains and losses are included in earnings currently. 
Gross Income: 
Gross income is recognized from sales when the product is shipped or in certain cases upon 
customer acceptance, from rentals in the month in which they accrue, and from services over 
the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance 
service and contain discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predom-
inantly monthly or for a two-year period, with some covering periods up to five years. 
Depreciation: 
Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their 
estimated useful lives. Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years 
digits method. Depreciation of plant and other property is computed using either accelerated 
methods or the straight-line method. 
Retirement Plans: 
Current service costs are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements in 
the plans are amortized generally over 10 years. 
Selling Expenses: 
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the 
effects of timing differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain 
transactions are included in taxable earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are 
deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful life of the 
applicable classes of property. Purchased tax credits and deductions are offset against the 
purchase cost. 
Inventories: 
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment 
sales are included in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process 
applicable to equipment rentals is similarly valued and included in rental machines and parts. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Non-U. S. Operations 
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
At end of year: 
For the year: 
Net assets employed 
Current assets 
Current liabilities 
Working capital 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
Deferred charges and other assets 
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 
Long-term debt 
Net assets employed 
Number of employees 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
Earnings before income taxes 
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U S. income taxes 
Net earnings 
Capital expenditures 
t See Taxes on page 32. 
5A30 
4,102 
1,328 
7,633 
894 
_9'l55 
1,184 
496 
i,68o 
8,175 
149,794 
$ 
13,982 
$ 
2,392 
1,153 
$ 
1,239 
$ 
3,274 
$ 
5 , 5 4 7 
3 , 9 J ] 
1,636 
6,823 
971 
9,430 
1 , 4 4 3 
4 3 7 
T , 8 8 O 
$ 
7,550 
146,973 
£ 
13,787 
$ 
2.,946 
i,044t 
$ 
1,902 
$ 
3,367 
5,826 
3,608 
'2,218 
5 , 4 7 7 
839 
8 , 5 3 4 
1 , 3 9 5 
294 
1,689 
$ 
6,845 
1 46,800 
S 
12,244 
$ 
2,731 
1,304 
S_ 
1,427 
$ 
2,800 
Shipments of data processing equipment 
in non-U. S. operations continued at high levels 
and strong growth rates in 1981. Despite this 
strong performance, non-U. S. financial results 
were affected even more than U. S. operations by 
inflation and other factors. Adding to these 
conditions was the severe impact of the stronger 
U. S. dollar. The Management Discussion on 
page 23 refers to this effect in greater detail. The 
graphs on the following page further illustrate 
the decline in value, in relation to the dollar, 
of the five major foreign currencies in which IBM 
conducts most of its non-U. S. business. 
Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsidia-
ries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $6,428 million at December 31,1981, 
S6,io8 million at December 31, 1980, and 85,529 
million at December 31, 1979. These earnings 
are indefinitely reinvested in non-US. operations. 
Accordingly, no provision has been made for 
taxes that might be payable upon remittance of 
such earnings. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Foreign Currency Valued in U. S. Dollars 
German mark 
French franc 
British sterHng 
Italian lira 
lapanese yen 
1980 
1981 
Inventories 
December 31,1981 
December 31, 1980 
(Dollars in millions) 
Finished goods 
Work in process 
Raw materials and operating supplies 
Total 
$ 
547 
1,999 
$ 
2,805 
$ 
524 
1,518 
2-51 
$ 
2,293 
Rental Machines and Parts 
Rental machines and parts are comprised of 
capitalized machines, rental machine work in 
process and field service parts. Rental machines 
include machines installed with IBM in the 
amount of $2,318 million and Si,886 million at 
December 31, 1981 and 1980, respectively, 
with accumulated depreciation of $1,696 million 
and $1,396 million. Rental machine work in 
process and field service parts totaled $3,806 
million and $3,595 million at December 31,1981 
and 1980. 
Plant and Other Property 
December 31,1981 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 0 
(Dollars in millions) 
Land and land improvements 
Buildings 
Factory, laboratory and office equipment. 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Total 
$ 
653 
5,123 
7,119 
12,895 
5,207 
$ 
7,688 
S 
623 
4,351 
6,044 
11,018 
4,384 
$ 
6,634 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Taxes 
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
Earnings before U.S. Federal and non-U.S. income taxes: 
U.S. operations 
$ 3,596 
$ 2,951 
$ 2,822 
Non-US. operations 
2,392 
2,946 
2 , 7 3 1 
$ 5,988 
$ 5,897 
$ 5,553 
Provision for U.S. Federal and non-U.S. income taxes: 
U.S. operations 
$ 1,527 
$ 1,291 
$ 1,238 
Non-U. S. operations 
1 , 1 5 3 
1,044 
1,304 
2,680 
2,3 3 5 
2,542 
Real estate, personal property, state and local franchise (including 
state income taxes of $200 million in 1981, $138 million in 1980, 
and $127 million in 1979), social security and other taxes 
1,587 
1,480 
1,3 1 5 
TDtal 
$ 4,267 
$ 3 , 8 1 5 
$ 3,857 
The components of the provision for U. S. Federal 
and non-U. S. income taxes are as follows: 
US.: 
Current 
$ 
994 
$ 
776 
$ 
914 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
49 
(34) 
86 
Net deferred investment tax credits 
70 
42 
30 
1 , 1 1 3 
784 
1,030 
Non-US.: 
1 , 1 1 3 
Current 
1,464 
1,546 
1,575 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
103 
5 
(63) 
1,567 
^,551 
1 , 5 1 2 
Total provision 
$ 2,680 
$ 2,335 
$ 2,542 
The consolidated effective U. S. Federal and non-
U. S. income tax rate was 44.8% in 1981, 
39.6% in 1980 and 45.8% in 1979. In 1980, the 
lower effective tax rate on earnings of non-
U. S. operations accounts for 5.3 percentage points 
of the difference between the effective rate and 
the U. S. statutory rate of 46.0%. 
The consolidated tax provision for 1980 
includes the effect of a reduction of prior periods 
income tax liabilities of $224 million (38$ per 
share), resulting from changes in tax laws and 
other adjustments of prior years income tax 
expenses. Of this amount, Szoy million relates to 
non-U. S. operations. 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Long-Term Debt 
December 31, 1981 
December 31,1980 
(Dollars in millions) 
U. S. Operations: 
9^/2% notes due 1986 
$ 
500 
$ 
500 
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund 
payments 1985-2003) 
500 
500 
10.80% notes due 1983-1986 
300 
300 
Other (average interest rate at December 31, 1981, 
in parentheses) payable in: 
U.S. dollars, due 1984-2001 (13.2 %) 
416 
— 
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (6.4%) 
262 
1 1 2 
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 
199 
254 
2,177 
1,666 
Non-U.S. Operations: 
Various obligations (average interest rate 
at December 31, 1981, in parentheses) payable in: 
U. S. dollars, due 1983-1992 (14.5%) 
182 
150 
French francs, due 1983-1991 (12.4%) 
170 
178 
Other currencies, due 1983-2011 (16.8%) 
144 
109 
496 
437 
2,673 
2,103 
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally 
to the 9y2% notes and 9%% debentures 
4 
4 
T)tal 
$ 2,669 
$2,099 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 1981, are as 
follows: 1983, $158; 1984, $289; 1985, $290; 1986, $928; 1987, $269; 1988 and beyond, $739. 
Interest Cost 
Interest on borrowings amounted to S480 
million in 1981, $325 million in 1980 and $141 
million in 1979. Of these amounts, $73 million 
in 1981 and $52 million in 1980 were included in 
the cost of buildings under construction, resulting 
in a net earnings increase of $39 million and 
$31 million, respectively. Prior to 1980, all interest 
was charged against income as incurred. 
Lines of Credit 
At December 31, 1981, the company had 
unused lines of credit available with a number of 
U. S. banks. These lines of credit permit the com-
pany to borrow up to an aggregate of $2,000 million 
outstanding at any time, at interest rates not to 
exceed the banks' prime rate. Included in these lines 
of credit is $1,875 rnillion, which is shared with the 
IBM Credit Corporation. In addition, a number of 
non-U. S. subsidiaries had available unused lines of 
credit of approximately $1,200 million. Interest 
rates on borrowings would vary from country to 
country depending on local market conditions. 
About $160 million of such unused lines require the 
payment of commitment fees, which generally 
range from 
to ¥2%. 
IBM Credit Corporation 
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned 
unconsolidated subsidiary, finances installment 
payment agreements relating to sales by IBM of its 
products in the United States. Its operations 
commenced as of May i, 1981. IBM's investment 
in the IBM Credit Corporation is accounted for 
by the equity method, and IBM Credit Corporation 
earnings are included in other income in IBM's 
consolidated statement of earnings. IBM has agreed 
to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to have a 
positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit 
Corporation has $205 million of lines of credit 
available, in addition to those shared with 
the IBM Corporation. 
The following information has been summarized 
from the financial statements of the IBM Credit 
Corporation. Additional information is available in 
its 1981 Annual Report. Copies may be obtained 
by writing to: IBM Credit Corporation, 1200 
High Ridge Road, Stamford, Connecticut 06904. 
Earnings for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981 
(Dollars in thousands) 
Finance and other income 
$ 
49,212. 
Expenses 
3452.70 
Provision for income taxes 
5^075 
Net earnings 
$ 
9,867 
Financial position at December 31, 1981 
Assets: 
Cash and cash equivalents 
$ 
532. 
Installment payment agreement 
receivables-net 
689,553 
Deferred charges and other a s s e t s . . . . 
1,644 
Total Assets 
$ 6 9 1 , 7 2 9 
Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity: 
Commercial paper 
$ 3 1 8 , 4 2 6 
Due to IBM Corporation 
9 7 , 1 6 2 
Taxes and other accruals 
9,036 
Long-term debt 
1 6 2 , 2 3 8 
Stockholder's equity 
104,867 
Total Liabilities and 
Stockholder's Equity 
$ 6 9 1 , 7 2 9 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Research and Development 
Research and development expenses 
amounted to $1,612 milhon in 1981, $1,520 
milhon in 1980 and $1,360 miUion in 1979. 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its U, S. subsidiaries have 
trusteed, noncontributory retirement plans, 
for which accrued costs are funded, covering sub-
stantially all regular and part-time employees. At 
December 31, 1981, there were 13,538 individuals 
receiving benefits under the plans. Most sub-
sidiaries outside the United States have retirement 
plans under which funds are deposited with 
trustees, annuities are purchased under group 
contracts, or reserves are provided. 
The cost of all plans for 1981, 1980 and 1979 
was $1,060 million, $1,109 million and $971 
million respectively. Unfunded or unaccrued prior 
service costs under all plans amounted to 
$516 million at December 31, 1981, and $821 mil-
lion at December 31, 1980. Updating of the 
actuarial assumptions, including the assumed 
investment rate of return, used to value the 
U. S. retirement plans had the effect of reducing 
unfunded prior service costs in 1981 by approxi-
mately $185 million. However, the effect of 
such changes on the pension cost for 1981 was 
not material. 
The following table compares estimated 
benefits and net assets for U. S. retirement plans 
calculated as prescribed by the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board. The assumed rate 
of return used in determining the actuarial 
present value of accumulated benefits was 
'^Vi 
percent for 1981 and 4% percent for 1980. 
At December 31 
1981 
(Dollars in millions) 
Actuarial present value of 
accumulated benefits: 
Vested 
$ 5 , 1 5 8 
$ 5 , 1 6 6 
Nonvested 
Z32 
1 6 8 
$ 5 , 3 9 0 
$ 5>334 
Net assets available 
for benefits 
$ 6 , 1 5 5 
$ 
At December 31, 1981 and at December 31, 
1980 the market value of fund assets and reserves 
of non-U. S. plans exceeded or approximated the 
present value of vested benefits computed in 
the usual actuarial manner. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
In April, 1981, stockholders approved a 
new five-year Employees Stock Purchase Plan, 
effective July i, 1981, which authorizes up to 
40 million shares of capital stock for the Plan. 
Employees who are not participants in a stock 
option plan may purchase IBM's capital stock 
through payroll deductions of up to 10% of their 
compensation. The price an employee pays for a 
share of stock is 85% of the average market 
price on the date the employee has accumulated 
enough money to buy a share. 
Under the 1981 Plan and its predecessor 
1976 Plan, employees purchased 8,284,857 shares 
during the year, including 455,242 treasury 
shares, for which $408 million was paid to IBM. 
At December 31, 1981, 35,839,693 reserved 
unissued shares remain available for purchase 
under the 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for granting 
officers and other key employees options 
to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the 
market price on the day of grant. Options have a 
maximum duration of 10 years and may be 
exercised in four annual installments, commenc-
ing one year from date of grant. 
The following table summarizes stock option 
transactions during 1981: 
Number of Shares 
Under Option 
Available for 
Option 
Balance at 
January i, 1981 
. 
1 2 , 9 4 2 , 4 8 3 
2-,32-7,095 
Options granted 
• 
377,2-^3 
( 2 , 3 7 7 , 2 2 3 ) 
Options terminated . . 
(339,446) 
1 6 0 , 9 4 4 
Options exercised . . . 
( 95,2-51) 
— 
Balance at 
December 31, 1981. . . . 
1 4 , 8 8 5 , 0 0 9 
I 1 0 , 8 1 6 
Exercisable at 
December 31, 1981. . . . 
1 0 , 2 8 4 , 1 6 5 
IBM received $5.2 million for the 95,251 
shares purchased during 1981. The 14,885,009 
shares under option at December 31, 1981, 
are at option prices ranging from $41.60 to $85.40 
per share. 
Litigation 
In January, 1982, the Department of Justice 
agreed to a dismissal of the civil antitrust action 
it had commenced against IBM in 1969. 
In December, 1980, the Commission of the 
European Communities filed a "statement of 
objections" seeking modification of certain IBM 
business practices in the Common Market 
area. The Commission may also seek to impose 
fines. Most of the practices to which the 
Commission has objected have been held to be 
legitimate competition in the United States. 
IBM has denied the charges in this proceeding and 
is defending its position. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Geographic Area and Industry Segment Information 
Financial information by geographic area and 
industry segment for the years 1981, 1980 
and 1979 is summarized below to provide a better 
understanding of IBM's operations. Material inter-
dependencies and overlaps exist among IBM's 
operating units and, therefore, the information may 
not be indicative of the financial results of, or 
investments in, the reported areas and segments 
were they independent organizations. 
Geographic Areas 
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
United States 
Gross income-Customers. 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . .. 
Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Gross income-Customers. 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 ... 
Americas/Far East 
Gross income-Customers. 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . . . 
Eliminations 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets 
Consolidated 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 .. . 
$ 15,088 
I>857 
$ 16,945 
2,094 
16,022 
$ 
9,312 
^ 
$ 
9,695 
758 
9A99 
$ 
4,670 
659 
$ 
5>3^9 
470 
45650 
(2,899) 
(14) 
(585) 
$ 29,070 
$ 
3,308 
$ 29,586 
$ 12,426 
1,615 
$ 1 4 , 0 4 1 
1,72.5 
13,737 
$ 9,932 
491 
$ 10,423 
1,511 
9 , 5 7 3 
$ 
3 , 8 5 5 
450 
$ 4,305 
398 
3 , 9 7 5 
(2,556) 
(72) 
(582) 
$ 26,213 
$ 
3,562 
$ 26,703 
$ 10,619 
1,101 
$ 11,720 
1,612 
12,631 
$ 8,837 
531 
$ 9,368 
1,082 
8,987 
3,407 
410 
3,817 
3 5 5 
3,358 
(2,042) 
(38) 
(446) 
$ 22,863 
$ 
3,011 
$ 24,530 
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, European 
operations accounted for approximately 95% of 
gross income in 1981, 1980 and 1979. 
Net earnings in 1980 include the effect of a 
reduction of prior periods tax liabilities of 
$17 million in the United States, $187 million 
in Europe/Middle East/Africa, and $20 million 
in Americas/Far East. 
Interarea transfers, consisting principally of 
completed machines, sub-assemblies and parts, are 
priced at cost plus an appropriate service charge, 
applied consistently throughout the world. The 
cost and service charges that relate to asset transfers 
are capitalized and depreciated or amortized by 
the importing area. Interarea accounts receivable, 
the unamortized portion of service charges, and the 
net change during the year in unamortized service 
charges, have been eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Industry Segments 
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
Information-Handling Business: 
Data Processing 
Gross income—Customers 
$ 24,073 
$21,367 
$18,338 
Operating income 
5,832 
5 , 3 3 0 
4 , 7 3 7 
Assets at December 31 
23,846 
21,088 
1 7 , 3 7 3 
Depreciation expense 
2,576 
2,061 
1,683 
Capital expenditures 
6,094 
6,027 
5 , 3 5 9 
Office Products 
Gross income—Customers 
4,219 
4 , 1 3 5 
3 , 8 4 9 
Operating income 
263 
4 7 9 
566 
Assets at December 31 
3,495 
3 , 3 7 7 
3 , 3 1 6 
Depreciation expense 
306 
287 
2 7 5 
Capital expenditures 
714 
5 3 7 
608 
Federal Systems 
Gross income—Customers 
719 
647 
612 
Operating income 
56 
3 7 
3 5 
Assets at December 31 
436 
3 7 1 
329 
Depreciation expense 
16 
1 3 
11 
Capital expenditures 
37 
2 7 
2 3 
Other Business 
Gross income—Customers 
59 
64 
64 
Operating income 
2 
3 
6 
Assets at December 31 
32 
3 6 
3 9 
Depreciation expense 
I 
I 
I 
Capital expenditures 
— 
I 
I 
Consolidated 
Gross income—Customers 
$ 29,070 
$26,213 
$22,863 
Operating income 
$ 6,153 
$ 5,849 
$ 5,344 
General corporate and interest expense 
(533) 
(382) 
(240) 
Other income, principally interest 
368 
430 
4 4 9 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 5,988 
$ 
5 , 8 9 7 
$ 
5 , 5 5 3 
Assets identified to segments 
$ 27,809 
$24,872 
$21,057 
Assets not identified to segments, including marketable securities . . . 
1,777 
1,831 
3 , 4 7 3 
Total assets at December 31 
$ 29,586 
$26,703 
$24,530 
Depreciation expense 
$ 2,899 
$ 2,362 
$ 1,970 
Capital expenditures 
$ 6,845 
$ 6,592 
$ 5,991 
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, 
are in the field of information-handling systems, 
equipment and services. How^ever, for purposes of 
segment reporting, IBM's information-handling 
business has been reported as three segments: 
Data Processing—consists of information-
handling products and services such as data pro-
cessing machines and systems, computer 
programming, systems engineering, education 
and related services and supplies for commercial 
and government customers. 
Office Products—consists of information-
handling products, systems and services such 
as electric and electronic typewriters, magnetic 
media typewriters and systems, information 
processors, document printers, copiers, and related 
supplies and services for commercial and govern-
ment customers. 
Federal Systems—consists of specialized 
information-handling products and services for 
United States space, defense and other agencies and, 
in some instances, other customers. 
Other Business consists of educational, training 
and testing materials and services for school, home 
and industrial use. 
Intersegment transfers of products and services 
similar to those offered to unaffiliated customers are 
not material. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Gross Income by Segment ft 
1981 
1980 
1979 
(Dollars in millions) 
Data Processing segment: 
Equipment 
Sales 
$ 
9,449 
$ 
7,627 
$ 
6,335 
Rentals 
9,660 
9,591 
8,846 
19,109 
17,218 
15,181 
Maintenance contracts, 
program products, parts and supplies 
Sales 
458 
4 1 1 
385 
Rentals 
M 
25 
24 
Services 
4,482 
3,713 
2,748 
4,964 
4,149 
3,157 
24,073 
21,367 
18,338 
Office Products segment: 
Sales 
2,245 
2,183 
2,084 
Rentals 
1,155 
1,253 
1,199 
Services 
819 
699 
566 
4,219 
4,135 
3,849 
All other segments: 
Sales 
749 
698 
669 
Services 
29 
13 
7 
778 
7 1 1 
676 
Total 
$ 
29,070 
$ 
26,213 
$ 
22,863 
t t T h i s information should be read in conjunction with the Industry Segments notes on pages 35 and 36. Gross income from rentals includes maintenance service on rented 
equipment. Gross income from services consists of maintenance service on sold equipment, program products and other services. 
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
1981 
1979 
1978 
1977 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales. 
rentals and services 
$ 29,070 
$ 26,213 
$ 22,863 
$ 21,076 
$ 18,133 
Net earnings 
3,308 
3,562 
3,011 
3 , 1 1 1 
2,719 
Per share t 
5-63 
6.10 
5.16 
5.32 
4.58 
Cash dividends paid 
2,023 
2,008 
2,008 
1,685 
1,488 
Per share t 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
2.88 
2.50 
Investment in plant, rental 
machines and other property.. 
6,845 
6,592 
5,991 
4,046 
3,395 
Return on stockholders' 
equity 
19.1% 
22.7% 
21.2% 
23.8% 
21.4' 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 29,586 
$ 26,703 
$ 24,530 
$ 20,771 
$ 18,978 
Net investment in plant, rental 
machines and other property.. 
17,278 
15,017 
12,193 
9,302 
7,889 
Working capital 
2,983 
3,399 
4,406 
4,511 
4,864 
Long-term debt 
2,669 
2,099 
1,589 
285 
256 
Stockholders' equity 
18,161 
16,453 
14,961 
13,494 
12,618 
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Information on Effects of Changing Prices 
Sustained high inflation has eroded 
industry's abihty to fund the replacement and 
expansion of productive capacity. Under 
conventional accounting principles, financial 
statements are prepared on the basis of historical 
costs, i.e. the actual dollars exchanged at the 
time of the transaction. Financial statements 
prepared in this manner, however, do not 
adequately reflect the decline in the purchasing 
power of those dollars and the subsequent 
effect on cash flows required for future replace-
ment of capital assets. 
In an attempt to measure the effects of in-
flation, the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board prescribed two methods for experi-
mentation. The Current Cost Method uses esti-
mated changes in specific prices to restate the 
value of inventories, rental machines, plants and 
other property. Such estimates are based upon 
latest production costs, published price indices, 
current suppliers' prices, and appraised valu-
ations, and represent year-end costs, or costs in 
effect at date of sale, to attain the same func-
tional service potential as embodied in the com-
pany's existing assets. The Constant Dollar 
Method restates these assets, both U.S. and non-
U. S., simply by factoring the increase in the rate 
of general inflation, as measured by the U. S. 
Consumer Price Index for all Urban Consumers 
(CPI-U). 
The Current Cost Method better measures 
the impact of inflation on IBM because it reflects 
the positive effects of technological and other pro-
ductivity improvements. It also recognizes 
changes in vendor prices caused by supply and 
demand and other factors which cause the 
specific prices of IBM's vendor purchases to fluc-
tuate differently than price changes resulting 
solely from general inflation. 
As Reported in 
Financial Statements 
Restated in Average 1981 Dollars 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 
1 9 8 1 
1 9 8 1 
1 9 8 0 
1 9 7 9 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
Cost of sales, rentals and services 
Expenses and other income 
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes . . . . 
$ 
2 9 , 0 7 0 
1 2 , 0 1 6 
1 1 , 0 6 6 
2 , 6 8 0 
$ 
2 9 , 0 7 0 
1 1 , 9 6 4 
1 1 , 1 8 5 
2 , 6 8 0 
$ 
2 8 , 9 3 2 
1 1 , 4 4 9 
1 1 , 3 7 7 
2,577 
$ 2 8 , 6 4 7 
1 0 , 7 1 7 
1 1 , 2 6 8 
3,185 
Net earnings 
$ 
3 , 3 0 8 
$ 
3 , 2 4 1 
$ 
3 , 5 2 9 
$ 
3,477 
Earnings per share 
$5.63 
$5-51 
$ 6 . 0 5 
$ 5 . 9 6 
Stockholders' equity (net assets) 
$ 
1 8 , 1 6 1 
$ 
1 9 , 7 4 9 
$ 
2 0 , 1 9 3 
$ 2 0 , 8 2 7 
Loss from decline in purchasing power of 
net monetary assets 
$ 
6 2 
$ 
3 0 1 
$ 
5 7 0 
Increase in general price level of inventories, 
rental machines and plant and other property 
Increase (decrease) in specific prices (Current Cost) 
$ 
1 , 9 8 2 
( 2 1 2 ) 
$ 
2 , 3 5 0 
5 0 4 
$ 
2 , 3 0 2 
8 4 0 
Excess of increase in general price level over 
increase (decrease) in specific prices 
$ 
2 , 1 9 4 
$ 
1 , 8 4 6 
$ 
1 , 4 6 2 
Experimentation with the Constant Dollar 
Method as described above, has proven to have 
little or no application to IBM's business. Under 
this method, IBM's 1981 restated earnings would 
be $1,899 million and stockholders' equity 
$ 2 1 , 6 9 4 million. 
Using the Current Cost Method the com-
pany's 1981 financial results, when adjusted 
for changing prices, show a decline of $67 million 
from reported net earnings and an increase in 
stockholders' equity of $1,588 million. The esti-
mated current cost of acquiring existing plants 
and other property is $ 2 , 2 3 9 million greater than 
the depreciated acquisition costs; the current 
production costs of rental machines are 
$ 6 6 5 million less, and inventories $ 4 9 million 
less. The above changes in cost represent the 
additional cash investment the company would 
have to expend at current prices to acquire the 
same service potential of existing assets. The ad-
ditional depreciation in 1981 on these restated 
assets would have been $215 million. Other 
costs would have been reduced by $148 million. 
Therefore, had the company made this added 
investment, the 1981 earnings would have been 
$67 million less. 
Productivity improvements from technological 
advances continued to partially offset inflationary 
pressures and are reflected in the lower estimated 
current costs of inventories and rental machines. 
In addition, the difference between the amounts re-
ported in the financial statements and the restated 
amounts using current costs is significantly 
influenced by changes in currency exchange rates. 
The Current Cost Method prescribes that non-U. S. 
inventories, rental machines and plant and other 
property, as well as the related depreciation expense 
and other costs, be translated into U. S. dollars 
using current exchange rates. In preparing consoli-
dated financial statements, the company uses 
historical exchange rates to translate these assets 
and the related depreciation expense and other 
costs. The use of different translation measure-
ments, therefore, has a significant effect on the 
comparability of data reported in the financial 


===== PAGE 41 =====
statements and the information prepared using 
current costs. 
When a company retains monetary assets 
or habihties such as cash or debt, gains and losses 
in purchasing power occur during periods of in-
flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted 
in a significantly reduced purchasing power loss 
in 1 9 8 1 , reflecting increased debt and cash outlays 
made for productive capacity and rental machines. 
Although inflation-adjusted information 
is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to 
emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation. It 
points out the importance of bringing inflation un-
der control and the need for further public policy 
initiatives to encourage capital investment. 
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation (Constant Dollar) 
changes in the average CPI-U from that year to 
year 1981. 
The amounts shown below for the years 
1977 to 1980 have been converted into the equiv-
alent purchasing power of 1981 dollars by 
applying to the amounts reported the rate of 
1981 
1980 
1979 
1978 
1977 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross income from sales, rentals 
and services 
$ 29,070 
$ 28,932 
$ 28,647 
$ 29,381 
$ 27,214 
Cash dividends paid per sharef 
$ 3.44 
$ 3.80 
$4-31 
$ 4.01 
$ 3-75 
Market price per sharef 
(at December 31) 
$ 56.88 
$ 74.92. 
$ 80.67 
$ 104.04 
$ 102.63 
Average Consumer Price Index for 
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0).. 
272.4 
246.8 
217.4 
195.4 
181.5 
T h e actual market price of I B M stock on the N e w York Stock Exchange composite tape at December 3 1 , for years 1 9 7 7 to 1981 (adjusted for stock split) was 
$68.38, $74.63, $64.38, $67.88 and $56.88 respectively, 
t Adjusted for 1979 stock split. 
Selected Quarterly Data 
1981 
Gross 
Income 
Gross 
Profit 
Net 
Earnings 
Per Share 
Stock Prices 
Earnings 
Dividends 
High 
L o w 
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) 
First Quarter 
$ 6,461 
$ 3,900 
$ 
730 
$ 1.25 
$ .86 
$ 71.50 
$ 60.25 
Second Quarter 
6,895 
4.047 
804 
1.37 
.86 
63-38 
55.13 
Third Quarter 
6,721 
3,875 
693 
1.18 
.86 
58.88 
52.25 
Fourth Quarter 
8,993 
5,232 
1,081 
1.83 
.86 
57.63 
48.38 
Total 
1980 
$ 29,070 
$ 17,054 
$ 3,308 
$5.63 
$3.44 
First Quarter 
$ 5,748 
$ 3,611 
$ 
681 
$ 1 . 1 7 
$ .86 
$72.00 
$51.38 
Second Quarter 
6,181 
3,813 
764 
1.31 
.86 
60.38 
50.38 
Third Quarter 
6,479 
3,981 
884t 
i . 5 i t 
.86 
69.13 
58.38 
Fourth Quarter 
7,805 
4,659 
i,233t 
2 . 1 l t 
.86 
72-75 
63.25 
Total 
$26,213 
$16,064 
$3,562 
$6.10 
$3.44 
t Includes the effect, $70 million {iz<t per share), and $ 1 5 4 million {z6't per share) in the third and fourth quarters respectively, of reductions in income tax expense 
applicable to prior years. 
There were 742,162 stockholders of record 
at December 31, 1981. During 1981, stockholders 
received $2,023 million in cash dividends. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
March 10, 1982, will be at the rate of $.86 per 
share. This dividend will be IBM's 268th consecu-
tive quarterly cash dividend. 
The stock prices reflect the high and low 
prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York 
Stock Exchange composite tape for the last 
two years. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Corporate 
Staff 
Information 
Systems 
Group 
Federal 
Systems 
Division 
Information 
Systems and 
Technology 
Group 
Data 
Systems 
Division 
General 
Products 
Division 
General 
Technology 
Division 
Information 
Systems andS; 
Communica-i 
. „ tions Group 
» 
A major realignment of IBM operations worldwide 
was made in 1981. 
All marketing and service operations in the 
U.S. now report to a single group-the Information 
Systems Group. All U. S. product development 
and manufacturing operations now report to one 
of two groups-the Information Systems and 
Technology Group or the Informations Systems 
and Communications Group. 
The marketing, service and manufactur-
ing responsibilities of the former General Business 
Group/International Division are being consoli-
dated into the IBM World Trade Americas/Far East 
and Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporations. 
The current responsibilities of all principal 
IBM units are shown at the right. 
The new marketing and service structures 
enhance IBM productivity. They permit the sale of 
the full line of IBM products through individual 
marketing offices that can best combine product, 
system and industry specialization to meet each 
customer's needs. 
The restructuring of U.S. product develop-
ment and manufacturing operations into two 
groups places similar or related products under 
common management. This enables IBM to take 
greater advantage of rapid changes in technology 
and to coordinate long-range product plans 
more effectively. 
Other Divisions: 
Real Estate & 
Construction 
Division 
Other Subsidiaries: 


===== PAGE 43 =====
To conduct its business throughout the world, 
IBM is now organized into the following groups, 
divisions and wholly owned subsidiaries: 
Information Systems Group 
Customer Service Division...Provides main-
tenance, related support and programming 
services within the U. S. for designated systems 
and products developed primarily by the Infor-
mation Systems and Communications Group. 
Federal Systems Division...Provides specialized 
information-handling and control systems 
to the Federal government for seaborne, space-
borne, airborne and ground-based environ-
ments. Also participates in applied research 
and exploratory development. 
Field Engineering Division...Provides main-
tenance and related services within the U.S. 
for all current IBM systems and products 
and new systems and products developed by 
the Information Systems and Technology 
Group, as well as support for specified IBM 
program offerings. The division also provides 
maintenance marketing support and central 
programming service for assigned products. 
National Accounts Division...Has marketing and 
field administration responsibility within the 
U.S. and its territories for the full standard line 
of IBM products. Its assigned customers are 
selected large accounts with complex informa-
tion processing needs. 
National Marketing Division...Has marketing 
and field administration responsibility within 
the U.S. and its territories for the full standard 
line of IBM products. Its assigned customers 
are large, medium and small accounts. 
Systems Supplies Division...Has responsibility for 
manufacturing or procurement and for market-
ing within the U.S. of IBM supplies and services. 
Information Systems 
and Technology Group 
Data Systems Division...Has worldwide develop-
ment and associated programming responsibility 
for large, complex systems, with primary 
emphasis on high-performance products, plus 
U.S. manufacturing responsibility for those 
systems. 
General Products Division...Has worldwide 
development and U.S. manufacturing respon-
sibility for storage systems, including tape 
units, disk products and mass storage systems, 
as well as non-impact system printers, program 
products and hardware-related programming. 
General Technology Division...Has worldwide 
development and product assurance and 
U.S. manufacturing responsibility for logic, 
memory and special semiconductor devices 
and associated packaging. The division also 
procures components for IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East Corporation and U.S. 
operating units. 
Information Systems 
and Communications Group 
Communication Products Division...Has world-
wide development and U.S. manufacturing 
responsibility for telecommunications systems, 
office systems, distribution industry systems, 
and related programming. The division serves 
as the worldwide architectural and systems 
focal point for office systems and systems net-
work architecture activities in IBM. 
Information Products Division...Has worldwide 
development and related programming, and 
U.S. manufacturing responsibility for type-
writers, copiers, industry systems for banking 
and manufacturing industries, peripheral 
equipment including printers, copier systems, 
diskettes, and associated supplies. 
System Products Division...Has worldwide 
development and U.S. manufacturing respon-
sibility for small and intermediate-sized general 
purpose systems, displays and related 
programming. 
Other Divisions 
Real Estate and Construction Division...Manages 
the selection and acquisition of sires, the 
design and construction of buildings, and the 
purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM 
operations in the U.S. The division has respon-
sibility for assessing real estate projects outside 
the U.S., as well as IBM's worldwide energy 
and environmental programs. It also provides 
facility services to selected headquarters 
locations. 
Research Division...Brings scientific understand-
ing to bear on areas of company interest 
through basic research and development of 
technologies of potential long-range importance. 
Subsidiaries 
IBM Credit Corporation...Finances installment 
payment agreements resulting from sales 
by IBM of its generally available information 
handling equipment to customers in the U.S. 
IBM Instruments, Inc. ...Has responsibility for 
IBM's efforts in the analytical instrument field, 
including the marketing and servicing of 
selected products in the U.S. 
Science Research Associates, Inc. ...Has world-
wide development, publication and/or market-
ing responsibility for a wide range of edu-
cational materials, services and microcomputer 
software designed for use in elementary 
and secondary schools, colleges, businesses 
and the home. 
IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
...With a territory extending across four 
continents, this subsidiary is responsible for 
IBM operations in 45 countries, including 
Australia, Brazil, Canada and Japan. 
IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Corporation...Through its subsidiary, 
IBM Europe, located in Paris, it is responsible 
for IBM operations in 80 countries. 
IBM World Trade Corporation...Provides 
designated support to IBM World Trade organi-
zational units. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
More Productive People... 
Valerie Cole, Chicago, helped an industrial equipment 
manufacturer establish a worldwide IBM computer 
network that links dealerships in 65 countries through 
more than 2,000 IBM display terminals. 
Dr. Janusz Wilczynski, Yorktown Heights, N.Y., 
designed advanced optics for photolithography, work that 
has significantly increased the production volumes 
of very dense packaging used in many IBM computers. 
Toshiaki Igi, Fujisawa, Japan, was a principal architect of 
the IBM computer system for processing the graphic symbols 
of the Japanese and Chinese written languages. 
Guenter Knauft, Boeblingen, Germany, made 
important contributions to the design and quality-testing 
of the intermediate-scale IBM 4331 computer, 
which has been installed by thousands of customers in 
more than 40 countries. 
Ann Loidl, Denver, helped five oil, gas and mining 
companies apply the capabilities of new IBM computers, 
software and distributed processing techniques to 
produce significant productivity gains in geographically 
dispersed operations. 
Brian Sowter, Hursley, United Kingdom, was a key 
contributor to the inventions which achieved high image 
quality in IBM's color display computer terminals. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Defense and Space Programs 
The U.S. Department of Defense has 
authorized the U.S. Navy to proceed with pro-
duction of 19 ship systems and 18 air systems 
for [.AMI'S, the Navy's new ship/helicopter system 
for which IBM is the prime contractor. Designed 
for defense against submarines and detection 
of surface vessels, LAMPS (Light Airborne Multi-
purpose System) successfully passed a series of 
open-sea tests in the Atlantic during 1981. 
The system contract is cxpected to be one of the 
largest IBM has had with the U.S. government. 
Computers and programming developed by 
the Federal Systems Division are playing im-
portant roles in the current series of orbital flights 
by NASA's Space Shuttle. The spacecraft is con-
trolled by five IBM onboard computers, 
programmed by more than 600,000 IBM in-
structions. Only one-third the size of previous 
Apollo mission computers, each of the onboard 
systems has five times more memory and 
processes information 40 times faster. IBM has 
also provided three large ground computers and 
more than three million programming instruc-
tions for flight control and pre-launch checkout. 
IBM has been awarded a U.S. Navy contract 
for the IBM Advanced Signal Processor (ASP), a 
special-purpose computer used on surface ships, 
submarines and planes, including helicopters. 
Covering the Navy's requirements for five years, 
the contract calls for delivery of as many as 
500 ASPs with a value exceeding $300 million. 
The ASP can perform 20 million multiplications 
a second. 
Satellite Business Systems 
The second satellite for the domestic U.S. 
communications system operated by Satellite 
Business Systems (SBS) is undergoing final tests in 
space and will enter commercial service early in 
1981. SBS is the partnership formed by sub-
sidiaries of The Aetna Casualty and Surety Com-
pany, COMSAT General Corporation and IBM. 
At year-end 1981, SBS had 60 earth stations 
and 7 customer networks installed, including one 
for IBM. SBS has opened marketing and field 
service centers throughout the U.S. and now has 
1,300 employees. The company plans to launch a 
third satellite on the first commercial payload 
flight of NASA's Space Shuttle in late 1982. 
in January, 1982, SBS and the international 
division of British Telecom announced plans 
to provide joint transatlantic services, using 
satellite facilities of the International Telecommu-
nications Satellite Organization (Intelsat). 
The services would include computer data com-
munication, electronic mail, video telecon-
ferencing and facsimile transmission. British 
Telecom is the government-owned corporation 
responsible for all telecommunications services 
for the United Kingdom. SBS has applied to 
the U.S. Federal Communications Commission 
for authority to provide such international 
common carrier services. Approval would permit 
SBS customers in the U.S. to interconnect 
with their subsidiaries and other British Telecom 
customers in the United Kingdom. 
Following FCC approval in 1981, SBS is 
negotiating with the Canadian government and 
Canadian common carriers to establish services 
between Canada and the U. S., using SBS satellites. 
New IBM Credit Corporation 
IBM has established a wholly owned 
subsidiary, the IBM Credit Corporation, to provide 
added flexibility in company financing and a 
more efficient, single-management focus on the 
financing of installment payment agreements 
offered by various U.S. marketing divisions. 
Expanded Support Programs 
IBM support programs at both the national 
and community levels have been broadened for 
1982. Included are expanded job training for the 
disadvantaged, a broader program of matching 
grants to education, hospitals and the arts, as 
well as additional support for the IBM Fund 
for Community Service. Participation by husbands 
and wives of employees was introduced in 
several areas. IBM will also conduct new training 
programs for managers of urban service organi-
zations in skills that will help them better manage 
their scarce resources. 
During 1982, IBM will increase from 8 to 19 
the number of major data and word processing 
job training centers for the disadvantaged that the 
company helps sponsor in the U. S. The centers 
are in urban areas with high unemployment and 
are operated in cooperation with nonprofit 
community-based organizations. IBM lends the 
computing and office products equipment and 
personnel needed for effective operation. Since 
opening their doors in 1968, such centers 
supported by IBM have graduated more than 
5,000 students and placed more than 80% in jobs. 
The company also helps support more than 200 
smaller clerical job training operations. 
Equal Opportunity Programs 
Emphasis continued during the year on 
worldwide IBM programs that provide equal 
opportunity in employment, training and advance-
ment. Of the more than 17,600 employees hired 
in the U.S. during the year, 42% were women 
and 20% were minorities. At year-end, IBM had 
more than 2,700 women managers in the U. S. 
There were also over 2,600 minority managers, 
and of those, about 470 were women. 
During the United Nations' International 
Year of Disabled Persons in 1981, IBM broadened 
its installation of workplace accommodations 
for the handicapped. IBM also helped sponsor the 
International Winter Special Olympics in 
Vermont for handicapped persons from all 50 
states and 16 other nations. 
IBM has several thousand handicapped 
employees worldwide, including a number of man-
agers. The majority have impaired hearing, sight 
or mobility. Among the workplace accommo-
dations for them are audio typewriters and com-
puter terminals, computer software and printers 
for Braille translations, keyboard hand and 
arm rests, motorized wheelchairs, reserved auto 
parking, modified elevators and rest rooms, ramps 
and audio cassettes of IBM publications. 
During 1981, more than 100 IBM employees 
were on social service leave in the U. S., working 
for national or community nonprofit organizations. 
In addition, more than 40 employees were on 
college and university campuses, participating in 
IBM's faculty loan program. Most were serving 
as teachers at predominantly minority colleges. 
In 1981, the company continued to expand 
countrywide purchasing of products and services 
from minority businesses-black, Hispanic, 
American Indian and Asian. The number of 
minority-owned suppliers in 1981 grew to more 
than 600 companies doing over $68 million 
worth of business with IBM. Also increasing, to 
over $24 million, was the value of purchases 
from more than 300 companies owned primarily 
by women. IBM did over $16 million in business 
with more than 80 suppliers that have predom-
inantly handicapped work forces. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
The lo-month exhibition of the works of French 
sculptor Auguste Rodin at the National Gallery of Art in 
Washington, D.C., through May 2, 1982, is being 
made possible by a grant from IBM. Pictured is the bronze 
casting, "Gates of Hell." More than 350 of Rodin's 
sculptures in bronze, marble and other media are on exhibit. 
Total attendance is expected to exceed one million. 
Personal Computer 'Courseware' 
Three software programs for the new 
IBM Personal Computer developed by SRA, IBM's 
educational publishing subsidiary, are now 
available. Suited for home or school use, the "edu-
cational courseware" provides computer drill 
and instruction in arithmetic for students in first 
and second grades and above. One program provides 
timed drills to build speed and accuracy-in 
either a competitive or noncompetitive format. The 
other two programs are games designed to enrich 
basic computation and problem-solving skills. 
Suggestion Plan Savings 
During 1981, IBM received more than 
195,000 cost- and labor-saving ideas from employ-
ees through the worldwide IBM Suggestion Plan. 
These ideas saved the company over $60 million 
through increased productivity and resulted in 
awards to employees exceeding $10 million. 
More Energy Gains 
IBM improved its energy efficiency again 
in 1981 with conservation measures that brought 
a 4.5% savings per square foot at major U. S. 
locations, compared with 1980. This reduction 
brought IBM's total U.S. savings from the 1973 
pre-conservation level to 50%. 
In the past eight years, IBM has conserved 
enough electricity in the U. S. to meet the 
needs of 450,000 homes for a year. Enough fuel 
oil has been saved to serve 250,000 homes in 
the northern states. 
In IBM World Trade countries, where conser-
vation has been emphasized for many years, the 
energy savings per square foot from 1973 through 
1981 exceeded 45%. 
Better ECG Analysis 
A new IBM-designed electrocardiograph 
management and analysis system helps doctors 
detect heart abnormalities. The system aids in the 
interpretation of electrocardiograms (ECGs)-
the graphic representations of electrical impulses 
that cause the heart to beat. The computer 
makes thousands of high-speed measurements of 
ECG data and then applies interpretive rules 
typically used by cardiologists. It prints a concise 
report for review by the physician. It can also 
help doctors identify changes in an adult 
patient's heart condition by comparing a new 
ECG with previous analyses. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
Experimental color display system developed by 
IBM Italy features an enlarged screen with a very-high-
definition image. The system is being tested at IBM 
Scientific Cx^nters in Madrid, Paris, Rome and Palo Alto, 
Calif., for applications ranging from satellite and 
medical image processing to computer circuit design, oil 
exploration and publication printing. 


===== PAGE 48 =====
The command and control system in the U. S. Navy's 
new Trident-class submarines was integrated by the 
Federal Systems Division. This integration involved about 
170 principal units of equipment controlled by more 
than one million computer instructions. IBM also developed 
and built theTrident sonar system. 
Left: Computer time and equipment contributed by 
IBM Taiwan assist scientists from 10 nations at the Asian 
Vegetable Research and Development Center, Tainan. 
Analysis of thousands of varieties of different vegetables 
is speeding development of more nutritious crops and better 
farm management in the tropics. 
Far left: IBM vendor reclamation of gold, palladium and 
other precious metals from obsolete IBM computer circuits 
produced a $25 million saving for the company in 
the U. S. during 1981. Such metals find use in high-density 
circuits for their superior electrical conductivity and 
corrosion resistance. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
Small satellite "dish" antenna for an earth station in lower 
Manhattan (roof of building, center) is one of 60 now installed 
in major U. S. cities by Satellite Business Systems (SBS). 
A total of 25 large business organizations have contracted 
with SBS for high-speed digital communications networks. 
htnefiafiB" 
, II.. .1 -. •• •• • 
1 
grunti 
[••1..J f||llH"l"j} 
1 •IllHI'l" 
llllll" 
'"! 
iii!!!!l 


===== PAGE 50 =====
IBM Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Advisory Board: 
Officers: 
Stephen D. Bechteljr 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Harold Brown 
Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J. - health care products 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William T. Coleman, Jr 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.G., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France-attorneys at law 
John M. Fox 
Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass. - waste disposal services 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Attorney,Washington, D.C.; former U.S. Secretary, Health and Human Services; former U.S. Secretary, 
Housing and Urban Development 
Garla Anderson Hills 
Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif. - attorneys at law 
Amory Houghton, Jr 
Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N. Y. 
John N.Irwin II 
Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb &C Tyler, New York, N. Y.-attorneys at law 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM 
T. Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N. Y. 
Dean R. McKay 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark - owners of the Maersk Fleet 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N. Y. 
J. Richard Munro 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N. Y. - publishing 
John R.Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM 
*Dean P Phypers 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
William W. Scranton 
Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Retired Chairman of the Board, E. 1. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del. - chemical products 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher &C Bartlett, New York, N. Y. - attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
* Elected 1/2.6/82 
Board Committees: 
Executive: 
Finance: 
Compensation: 
Audit: 
Frank T. Gary, Chairman 
William W. Scranton, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr., Chairman 
WilliamT. Coleman, Jr.,Chairman 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
George B. Beitzel 
James E.Burke 
John M. Fox 
T. Vincent Learson 
Garla Anderson Hills 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Richard W. Lyman 
William H.Moore 
John N. Irwin II 
Irving S. Shapiro 
John R.Opel 
Dean R. McKay 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
J. Richard Munro 
Paul J. Rizzo 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
George L. Hinman 
Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N. Y. - attorneys at law 
Gilbert E.Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N. Y. 
Louis H. LaMotte 
Retired Executive Vice President, IBM 
William McChesney Martin, Jr 
Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Albert L.Williams 
Retired President, IBM 
John R.Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Board 
George B. Beitzel 
Sr. Vice President 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Sr. Vice President 
Dean R. McKay 
Sr. Vice President 
tDean P Phypers 
Sr. Vice President 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Sr. Vice President 
Nicholas de B. Katzenbach 
Sr. Vice President & General Counsel 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr 
Sr. Vice President 
t Allen J. Krowe 
Vice President, Finance Sc Planning 
John F. Akers 
Vice President & Group Executive 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Vice President & Group Executive 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr 
Vice President & Group Executive 
Arthur G.Anderson 
Vice President 
C.Michael Armstrong 
Vice President 
John E. Bertram 
Vice President 
Charles P. Biggar 
Vice President 
James A. Bitonti 
Vice President 
Erich Bloch 
Vice President 
Lewis M.Branscomb 
Vice President 
Walton E. Burdick 
Vice President 
Kaspar V Cassani 
Vice President 
George H.Conrades 
Vice President 
Frank J. Cummiskey 
Vice President 
Wallace C. Doud 
Vice President 
Robert B. Dunlop 
Vice President 
48 
IBM iq8i Annual Report 
William W. Eggleston 
Vice President 
Bob O. Evans 
Vice President 
P Martin Foley 
Vice President 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Vice President 
Ralph E.Gomory 
Vice President 
John B. Jackson 
Vice President 
Terry R.Lautenbach 
Vice President 
Thomas M. Liptak 
Vice President 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President 
David E. McKinney 
Vice President 
Charles E. McKittrick, Jr 
Vice President 
Frank A. Metz, Jr 
Vice President 
Theodore C. Papes, Jr 
Vice President 
Francis G. Rodgers 
Vice President 
H.Mitchell Watson, Jr 
Vice President 
John E Williams 
Vice President 
J. Richard Young 
Vice President 
James J. Forese 
Controller 
John H.Grady 
Secretary 
C.Arthur Northrop 
Treasurer 
Wallace R. DuBois 
Assistant Controller 
J. William Scruggs 
Assistant Controller 
John H.Stewart 
Assistant Controller 
Thomas C. Irwin 
Assistant Secretary 
David A. Finley 
Assistant Treasurer 
Bruce E. Langton 
Assistant Treasurer 
t Effective 1/26/81 


===== PAGE 51 =====
Division and Subsidiary 
Chief Executives: 
Arthur C;. Anderson . 
John E. Bertram . . . . 
Charles P. B i g g a r . . . . 
Kaspar V. (Hassani . . . 
George H.Conrades. 
Vincent N. Cook 
. . . 
Edward M. Davis . . . 
David A. I'inley 
Victor J. Goldberg . . 
Ralph E. Ciomory . . . 
John E. (iuth, Jr 
President, Cieneral Products Div. 
President, Data Systems Div. 
President, Eield Engineering Div. 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ 
Middle East/Africa Corporation 
President, National Accounts Div. 
President, Eederal Systems Div. 
President, General Technology Div. 
President, IBM Oedit Corp. 
President, Communication Products Div. 
Director of Research 
President, Science Research Associates 
Thomas M. Liptak 
President, Customer Service Div. 
E^dward E. Lucente 
President, Information Products Div. 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Corp. 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr 
Chairman, IBM World Trade 
Americas/ Ear East Corp. 
Everett H. Van Hoesen 
President, Systems Supplies Div. 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr 
President, System Products Div. 
Cecil P. Webb 
President, IBM Instruments, Inc. 
John E Williams 
President, Real Estate and 
Construction Div. 
J. Richard Young 
President, National Marketing Div. 
IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East 
Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Nadal Antonioni 
Thomas J. Bata 
Jill K. C'onway 
Morton Ehrlich 
Thomas I loving 
Ryoichi Kawai 
Donald R. Keough . . . . 
Terry R. Lautenbach. . . 
Raymond (..(VNeill . . 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. . . . 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. . 
Takeo Shiina 
Ciustavo J. Vollmer. . . . 
Ciordon R. Williamson 
General Manager, Latin America Northern Region, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation 
Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization, Toronto, C^anada 
President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Ela. 
President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y., and Editor-in-Chief, " T h e Connoisseur" 
President, Komatsu, L.imited,Tokyo, Japan 
President,'I'he Coca-Cxila C'ompany, Atlanta, Ga. 
President, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM 
Vice President, Einance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/ Ear East Corporation 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Ear East Corporation, and IBM Senior Vice President 
Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
President, IBM Japan, l.imited 
President, (Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela 
IBM Director of Industry Relations 
IBM World Trade 
Europe/Middle East^ 
Africa Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
John E. Akers 
ArthurCi. Anderson. . , 
Eernando de Asua, Jr.. , 
ToreBrowaldh 
Kaspar V. C^assani 
Billy 
C^hristensen . . , 
The Earl of Cromer . . . . 
Joseph E. ('ullnian 3rd . . 
Erank J. CAimmiskey 
. . . 
Pierre E. (iousseland . . . 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Jacques G. .Maisonrouge 
I'heodore C,'. Papes, Jr. . . 
Otto Sturzenegger 
Kurt Werner 
Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
President, General Products Division, and Vice I'resident, IBM 
Managing Director, IBM Spain 
Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and C'hairman of the Board, IBM Sweden 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation, and IBM Vice President 
Vice President and General Manager, IBM World Trade Corporation and 
Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation 
Eormer Chairman of the Board, IBM United Kingdom, Limited 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Philip Morris, Inc., New York, N. Y. 
Vice President, IBM 
C;hairman, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
C^hairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and IBM Senior Vice President 
Directeur Cieneral, IBM Europe S. A., and Vice President, IBM 
President and C'hairman, C:iba-Geigy, USA, Ardsley, N. Y. 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany 
•Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
Board of Directors: 
C.eorge B. Beitzel 
Patricia Albjerg (Iraham 
John E.Ciuth,Jr 
Wayne EI. Eloltzman . . . 
H. 'Ehomas James 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Professor and Dean-Elect, Harvard Graduate School of Education 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
President, I'he Hogg Eoundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex. 
President, Spencer Eoundation, Chicago, 111. 
II'jM stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange, 
other exchanges in the United States, and exchanges in Austria, 
Belgium, (Canada, England, Erance, Japan, Switzerland, 
the Netherlands and the Eederal Republic of Clermany. 
PRINTED IN USA 
International Business Machines (Corporation 
(Corporate Headquarters 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
Slock Transfer 
Offuxs: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
Co-Transfer Anan s: 
'Erust General du Canada 
National Trust (Company, L.imited 
Registrars: 
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York 
'I'he Eirst National Bank of (Chicago 
Montreal Trust Company 
Armonk, N.V. 
lojo^ 
yiy Fifth Avenue, New York, N.V. 
10022 
yiy Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 
10022 
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 
60611 
1100 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H^B 2G7 
21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M^C 
iBj 
JO West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 
looi} 
One First National Plaza, Chicago, III. 60670 
777 Dorchester Boulevard West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, HjB 
4A^ 
/5 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M^H 
1B4 


===== PAGE 52 =====
f
^ 
International 
: 
Business Machines 
Gorporation 
'y' 
Armonk, R Y 
10504 
