

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: 
1 Financial Highlights 
2 Letter to Stockholders 
5 Goals for the Decade 
Z3 IBM Organization 
Z4 IBM and the Community 
27 Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
Earnings 
Management Discussion-Results of Operations 
Financial Position 
Management Discussion-Financial Condition 
Funds Flow 
Stockholders' Equity 
Notes to Financial Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
Supplemental Financial Information 
46 Directors and Officers 
48 Stockholder Information 
Cover: The IBM Personal Computer, specially 
equipped 
with voice output, is being used to help teach some 
10,000 kindergarten and first grade students to read 
and write. School districts in Florida, 
Massachusetts, 
Minnesota, New York, North Carolina, Texas 
and Washington, D.C., are participating 
in a national 
evaluation of the Personal Computer-based 
language 
arts teaching program. The six-year-old in the cover 
photo is responding to picture and word cues on 
the screen and instructions from the computer's voice 
digitizer during an exercise in phonics. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 31,1982 
International Business Machines Corporation 
Highlights of the year: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1 9 8 2 
1 9 8 1 ' 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
$ 34,364 
$ 2 9 , 0 7 0 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 
7 , 9 3 0 
$ 
6 , 2 6 0 
U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes 
$ 
3,521 
$ 
2 , 6 5 0 
Net earnings 
$ 
4 , 4 0 9 
$ 
3 , 6 1 0 
Per share 
$7-39 
$ 6 . 1 4 
Cash dividends paid 
$ 
2 , 0 5 3 
$ 
2 , 0 2 3 
Per share 
$ 3 . 4 4 
$ 3 . 4 4 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
$ 
6 , 6 8 5 
$ 
6 , 8 4 5 
Return on stockholders' equity 
2 3 . 4 % 
2 1 . 1 ' 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 
3 2 , 5 4 1 
$ 2 9 , 1 0 7 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 
$ 
1 7 , 5 6 3 
$ 
1 6 , 7 9 7 
Working capital 
$ 
4 , 8 0 5 
$ 
2 , 9 8 3 
Long-term debt 
$ 
2 , 8 5 1 
$ 
2 , 6 6 9 
Stockholders' equity 
$ 
1 9 , 9 6 0 
$ 
1 7 , 6 7 6 
Number of employees 
3 6 4 , 7 9 6 
3 5 4 , 9 3 6 
Number of stockholders 
7 2 5 , 7 4 5 
7 4 2 , 1 6 2 
* During the year ended December 31,1982, the company 
adopted Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52, 
"Foreign Currency Translation." The consolidated financial 
statements for 1981 and 1980 have been restated to give effect 
to this accounting change. 
IBM's Operations: 
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are in the field 
of information-handling systems, equipment and services to solve 
the increasingly complex problems of business, government, 
science, space exploration, defense, education, medicine and many 
other areas of human activity. IBM's products include data 
processing machines and systems, telecommunications systems 
and products, information distributors, oflice systems, type-
writers, copiers, educational and testing materials, and related 
supplies and services. Most products are both leased and sold 
through IBM's worldwide marketing organizations. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders 
IBM delivered record quantities of products 
and services to its customers in 1982. As a result, 
revenues and earnings reached an historic high. 
The company's continuing investments in 
advanced technology and efficient production 
and development facilities, along with invest-
ments in marketing and service support to 
our customers, were key factors in achieving 
these results. The company's progress, in the face 
of a worldwide recession and a stronger U. S. 
dollar relative to other major currencies, is a fur-
ther indication of the health of our business 
around the world. 
IBM worldwide net earnings for the year 
ended December 31, 198Z, were $4,409 million, 
compared with $3,610 million for 1981. Net 
earnings were $7.39 per share, based on 596.7 
million shares, the average number outstand-
ing during 1982. in the prior year, net earnings 
were $6.14 per share on 5878 million shares. 
Worldwide gross income was $34,364 mil-
lion in 1982, an increase of 18.2 percent over 
$29,070 million in 1981. Sales increased 30.3 per-
cent over 1981, rentals increased 2.6 percent 
and services, 20.6 percent. 
In the quarter ended December 31,1982, 
net earnings were $ 1,500 million, or $2.50 per 
share, compared with $ 1,173 million, or $ 1.99 per 
share, for the same period of 1981. Gross in-
come in the fourth quarter of 1982 was $11,074 
million. It compares with $8,993 million in 
the fourth quarter of 1981. These were record 
quarterly and annual gross income and net 
earnings for IBM. 
Operations outside the U. S., included in the 
consolidated results, had net earnings of $ 1,649 
million in 1982 and $1,541 million in 1981. 
Gross income was $ 15,336 million and $ 13,982 
million in the respective years. 
In the fourth quarter of 1982, IBM adopted 
Financial Accounting Standard No. 52 (FAS No. 
52) on Foreign Currency Translation, effective 
January 1, 1982. For consistency, 1980 and 1981 
results have been restated. Details of this change 
are covered under "Accounting Change—Foreign 
Currency Translation" on page 36. 
Even after adoption of FAS No. 5 2, period-to-
period comparisons continue to be affected by 
the strengthening of the U. S. dollar relative to the 
currencies of many countries. The effects of 
these currency rate changes on business volumes 
and operating decisions are difficult to quantify. 
However, it is estimated that had currency rates 
remained constant with those in 1981, gross 
income for 1982 would have been approximately 
$ 1,800 million greater and net earnings would 
have been approximately $300 million greater 
than reported. 
Before- and after-tax margins have con-
tinued to improve over 1981 despite higher 
effective income tax rates, which partially offset 
improvements resulting from both higher gross 
profit margins and improved expense to gross 
income relationships. Current-year results con-
tinue to reflect major capital expenditures to 
satisfy long-term requirements for IBM products 
and services. 
The 1982 results show significant growth 
for both net orders and net installations. During 
the second half, IBM experienced some softness 
in orders because of economic conditions. 
Shipments of advanced, large-scale processors 
and 3380 direct access storage devices are strong. 
Strong Position 
IBM is in a good position to take advantage 
of the growing worldwide demand for informa-
tion processing products. Investments in 
research and development are providing a stream 
of new products to meet the evolving needs of 
an expanding range of customers. Investments in 
plant and equipment are providing the capacity 
to manufacture those products in unprece-
dented volumes—on a scale that gives us a com-
petitive edge in the industry. 
Those investments have been sizable. In the 
last five years, we have added almost 25 million 
square feet of manufacturing and laboratory 
space. Our investment in land, buildings and 
equipment during that period was more than $10 
billion. Annual research and development 
expenditures, which first passed the $i billion 
mark in 1976, exceeded $2 billion in 1982. 
The entire organization has been reshaped 
so that we can more efficiently manufacture, 
market, install and service higher business vol-
umes. And we are realizing significant results 
from productivity and quality programs initiated 
throughout the business. 
At the moment, of course, we still face 


===== PAGE 5 =====
John R. Opel, President and Chief Executive Officer!Frank T. Cary, Chairman of the Board 
worldwide economic uncertainties. We are ex-
amining investment decisions carefully, keeping 
our options open against possible prolonged 
negative effects of the recession. But we 
will not compromise the foundation we have in 
place to meet future growth prospects. 
Technological Leadership 
Underpinning that foundation is IBM's 
technological leadership. Research and devel-
opment people in IBM laboratories worldwide 
continue to deliver the industry's leading prod-
ucts and processes on every front important to 
our future. 
We have developed and are producing in 
volume, on production lines of our own design, 
many of the most advanced, most reliable semi-
conductor chips in the industry. 
Packaging—the assembly and interconnec-
tion of these chips in a machine—is one of IBM's 
great technical strengths. The circuit board and 
module technologies in IBM's large-scale proc-
essors lead the industry. 
Our 3380 disk file, with its thin film read/ 
write head, represents the state-of-the-art in disk 
storage technology. 
New Products 
In 1982, we made a number of announce-
ments that continued our pattern of improving 
price/performance across the product line. 
The IBM 3084, the new top-of-the-line 
processor, was added to our large-scale, 
advanced-technology series. The 3084 and four 
additional new processors extended our family 
of large systems, allowing users of smaller 
processors in the series to move up to larger 
processors in an orderly, efficient way. 
New hardware and software offerings, 
including a more powerful processor for the 
4300 series and enhanced programming to link 
IBM's major office systems products, strength-
ened our mid-range and small systems. 
The new IBM Scanmaster I is an important 
addition to the office systems area. This commu-
nications terminal scans graphic, typed or 
handwritten material, then transmits it to a cen-
tral processor for storage and distribution to 
multiple locations. The terminal also can send 
material directly to another Scanmaster. 
Our product line reached into new business 
areas in 1982 with announcements of two pro-
grammable robotic systems for industrial use, 
and the IBM Instruments Computer System, 
designed to improve productivity in laboratory 
environments. 
High Shipment Levels 
The amount of computing power being 
shipped continues to grow. Shipments of 
our large-scale processors were strong in 1982 
and there is a healthy backlog of orders. As 
production levels grow, we expect shipments 
of our large processors to increase again in 1983. 
IBM 3380 large-system disk files are being 
shipped in volume. During 1982, we more than 
doubled our production rate for this product. 
Shipments of the IBM Personal Computer 
are well ahead of our expectations and are a 
dramatic demonstration of the increase in vol-
ume taking place in our business. Production 
plans for the Personal Computer have been 
significantly expanded. 
Emphasis on Quality 
As we increase volumes and reach new 
users of our products and services, we are in-
tensifying our emphasis on quality in all aspects 
of the business. We have set up programs in 
every operating unit to give all employees a role 
in improving quality. These programs stress 
defect-free work in everything we do, from test-
ing a product to writing a memo. Quality pro-
grams for our suppliers throughout the world 
ensure their commitment to meeting the same 
high standards we set for ourselves. 
And we have established an additional qual-
ity guideline that makes it clear that any new 
product we ship must be superior in quality to the 
one it replaces, as well as to competitive products. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Safeguarding IBM Property 
During 1982, we found it necessary to take 
legal action to halt the theft or misappropriation 
of IBM proprietary information. In one case, 
two major Japanese companies and a number of 
individuals were indicted by a Federal grand jury 
in California. IBM filed a related civil suit. An-
other case involved the misappropriation of IBM 
trade secrets by three former IBM employees. As 
a result of our civil lawsuits, we were successful 
in recovering our property and the defendants 
were prohibited from making any use of it. 
Actions like these are necessary if we are 
to protect the business and the interests of our 
stockholders and employees. Our investments 
in research and development and the innovative 
ideas of our employees are IBM's stake in the 
future. We will do everything appropriate to safe-
guard those assets. 
Addressing Future Opportunities 
By the end of the 1980s, the information 
processing industry is expected to grow to more 
than $i trillion. Not only will the industry as 
we know it become much larger, it will also 
expand in a number of new directions. IBM's 
intention is to address business opportunities 
across the information-handling spectrum. 
Through our traditional structure, we 
market large and medium systems, small com-
puters for business and personal use, displays, 
storage devices, word processing products, soft-
ware and service. And we have widened our 
scope to focus on other promising growth areas, 
such as robotics, telecommunications and 
network services. 
We also are adapting the ways we do 
business—giving our customers more options 
and ensuring that we stay competitive.We are 
continuing to expand our marketing channels-
selling through IBM Product Centers, telephone 
marketing and outside retailers. At the same 
time, we are offering more flexible pricing terms 
and conditions, such as volume procurement 
agreements and term lease plans. 
Business Goals 
IBM's Strategy is aimed at taking full advan-
tage of the promising potential we see for the 
information industry in the 1980s and beyond. 
At the core of that strategy are three primary 
business goals: 
We are firmly committed to profitable 
growth. We are expanding our traditional busi-
ness and investing in a variety of new entre-
preneurial opportunities with high, long-term 
potential. 
We intend to be the product leaders, 
to stay in the forefront of the industry in tech-
nology, reliability, quality and value across our 
entire product line. 
We are concentrating on efficiency in every 
aspect of our work. We want to be not only 
the low-cost producer of the highest quality 
products in the industry, but also the low-cost 
developer, seller and servicer. 
Our progress toward meeting our business 
goals, detailed in this annual report, demon-
strates that IBM is well prepared to meet the 
competitive tests of our changing industry— that 
our strategy for the 80s is working. 
IBM employees in every area of the business 
have responded with significant contributions 
to our ambitious goals. They continue to be 
IBM's greatest asset. Their dedicated efforts have 
always been the key to our success. 
January Z5, 1983, by order of the Board of Directors 
John R.Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Frank T C;irv 
^ 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Board 
This i!^-square-inch 
read-only 
memory chip used in 
IBM's most powerful 
processors represents the first 
large-scale production 
use of electron-beam 
tools to 
create specialized bit patterns 
on 
high-performance 
chips. The advanced technique allows faster 
design 
and manufacturing 
turnaround. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
^ r a d e . . - ^ 
S for the decade 


===== PAGE 8 =====
Growth 
'...expanding our traditional business and investing 
in a variety of new entrepreneurial opportuni-
ties with high, long-term potential." 
A key to the healthy growth that continues to 
characterize IBM's business is the company's 
ability to provide more information processing 
power for less money In 1982, users of IBM's 
large processors could run a mix of typical data 
processing instructions in one second at a cost of 
about seven cents. Those same instructions 
would have taken more than six minutes to exe-
cute and cost more than $14 in 1955. 
IBM continues to make significant in-
vestments in research and development in order 
to further reduce the cost of information proc-
essing and to make new applications possible. 
Investments in new facilities and equipment 
provide the capacity necessary to meet expand-
ing demand and position the company for 
profitable growth. 
Volume Shipments 
In 1982, record levels of large-scale com-
puting systems were shipped from IBM plants in 
Kingston, N.Y., Montpellier, France, and Yasu, 
Japan. Production levels increased for these 
systems and delivery schedules were shortened. 
For example, first customer deliveries of the 
3083, a new addition to IBM's large processor 
series, were made ahead of schedule. Shipments 
of large systems are expected to increase again 
in 1983. 
Customer demand for IBM's advanced 
disk storage devices was very strong throughout 
the year. New shipment levels were reached for the 
3380, which stores up to 2.5 billion characters 
of information—the equivalent of 11 sets of the 
30-volume Encyclopaedia Britannica, plus four 
copies of the Manhattan telephone directory 
This storage device uses thin film read/write 
head technology, pioneered by IBM, to transfer 
data at speeds up to three million characters 
per second. 
The IBM Personal Computer became the 
most popular IBM processor during 1982. 
Even greater shipment levels of the Personal 
Computer are expected as production capacity 
High volumes of iBM^s advanced 
disk 
storage files are shipped from the company's San Jose, 
Calif, 
Berlin, Germany, and Fujisawa, 
Japan, 
plants to meet growing customer demand. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
IBM point-of-sale systems produced at the company's 
Santa Palomba, Italy, plant are prepared for 
shipment. 
The jOS,ooo-square-foot 
facility 
is the newest of IBM's 
IJ manufacturing 
plants in Europe. 
expands, the number of marketing outlets 
increases and users find new applications for 
business, education and the home. 
IBM also began deliveries of the new 4700 
finance system, a family of compact computer 
devices for teller and administrative operations 
in banks. The 4700 ofi^ers improved perform-
ance, supports more terminals and applications 
and provides more storage capacity than 
IBM's 3600 finance system. The systems are 
compatible, enabling users to "mix and match" 
devices for flexibility 
Shipments of two new models of the 3890 
document processor are scheduled for the first 
quarter, 1983. These devices minimize check-
handling tasks in financial institutions by simul-
taneously microfilming and sorting magnetic 
ink-encoded documents. 
Research and Development 
IBM's investments in research and devel-
opment will provide the advanced technologies 
and highly automated processes necessary 
to meet the growing customer demand for high-
performance products. 
In 1982, the company invested almost $2.1 
billion in research and development. This brings 
IBM's five-year investment to nearly $8 billion. 
Research and development efforts have 
produced achievements such as an experimental 
Vs-inch-square chip with a storage capacity of 
z88,ooo bits of data, the highest information 
capacity yet reported. Another innovation, 
an experimental 'A-inch 72,000-bit memory 
chip, operates 12 times faster than an IBM 
72,000-bit chip announced in 1980. 
An IBM-developed experimental ceramic 
chip carrier makes it possible to put the com-
puter logic power of an IBM System/370 Model 
138 computer in a package that can be held in 
the palm of a hand. 
The number of patents issued to IBM is an-
other measure of the results of research and 
development investments, as well as the inven-
tiveness and creativity of IBM employees. More 
than 450 U. S. patents were granted IBM in 1982, 
bringing to 2,155 the number of new ideas and 
techniques patented by IBM in the last five years. 
Exploring Future Applications 
In addition to developing advanced 
technologies, IBM's efforts also are aimed at 
finding better ways to develop products and 


===== PAGE 10 =====
Using a new technique called Scanning 
Tunneling 
Microscopy, developed at IBM's Zurich Research Labora-
tory, scientists there have been able to ''map'" surface 
variations that tneasure less than the volume of a 
single atom. The diamond-shaped pattern 
indicated 
here is formed by the topmost atoms of a silicon surface. 
This significant breakthrough will lead to a better 
understanding of the structure of surfaces, crucial to 
future advances in computer technology. 
3.5 million square feet of new plant and labora-
tory space were completed at 11 sites in five 
countries. An additional 4.8 million square feet 
are under construction worldwide. 
Expansion projects under way at a number 
of IBM locations include a 758,000-square-
foot addition to the San Jose, Calif., manufactur-
ing facility, which will significantly increase 
IBM's capacity to produce disk storage devices. 
A ioo,ooo-square-foot facility under con-
struction in Boeblingen, Germany, will be used 
to further develop IBM computer software. 
Among additions which recently became fully 
operational are a 6oo,ooo-square-foot facility to 
expand printed circuit manufacturing capacity 
at the Austin, Tex., site and a ]45,ooo-square-
foot building at the Burlington, Vt., site for semi-
conductor manufacturing support. 
In 1982, IBM-owned and leased manufac-
turing and laboratory space was increased 
by 8.3 percent to a total of almost 74 million 
square feet. 
Federal Systems Division 
The IBM Federal Systems Division ex-
panded the specialized information-handling 
equipment and services it provides to U. S. gov-
ernment agencies. New projects include the 
design and integration of flight instrumentation 
for the U. S. Air Force's new search and rescue 
helicopter. The division also received a con-
tract from the U.S. Navy for initial work on ad-
vanced sonar and submarine control systems. 
IBM computer hardware and software played a 
key role in the three successful flights of the 
A mixture of neon and argon gasglovnng 
between 
two thin glass plates creates sharp pictures, graphs and 
characters in a new IBM display screen, now being 
evaluated for a variety of applications. 
techniques to meet specific needs. Company-
wide, 14 scientific centers are exploring 
advanced applications for IBM technology and 
developing new uses for existing products. 
IBM also is working with some 150 colleges 
and universities worldwide on research projects 
to explore advanced applications. A major 
project was recently announced by IBM and 
Carnegie-Mellon University This joint effort was 
set up to develop software technology for pro-
fessional workstations and a network to give stu-
dents and faculty access to the university's 
data processing resources from the home, office 
and laboratory. 
Expanding Capacity 
IBM's expansion program to prepare for 
even greater business volumes in the years ahead 
included investments of more than $2.4 billion 
in new plant and equipment in 1982. More than 
The IBM ^/oo finance system, adapted in Japan 
to print and display Kanji characters, is improving 
productivity at some 180 branch locations of a large 
Japanese bank. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
The third satellite deployed by Satellite 
Business 
Systems, a partnership 
owned by Aetna, 
COMSAT 
General and IBM, clears the cargo bay of the Space 
Shuttle Columbia. 
IBM's Federal Systems 
Division 
supported Columbia's three missions in 1^82. 
Space Shuttle Columbia in 1982. On-board 
equipment, as well as programming used in mis-
sion control in Houston, Tex., and test and 
launch facilities at Cape Canaveral, Fla., were 
developed by this IBM division. 
Satellite Business Systems 
Satellite Business Systems, a partnership 
formed by Aetna Life & Casualty, C O M S A T 
General Corporation and IBM, launched its third 
communications satellite in 1982. The new 
satellite expands the data and voice transmission 
capacity of Satellite Business Systems by 50 
percent. IBM uses SBS satellite communications 
services to handle more than 160,000 calls 
within the IBM internal telephone network each 
business day 
During the year, this business venture 
began offering expanded low-cost, long distance 
telephone services to business and residential 
users. In addition, agreements were signed to 
provide advanced telecommunications services 
to the United Kingdom and Italy 
Supplier Investment 
Under an agreement jointly announced by 
IBM and Intel Corporation in December 1982, 
IBM will purchase a minority interest in Intel, an 
important semiconductor supplier to IBM. This 
investment will strengthen this major semicon-
ductor manufacturer's research, development 
and production capacity While IBM supplies most 
of its semiconductor needs within the company, 
IBM expects to continue making significant pur-
chases from other manufacturers, as well as from 
Intel. The planned purchase of 12 percent of 
Intel is an investment and IBM will not partici-
pate in the day-to-day operations of Intel. 
Wider Business Scope 
IBM is expanding its business interests into 
a number of high-potential growth areas, such as 
telecommunications, industrial automation and 
network services. Seven Independent Business 
Units—"businesses within the business" — 
have been established to develop and market 
specialized products and services. 
Three new Independent Business Units 
established in 1982 are: 
• IBM Information Network, operating coast-
to-coast data communications as well as 
remote computing services facilities linking 
users to its Tampa, Fla., data processing center. 
• Information Systems Services, providing 
technical, management and consulting services 
and developing customized software to meet 
specific needs of data processing customers. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
ms^ a®r «ar om. ju^s , 
•Telecommunications Carrier Products, with 
worldwide design, development, marketing and 
service responsibility for products and applica-
tions such as directory assistance systems. 
Other Independent Business Units are: 
• Biomedical Systems, which develops, manu-
factures and markets specialized biomedical 
products, such as blood-processing and electro-
cardiograph equipment. 
• IBM instruments. Inc., which markets and 
services instruments and equipment used in re-
search and development in industry, education 
and government. 
• Industrial Automation, responsible for 
advanced manufacturing devices, such as 
IBM's robotic systems. 
•Science Research Associates, Inc., which 
develops and markets educational and testing 
materials and services, including microcom-
puter software. 
European Business Units handle advanced 
manufacturing systems and telecommunica-
tions carrier products, satellite communications 
and network development. 
In addition, IBM is exploring other entre-
preneurial opportunities in areas such as educa-
tion and graphics. 
Future Growth 
The information processing industry con-
tinues growing at a healthy rate, and the amount 
of computing power IBM is able to provide per 
dollar continues growing as well. IBM employees 
and customers have translated these gains 
in price and performance into new applications. 
Pinpoint landings of the space shuttle, the 
convenience of banking through automatic 
tellers and faster and more accurate design and 
manufacturing techniques are now common-
place. Continued improvements in information 
processing will generate an expanding number of 
uses for a growing array of products and services. 
At the IBM Information 
Network's education 
center 
in Tampa, Fla., customers learn to use software 
and color graphics to help solve business problems. 
The new Independent 
Business Unit offers 
network 
management services as well as a variety of remote 
computing productivity 
tools and services. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
Product Leadership 
'...to stay in the forefront of the industry 
in technology, reliability, quality and value 
across our entire product line." 
IBM expanded its traditional product line and 
moved into new business areas in 1982 with an-
nouncements that ranged from large-scale 
processors to programmable robotic systems. 
New offerings brought further price/ 
performance improvements across the product 
line and greater communications capabilities 
among systems. Orderly, cost-effective ways for 
users to add function and capacity as their needs 
change characterized the year's announcements. 
Large Systems 
The power and range of large systems 
were extended with the announcement of the 
IBM 3084, the company's most powerful proc-
essor, and four new models in the large-scale, 
advanced-technology processor series. 
The IBM 3084 offers the speed and capacity 
to meet the growing needs of users of IBM's 
large-scale processors. It has up to 64 million 
characters of main storage, twice that of IBM's 
previous top-of-the-line processor. It also has 48 
channels to transfer data to and from peripheral 
equipment, such as storage devices and terminals. 
IBM also announced the 3081 Model 
Group G and three new 3083 models. These 
processors offer users a range of performance 
options and provide up to 32 million characters 
of main storage and as many as 24 channels. 
IBM's large systems line is based on highly 
reliable, advanced-technology thermal conduc-
tion modules and high-performance circuit 
boards.These elements are the building blocks 
for the widest span of performance and capac-
ity options in the company's history, giving 
customers a convenient, cost-effective way to 
add power as their needs expand. 
Multiple Virtual Storage/Extended Archi-
tecture (MVS/XA), IBM's advanced, large-system 
control programming that enables users to take 
full advantage of the speed and capacity of these 
IBM J081 andjoSj 
computers, hundreds of remote 
processors and more than 10,000 terminals help a major 
insurance company provide faster, more complete service 
to thousands of customers each day. This center near 
Atlanta is one of the company's three data centers serving 
4SJ000 home office, field office and agency users. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
m 
processors, is scheduled for general availability 
by the end of the first quarter, 1983. 
IBM Personal Computer 
The IBM Personal Computer was enhanced 
with the introduction of new hardware options 
and programming. Maximum main storage was 
doubled to more than half a million characters of 
information. Diskette storage, used to keep data 
readily available for processing, was increased to 
640,000 characters, twice the previous maximum. 
For business and education applications, 
enhanced communications capabilities enable 
users to link the Personal Computer to other 
devices. A new printer and 16-color display which 
can be used to depict charts and graphs were 
also introduced. 
The number and variety of Personal 
Computer programs were also significantly 
expanded with the addition of inventory control, 
general ledger and time management applications, 
as well as programs for home and leisure use. 
Early in 1983, IBM began marketing 
the Personal Computer in selected countries in 
Europe, the Middle East and Asia. 
Office Systems and Products 
IBM significantly expanded its office systems 
offerings with a new communications terminal 
and enhanced programming for linking systems. 
The new IBM Scanmaster I communications 
terminal digitizes images of graphic, hand-
written or typed material and sends it to an IBM 
computer for storage or distribution within an 
office systems network. The terminal offers office 
systems users a way to add image filing to the 
text and data handling capabilities of the 
Display writer and other IBM office workstations. 
Scanmaster 1 also can transmit directly to 
another Scanmaster, sending material at the rate 
of less than one minute per page. 
Office systems communications capability 
was further enhanced by a new version of IBM's 
Distributed Ofiice Support System (i)isoss) 
programming. Scanmaster I, Displaywriter and 
the IBM 5520 Administrative System can 
be connected through DISOSS, which already 
supported the IBM 8100 Information System. 
New licensed programs enable Display-
writer users to develop and run data processing 
applications. A higher-capacity, 66-line Display-
writer screen that makes text editing more 
convenient was announced. 
A leather goods manufacturer in Italy produces 
handcrafted products for worldwide distribution 
with 
the help of System/j8 computers to monitor shop floor 
activities and handle inventory 
control. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
Also introduced were Electronic 85 and 
65 typewriters. The Electronic 85 can store up to 
15,500 characters to simplify repetitive typing 
tasks. The Electronic 65 has a storage capacity of 
7,400 characters and can be upgraded on-site to 
the Electronic 85. 
A new top-of-the-line copier, the Series 111 
Copier/Duplicator Model 60, copies up to 70 
pages per minute and allows users to add 
features, such as automatic document feed and 
copy reduction. 
Mid-Range and Small Systems 
IBM's 4300 series of mid-range processors 
was expanded with new and enhanced models. 
The top-of-the-line 4341 Group 12 offers up to 
16 million characters of main storage and six 
data transfer channels. The entry-level 4341 
Group 9, with up to four million characters of 
main storage and three channels, is designed for 
engineering, scientific and commercial users 
who do not require the speed and capacity of 
the larger models. Also, the main storage of the 
4331 Group II was doubled tofourmillion 
characters and new communications options 
were announced for the 4321. 
The new System738 Model 7 general pur-
pose computer has up to four million characters 
of main storage, double the previous maximum. 
System/38-based office application software 
improves productivity by making it easier to 
write and store documents, keep track of 
personal appointments and generate charts. 
New System734 software includes program-
ming that makes it easier to create, maintain 
and update data files, write data entry programs 
and generate formatted reports. System734 
Einancial Planning and Modeling System soft-
ware simplifies the development of financial 
forecasting and planning models. 
The IBM Scanmaster 
I is shown in development 
tests in 
a special chamber at IBM's Fujisawa 
Laboratory 
near 
Tokyo. The new office system terminal 
transmits 
images 
of graphic, 
handwritten 
or typed material to a central 
processor for storage or distribution 
within an office 
systems 
network. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
A specialist at IBM's Advanced 
Customer 
Education 
Center near Washington, 
D.C., 
monitors a 
nationwide 
IBM network 
in which hundreds of products 
are interconnected 
using the company's 
Systems 
Network 
Architecture, 
the world's most widely 
used 
telecommunications 
architecture for 
linking 
information 
processing 
equipment. 
The performance options available with 
IBM's flexible Series/i small computer were 
expanded with the introduction of a mid-range 
processor and new control programming that 
enables users to link up to i6 processors. This 
programming also improves response time and 
offers features that improve serviceability. 
Printers, Terminals 
The new 3800 Printing Subsystem Model 3 
merges electrophotographic and laser tech-
nologies and is the fastest printer in IBM's prod-
uct line. It produces text and graphics with finer 
lines and better character resolution than earlier 
models and can operate with a variety of large-
scale IBM processors. 
Multiple 
exposure photography 
captures the motion 
of an advanced 
IBM robotic system during a printer 
com-
ponent assembly operation at the Austin, 
Tex., 
facility. 
IBM's new robotic systems are used throughout 
the 
company to perform 
a variety 
of manufacturing 
tasks. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
A new, low-cost model of the IBM 3262 
printer attaches to a variety of mid-range 
processors. New color and monochrome termi-
nals and a compact printer for use with the 
System738 and System734 give customers added 
peripheral equipment options. 
Robotic Systems 
IBM entered a new business area in 1982 
when it began marketing two industrial robotic 
systems. The advanced IBM 7565 Manufacturing 
System can be programmed for intricate opera-
tions, such as automatic assembly and electronic 
parts insertion.The IBM 7535 Manufacturing 
System can perform repetitive tasks, such 
as assembling, packing and loading parts. The 
robotic systems can be programmed with an 
advanced IBM-developed programming language. 
Scientific, Drafting Systems 
IBM Instruments, Inc., an IBM subsidiary, in-
troduced the IBM Instruments Computer System, 
which provides scientists and technicians with 
a modular, bench-top computer to control 
laboratory instruments and to collect, store and 
analyze data. Also announced were a new chro-
matograph for use with this system, and a series 
of spectrometers for biomedical, environmental, 
clinical and industrial substance analysis. 
IBM also announced its first stand-alone 
drafting product, the 7361 Fastdraft system. 
It consists of a small processor, up to two graphics 
displays, terminal console, large-format color 
plotter and specialized software. 
Meeting Users' Needs 
IBM's leading-edge products are addressing 
a rapidly expanding number of uses and users — 
from international corporations moving infor-
mation through multiple distributed processing 
networks to first graders learning phonics with 
the aid of the Personal Computer. 
The products announced by IBM in 1982 
reflect the creativity and technological contri-
butions of employees worldwide and underscore 
the company's commitment to remain in the 
vanguard of the industry. 
Laser beams in the new IBM j800 Printing Subsystem 
Model 
the company's fastest printer, scan across the 
print drum to create text and graphics at speeds up 
to 20,0^0 lines per minute. The paths of the beams are 
altered millions of times per second and are reflected 
from an 18-sided mirror spinning at thousands of 
revolutions per minute. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
Efficiency 
to be not only the low-cost producer of the 
highest quality products in the industry, but also 
the low-cost developer, seller and servicer." 
Several years ago, IBM embarked on a full-scale 
drive to become the most efficient producer of 
information products in the industry. 
In 1982, the results of a major reorgani-
zation and hundreds of efficiency measures in-
troduced throughout IBM helped move 
greater numbers of products through the or-
ganization smoothly and cost effectively 
Along with programs to support high-
volume, low-cost production, IBM employees in 
every operating unit are putting a special em-
phasis on quality. This effort stresses that doing 
a job right the first time—whether building 
a terminal, typing a letter, making a sales call or 
servicing equipment—contributes directly to 
the company's success. 
Marketing Channels 
Expanded marketing channels are provid-
ing products and services to more businesses and 
users than ever before. As product volumes in-
crease, these channels are effectively complement-
ing IBM's traditional marketing activities and 
reducing marketing costs. 
A total of 89 IBM Product Centers are 
selling office equipment, small computers, termi-
nals and supplies in major cities worldwide. 
In the U. S., the IBM Personal Computer can 
be purchased in IBM Product Centers, in more 
than 370 Sears and ComputerLand stores and in 
235 independent retail outlets designated as 
authorized Personal Computer dealers. Volume 
sales of the Personal Computer are handled 
by IBM marketing representatives as well. 
In many countries where IBM does busi-
ness, customers may order supplies and selected 
products through catalogs or by toll-free tele-
phone calls to IBM Direct centers. 
IBM also is selling selected products and 
subassemblies through authorized distributors 
and to other manufacturers. 
IBM Product Centers, such as this one in Singapore, 
provide a cost-effective way to sell IBM products and 
reach more customers. 
SINGAPORE 
m 


===== PAGE 19 =====
f/'-,'/ I't' 
A convenient repair and exchange service for IBM 
products, such as the IBM Personal Computer and the 
^yoo finance system, is offered at more than loo service 
centers in the U.S. Repair center service for selected 
products is available 
worldwide. 
An IBM-designed laser scanning system 
automatically 
verifies circuit patterns on ceramic sheets used in IBM's 
large-computer 
chip carriers. 
Installed in IBM plants in 
Sindelfingen, 
Germany, 
and East Fishkill, 
N.Y., 
the system makes Sj million decisions in five seconds. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
Service Efficiencies 
Customers may also choose from a variety 
of service options. The Customer Service 
Division is now operating more than JOG Service/ 
Exchange Centers to efficiently provide IBM 
service for selected products. The centers offer 
quick turnaround and low service costs to cus-
tomers who bring in product components. 
Through another service option recently intro-
duced in many U. S., Canadian and Japanese 
cities, customers also may make arrangements 
for an IBM courier service to pick up and deliver 
selected product components. 
The Field Engineering Division's remote 
service program, which provides customers with 
technical assistance over the telephone, has 
proved to be a cost-effective way to help users 
get faster problem resolution. About 85 percent 
of customer requests for software assistance 
are resolved without the need for an on-site 
service call. 
Also, thousands of modems, control units 
and displays are installed by customers without 
assistance from service personnel. For example, 
about 97 percent of the IBM 3279 color displays 
and 3278 and 8775 displays shipped each 
month are being installed this way. 
Administration 
A new supply management system is now 
being used by IBM's Americas/Far East Cor-
poration to coordinate orders and deliveries of 
equipment and system components from IBM 
plants around the world. With this adminis-
trative tool, marketing representatives can give 
customers committed delivery schedules within 
four days, a process that once took several 
weeks. Better scheduling and tracking of ship-
ments also reduce, by more than half, the time 
between equipment arrival in a country and in-
stallation in the customer's office. 
Development, Manufacturing 
Advanced computer-based tools and 
processes designed by IBM engineers are reduc-
ing turnaround time for developing, manufac-
turing and testing complex circuit components. 
A computer-based system that is operating 
in IBM's Burlington, Vt., facility can reduce 
design costs in some applications by as much as 
90 percent. The system automatically designs 
computer logic chips with more than 7,000 
circuits that contain some 30,000 transistors. 
The Data Systems Division uses a computer 
application to convert mechanical designs into 
three-dimensional drawings, enabling engineers 
to view and position largc-scale processor com-
ponents. This application helps optimize the 
A new, automated materials distribution 
center 
at IBM's Greenock, Scotland, facility speeds parts to 
an adjoining manufacturing 
plant, which supplies 
terminals and controllers to Europe, the Middle East 
and 
Africa. 
An IBM marketing representative 
in San Francisco 
uses a regional information network to perform such 
tasks as business planning, 
scheduling meetings and 
electronically distributing 
documents. Similar 
advanced 
office and information systems used throughout 
IBM improve employee efficiency in every aspect of 
IBM's business. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
use of space in IBM's large systems, critical to 
the high-performance levels of these processors. 
IBM's Engineering Design System enables 
engineers and researchers in zy locations world-
wide to share information on current circuitry 
designs and keep pace with rapidly changing 
technology. The system also is used as an 
advanced design tool for tasks such as custom-
izing circuits and testing designs against 
performance criteria. 
Focus on Quality 
During the year, activities in every oper-
ating unit focused attention on the necessity to 
design and produce products that are less 
expensive to build, easier to install and require 
little maintenance. 
At the new IBM Quality Institute and 
through other companywide educational pro-
grams, managers explore the topic of quality and 
the process of improving operations. Divisions 
set targets reflecting IBM'S objectives to deliver 
defect-free products and services and ensure 
quality leadership. 
In addition, more than 2,000 quality circles 
have been formed companywide to foster 
employee participation in improving quality and 
efficiency 
Suggestion Program 
IBM encourages employees to look beyond 
their own specific job responsibilities for ways to 
improve the company's operations. The com-
pany's suggestion plan provides cash awards that 
are tied to dollar savings resulting from inno-
vations not directly related to an employee's job 
responsibilities. 
In 1982, more than $12 million was 
awarded to 30,000 employees companywide for 
suggestions representing a savings of more 
than $60 million. 
The efforts and ideas IBM employees bring 
to their jobs continue to be the company's 
most important asset in the drive for efficiency 
'i.'r. 
. a : 
Delivery schedules ofproducts, such as this disk file for a 
Canadian bank, are improved due to an order entry and 
inventory control system tied to IBM 
manufacturing 
facilities 
worldwide. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
To conduct its business throughout the world, 
IBM is organized into the following groups, divisions 
and wholly owned subsidiaries: 
Information Systems Group 
Customer Service Division 
Provides maintenance, related support and pro-
gramming services within the U S. and its ter-
ritories for designated systems and products 
developed primarily by the Information Systems 
and Communications Group. 
Federal Systems Division 
Provides specialized information-handling and 
control systems to the Federal government for 
seaborne, spaceborne, airborne and ground-
based environments. Also participates in applied 
research and exploratory development. 
Field Engineering 
Division 
Provides maintenance and related services with-
in the US. and its territories for all current IBM 
systems and products and designated new 
systems and products developed primarily by the 
Information Systems and Technology Group, 
as well as support for specified IBM program offer-
ings. Has overall responsibility for the distribu-
tion of all hardware and software products and 
related publications. The division also provides 
maintenance, marketing support and central 
programming service for assigned products. 
Nat lonal Accounts Division 
Has marketing and field administration 
responsibility within the U.S. and its territories 
for the full standard line of IBM products, its 
assigned customers are selected large accounts 
with complex information processing needs. 
National Marketing Division 
Has marketing and field administration 
responsibility within the U.S. and its territories 
for the full standard line of IBM products. 
Its assigned customers are large, medium and 
small accounts. 
Systems Supplies Division 
Has responsibility for formulating worldwide 
business strategy for information processing 
supplies and accessories; for manufacturing or 
procurement, and marketing within the U. S. and 
its territories of IBM supplies and services. 
Information Systems and Technology Group 
Data Systems Division 
Has worldwide development and associated 
programming responsibility for large, complex 
systems, with primary emphasis on high-
performance products, plus U. S. manufacturing 
responsibility for those systems. 
General Products Division 
Has worldwide development and U. S. manufac-
turing responsibility for storage systems, includ-
ing tape units, disk products and mass storage 
systems, program products and product-related 
programming. 
General Technology Division 
Has worldwide development and product assur-
ance and U.S. manufacturing responsibility 
for logic, memory and special semiconductor 
devices and associated packaging. The division 
also procures components for the IBM World 
Trade Americas/Far East Corporation and U. S. 
operating units. 
Information Systems 
and Communications Group 
Communication Products Division 
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
facturing responsibility for telecommunications 
systems, office systems, display products, 
distribution industry systems and related pro-
gramming. The division serves as the worldwide 
architectural and systems focal point for office 
systems and Systems Network Architecture 
activities. 
Information Products Division 
Has worldwide development and related 
programming and U. S. manufacturing responsi-
bility for typewriters, copiers and systems 
for banking and manufacturing industries, and 
for peripheral equipment, including printers, 
copier systems, keyboards, diskettes and 
associated supplies. 
System Products Division 
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
facturing responsibility for small and inter-
mediate-sized general purpose systems, robotic 
systems and related programming. Its respon-
sibility for the IBM Personal Computer also 
includes U.S. marketing through retail channels. 
Other Divisions 
Real Estate and Construction Division 
Manages the selection and acquisition of sites, 
the design and construction of buildings and the 
purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM opera-
tions in the U. S. The division has responsibility 
for assessing real estate projects outside the 
U. S., as well as for IBM's worldwide energy and 
environmental programs. It also provides facility 
services to selected headquarters locations. 
Research Division 
Brings scientific understanding to bear on 
areas of company interest through basic research 
and development of technologies of potential 
long-range importance. 
Subsidiaries 
IBM Credit Corporation 
Offers term leases and finances installment pay-
ment agreements on IBM information-handling 
equipment in the U. S. 
IBM Instruvients, Inc. 
Has responsibility for IBM's efforts in the ana-
lytical instruments field, including marketing 
and servicing selected products in the U. S. 
Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Has worldwide development, publication and/or 
marketing responsibility for a wide range of 
educational and testing materials, services and 
microcomputer software designed for use 
in elementary and secondary schools, colleges, 
businesses and the home. 
IBM World Trade Americas I Far East Corporation 
With a territory extending across four conti-
nents, this subsidiary is responsible for IBM 
operations in 46 countries, including Australia, 
Brazil, Canada and Japan. 
IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/ 
Africa Corporation 
Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe, located 
in Paris, it is responsible for IBM operations in 
85 countries. 
IBM World Trade Corporation 
Provides designated support to IBM World Trade 
organizational units. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
IBM has had a long-standing practice of support-
ing social, educational and cultural programs. 
In 1982, IBM contributions of cash grants, equip-
ment and other resources reached a record of 
$80 million worldwide. 
Educational Contributions 
IBM support for colleges and universities in 
many parts of the world concentrates on areas 
where the needs of education and the long-term 
interests of the company coincide. 
In 1982, IBM announced a program to 
provide $50 million in cash and equipment to 
help selected universities develop and update 
manufacturing systems engineering courses. 
Of the total, $10 million in cash grants will be 
shared by five or six universities over the next 
four years to implement or improve curricula at 
the master's degree level. IBM also will make 
available up to 20 computer-aided design and 
manufacturing systems. 
Matching cash grants of S6 million were 
made to more than 1,300 universities in 1982. 
Contributions to colleges and universities by em-
ployees, retirees and their spouses are matched 
by IBM on a 2 to 1 basis. Since 1959, employee 
gifts and company matching grants have totaled 
nearly $50 million. 
In 1982, 196 fellowships for graduate work 
were awarded worldwide in such fields as en-
gineering, information systems and computer 
science. The company also sponsored several 
hundred scholarships for minority students in 
the U.S. 
IBM is working with universities outside the 
U S. on a number of projects, such as upgrading 
business management curricula in Australia, the 
Philippines and Indonesia, and developing a 
prototype system for alcohol fuel production 
in Brazil. 
A four-week seminar for postgraduate level 
researchers and university professors was 
sponsored by IBM in Courchevel, France, in 1982. 
Called the IBM Europe institute, this seminar 
was the first of a series of meetings at which infor-
mation on advanced technology and applica-
tions was presented to leading members of the 
European scientific community 
IBM also sponsors a number of.educational 
exhibitions in museums throughout the world. 
Among major exhibitions is "Calculating to 
Computing...the Dawn of the Information Age," 
which opened in 1982 at the Museum of Science 
and Industry in Chicago. This comprehensive 
display on innovations in computing is on long-
term loan. During 1982, IBM also supported the 
National Science Museum in Tokyo and spon-
sored the opening of the Museum of Technology 
in Winterthur, Switzerland. 
Faculty Loan 
More than 60 IBM employees participated 
in the Faculty Loan Program in 1982, most of 
them teaching at colleges with predominantly 
minority enrollments. These company-paid 
leaves are for one academic year. Since 1971, 
more than 370 employees have taught at nearly 
100 institutions. 
During the same period, more than 500 
U. S. employees were granted social service leaves 
to work for national or community nonprofit 
organizations. In 1982, more than 100 employees 
were granted leaves. 
Job Training 
IBM placed special emphasis during the year 
on job training. The company now provides sup-
port to 21 major job training centers for the 
socially and economically disadvantaged in the 
U.S. The centers—13 of them opened in 1982 — 
are operated in connection with nonprofit, 
community-based organizations in urban areas. 
Instructors and equipment are provided for 
courses in programming, computer operation, 
data entry and word processing. The job place-
ment rate is more than 80 percent for the 
6,000 students graduated from these training 
programs since the first center was opened in 
1968. Additional centers will be opened in 1983. 
Some 200 smaller community job training 
centers teaching typing and data entry skills also 
Young scientists at the Asian Institute of Technology 
near Bangkok, Thailand, study ways to help solve 
such world challenges as food production, 
housing and 
energy. IBM helps support this international 
center, 
which has graduated 
2,000 students from some 
20 Asian 
countries. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
Students at an IBM-sponsored job training 
center 
in Houston, one of zj major centers opened in ipSz, 
attend a class in the new facility's computer room. 
receive IBM assistance. More than 150,000 stu-
dents have completed courses at these centers in 
the past 14 years. 
Since the mid-1970s, IBM has helped estab-
lish 22 job training centers for the physically 
disabled. More than 850 handicapped persons 
have been trained at these centers as entry-level 
programmers. 
Community Programs 
As part of its expanded public responsi-
bility efforts in 1982, IBM introduced a 
training seminar for executives of nonprofit or-
ganizations. The five-day program, designed to 
enhance skills in planning, finance and manage-
ment, will continue through the third quarter 
of 1983. More than 860 representatives of 
organizations such as the National Urban 
League, the American Red Cross and many small 
community groups attended the Community 
Executive Program-'82. 
IBM supports employee involvement in 
after-hours volunteer work for nonprofit 
organizations through the IBM Fund for Com-
munity Service. This program aids specific 
projects in which an IBM employee, retiree or 
spouse has a continuing mvolvement. In 1982, 
grants amounting to about $2 million were pro-
vided to assist about 1,000 projects. 
Worldwide, IBM supports a wide variety of 
projects, such as helping provide Braille text-
books for schools in Mexico and eyeglasses for 
needy children in Thailand. In Belgium, IBM 
aids university-level, handicapped computer pro-
gramming students by providing computer 
output in Braille, special equipment and job 
placement assistance. 
Affirmative Action within IBM 
IBM is actively engaged in affirmative action 
programs to hire and provide advancement 
opportunities for women, minorities and the 
physically handicapped. 
Of the nearly 15,000 persons hired in the 
U.S. in 1982, 40 percent were women and 19 
percent were minorities. At year-end, IBM had 
approximately 3,000 women managers and 
2,600 minority managers. 
Several thousand handicapped persons are 
employed by IBM worldwide. Among workplace 
accommodations for them are "talking" termi-
nals, Braille translations and audio cassettes 
for the blind and typewriter-assisted telephones 
for the deaf. 
The company continued to expand pur-
chasing of products and services from minority-
owned businesses in the U. S. The number of 
minority-owned suppliers grew in 1982 to 700 
companies doing more than $79 million worth 
of business with IBM. Purchases from 400 com-
panies owned primarily by women increased 
to more than $40 million. Purchases from 80 
companies owned by suppliers who employ large 
numbers of handicapped workers totaled more 
than $16 million. 
Cultural Activities 
Direct grants from the company are made 
each year to museums, performing arts com-
panies, public television and other cultural 
organizations. 
Cultural institutions received added 
financial support in 1982 from IBM employees, 
retirees and their spouses under the company's 
new Matching Grants to the Arts Program. 
IBM's support of the arts on television in-
cluded worldwide distribution of "Picasso: 
A Painter's Diary," which was translated into 
nine languages and shown in 30 countries. "Ian 
McKellen Acting Shakespeare" was shown on 
U. S. public television, and complementary class-
room materials were mailed to 25,000 schools. 
The program also will be distributed worldwide 
during 1983. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
'Thomas Eakins: Artist of Philadelphia" 
one of the 
major art exhibits supported by IBM in ip82, is viewed 
by visitors at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston. 
In Memoriam 
Albert L.Williams, a member of the IBM 
Advisory Board and former president of the 
IBM Corporation, died on December 30, 1982. 
In recognition of the key role he played in 
the success of the company, John R. Opel, IBM 
president and chief executive officer, said, 
"Many of the fine things about IBM that we take 
for granted today are based on his wisdom. 
We shall miss him." 
A1 Williams joined IBM as a salesman in 
1936 and, after holding a number of sales and 
management positions, became controller 
of the company in 1942. He served in various 
executive capacities before becoming president 
in 1961. Following his retirement as president 
in April 1966, he served as chairman of the 
executive and finance committees. He retired 
from the Board of Directors in 1981. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity 
of the financial information presented in this 
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The 
accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles, applying certain esti-
mates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of 
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, 
of organizational arrangements with clearly 
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of 
authority. We believe this system provides 
reasonable assurance that transactions are 
executed in accordance with management au-
thorization, and that they are appropriately 
recorded, in order to permit preparation of 
financial statements in conformity with generally 
accepted accounting principles and to 
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain 
accountability of assets. An important element 
of the system is an ongoing internal audit 
program. 
To assure the effective administration of 
internal control, we carefully select and train 
our employees, develop and disseminate written 
policies and procedures, provide appropriate 
communication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of 
controls. We continue to believe that it is 
essential for the company to conduct its business 
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
lated into numerous languages, are distributed 
to employees throughout the world, and 
reemphasized through internal programs to 
assure that they are understood and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial 
statements. Their accompanying report is 
based on an examination conducted in accor-
dance with generally accepted auditing stan-
dards, including a review of internal accounting 
controls and tests of accounting procedures 
and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors is composed solely of outside directors, 
and is responsible for recommending to 
the Board the independent accounting firm to 
be retained for the coming year, subject to 
stockholder approval. The Audit Committee 
meets periodically and privately with the 
independent accountants, with our internal 
auditors, as well as with IBM management, to 
review accounting, auditing, internal account-
ing controls and financial reporting matters. 
John R.Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
Allen J. Krowe 
Vice President, Finance & Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors 
of International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 28, 
30, 32 and 34 through 42, present fairly 
the financial position of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its subsidiary 
companies at December 31,1982 and 1981, and 
the results of their operations and changes 
in funds for each of the three years in the period 
ended December 31, 1982, in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles applied 
on a consistent basis after restatement for the 
change, with which we concur, in the method of 
February 8, 1983 
accounting for foreign currency translation 
as described on page 36. Our examinations of 
these statements were made in accordance 
with generally accepted auditing standards and 
accordingly included such tests of the account-
ing records and such other auditing procedures 
as we considered necessary in the circumstances. 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
New "fork, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 27 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1 9 8 2 
1 9 8 1 * 
1 9 8 0 ' 
Gross Income: 
Sales 
$ 1 6 , 8 1 5 
$ 1 2 , 9 0 1 
$ 1 0 , 9 1 9 
Rentals 
1 1 , 1 2 1 
1 0 , 8 3 9 
1 0 , 8 6 9 
Services 
6 , 4 2 8 
5,330 
4,425 
$ 3 4 , 3 6 4 
$ 2 9 , 0 7 0 
$ 2 6 , 2 1 3 
Cost of sales 
6 , 6 8 2 
5 , 1 6 2 
4 , 2 3 8 
Cost of rentals 
3»959 
4 , 0 4 1 
3 , 8 4 1 
Cost of services 
3»047 
2,534 
2 , 1 8 7 
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
9,578 
8,583 
8 , 0 9 4 
Research, development and engineering expenses 
3 , 0 4 2 
2,451 
2 , 2 8 7 
Interest expense 
454 
407 
273 
2 6 , 7 6 2 
2 3 , 1 7 8 
2 0 , 9 2 0 
7 , 6 0 2 
5,892 
5,293 
Other income, principally interest 
328 
3 6 8 
430 
Earnings before income taxes 
7,930 
6 , 2 6 0 
5,723 
Provision for U.S. Federal and 
non-US. income taxes 
3,52.1 
2 , 6 5 0 
2 , 3 2 6 
Net Earnings 
$ 
4 , 4 0 9 
$ 
3 , 6 1 0 
$ 
3,397 
Per share 
$ 7-39 
$ 6 . 1 4 
$ 5 . 8 2 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1 9 8 2 - 5 9 6 , 6 8 8 , 5 0 I 
1 9 8 1 - 5 8 7 , 8 0 3 , 3 7 3 
1 9 8 0 - 5 8 3 , 5 
1 6 , 7 6 4 
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36. 
The notes on pages 35 through 42 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Results of Operations 
The results of operations for the current 
year were outstanding, as reported in the Letter 
to Stockholders. 
Gross income totaled $34.4 billion, an 
increase of 18.2 percent over 1981. Gross income 
from U.S. operations increased by 26.1 percent 
while gross income from non-U. S. operations in-
creased by 9.7 percent. 
Net earnings for the year were $4.4 billion, 
up 22.1 percent over 1981. Net earnings from U.S. 
operations increased by 33.4 percent over 1981 
and from non-U. S. operations by 7.0 percent. 
Gross income from sales increased by 30.3 
percent over 1981. In 1982, the percent of gross 
income derived from sales amounted to 48.9 
percent, compared to 44.4 percent in the prior 
year. Purchase of equipment previously on rent 
grew by 29.2 percent, and purchase of newly 
manufactured equipment grew by 36.0 percent. 
In the U. S., purchase of equipment previously on 
rent grew by 50.3 percent, compared to a modest 
non-U. S. growth of 6.9 percent. The increase 
in the proportion of gross income from the pur-
chase of products reflects a trend in customers' 
choice of the method of acquisition toward 
outright purchase or sales type leases. Accord-
ingly, we saw a modest growth of 2.6 percent 
in rental revenue over 1981. 
Gross income from services showed a sig-
ficant increase of 20.6 percent in 1982. Main-
tenance gross income, which is approximately 
60 percent of the total service gross income, 
grew at 17.8 percent, while program product 
gross income, the other major element, grew at 
45.3 percent. 
Although the implementation of a new 
accounting standard on foreign currency trans-
lation has lessened the effects of currency 
changes on earnings, the financial results con-
tinue to reflect the adverse impact of the 
continued strengthening of the U. S. dollar 
against other currencies. Had currency rates 
remained constant year to year, and if the effects 
of currency rate changes on business volumes, 
pricing and other operating decisions were 
disregarded, it is estimated that gross income 
and net earnings from non-U. S. operations 
would have grown about 20 percent over 1981. 
During 1982, gross profit increased 19.3 
percent to $20.7 billion and the gross profit mar-
gin improved to 60.2 percent. The ongoing 
investment in efficient production facilities has 
allowed the company to continue to offer 
competitive products while offsetting inflation 
and producing a modest margin improvement. 
The gross profit margin on rentals improved 
by 1.7 percent. This improvement was largely 
due to price changes on short term rentals, lower 
parts and maintenance costs, and reflects quality 
improvements and better productivity in our 
worldwide service organization. 
The advance of technology continues to be 
a dominant force in this industry. Investments 
in research and development, which continued 
at high levels in 1982, amounted to $2.1 billion, 
an increase of 27.4 percent over 1981. Addi-
tionally in 1982, expenditures for product 
related engineering amounted to $1 billion, an 
increase of 17.9 percent over the prior year. 
A continued commitment to the development 
of new products and services is essential to 
maintain the health of the business. 
Selling, general and administrative expense 
as a percent of gross income was 30.9 percent 
in 1980, 29.5 percent in 1981, and 27.9 percent in 
1982. This favorable trend is due primarily to 
ongoing productivity improvements. End user 
marketing and field administration organizations 
were restructured early in 1982 into full product 
line, customer service functions. This allowed 
more effective customer coverage and the consol-
idation of administrative functions. Further, 
we were able to simplify product offerings and 
select the most cost effective marketing channels. 
The effective tax rate in 1982 increased 
by 2.1 percentage points to 44.4 percent. 
This increase was due to non-U. S. operations 
where the effective tax rate increased by 
6.7 percentage points, primarily the result of 
nonrecurring 1981 adjustments and increased 
tax rates in certain countries. 
The consolidated financial statements for 
the years 1981 and 1980 have been restated to 
give effect to the change in accounting principle 
in connection with the adoption in 1982 of 
Financial Accounting Standard No. 52 (FAS No. 
52). Non-U. S. subsidiaries, accounting for approx-
imately 85 percent of the company's non-U. S. 
gross income, operate in a local currency environ-
ment. The results of these operations are more 
effectively and accurately portrayed using local 
currency under FAS No. 52. 
IBM management is committed to three 
goals for the Eighties: profitable growth, product 
leadership and efficiency. In 1982 the company 
made major strides in achieving these goals. The 
company will continue to invest in research and 
development, engineering, in high technology 
manufacturing, in efficient development and 
production facilities, and in improved marketing 
and service while exercising prudent cost and 
expense control. 
During this past year, IBM has positioned 
itself for continued growth. IBM's advanced 
technology large-scale processors and the family 
of high-performance direct access storage devices 
were exceptionally well received this past year. 
These high technology products contributed 
significantly to the excellent incoming order flow 
across our worldwide operations. Reflecting 
the effects of the recession, the company experi-
enced a softening in orders for mid-range 
systems in the third and fourth quarters of 1982. 
Orders for office systems and low-end processors, 
including the Personal Computer, remained 
strong throughout the year. Despite continuing 
economic uncertainty, management believes the 
economic pace will quicken in 1983, and expects 
the company to continue the trend of sustained 
growth and profitability. 
$36,000 IBM Consolidated Gross Income: 
(In millions) 
1978 
'79 
'80 
'81 
1982. 
I Sales 
WM Rentals 
• • 
Services 


===== PAGE 29 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market. . . . 
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, less allowance: 
1982, $216; 1981, $187 
Other accounts receivable 
Inventories 
Prepaid expenses 
Rental Machines and Parts 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Plant and Other Property 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Deferred Charges and Other Assets 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
Loans payable 
Accounts payable 
Compensation and benefits 
Deferred income 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
Deferred Investment Tax Credits 
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 
LongTerm Debt 
Stockholders' Equity: 
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1982-602,406,128; 1981-592,293,624 
Retained earnings 
Translation adjustments 
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36. 
1982 
1981* 
$ 
405 
^>895 
4^976 
457 
3»492 
z ^ 
16,527 
7>4io 
14,240 
5»794 
$ 13,014 
9»ii7 
8,446 
1,964 
$ 32»54i 
2,854 
529 
983 
1,959 
402 
1,482 
8,209 
323 
1,198 
2,851 
5,008 
16,259 
(1,307) 
19,960 
$ 32,541 
454 
1,575 
4,382 
410 
2,803 
685 
16,599 
7,347 
12,702 
5,157 
$ 10,309 
9,252 
7,545 
2,001 
$ 29,107 
2,412 
773 
872 
1,556 
390 
1,323 
7,326 
252 
1,184 
2,669 
4,389 
13,909 
(622) 
17,676 
$ 29,107 


===== PAGE 30 =====
Financial Condition 
IBM has maintained its strong financial 
condition while continuing to invest signifi-
cantly in research and development, technology 
and modern production facilities. Expenditures 
for research and development and product 
related engineering exceeded $ 11 billion over the 
past five years. During the same period the com-
pany invested over $io billion in land, buildings, 
and machinery and equipment (see graph 
on page 33 depicting this investment). These 
investments have provided the company with 
the technology, capacity for growth, and the 
highly automated facilities to allow us to 
compete effectively. 
Funds from operations in 1982 grew 24.2 
percent to $9.7 billion. This source of funds, 
which was $1.9 billion greater than the prior 
year, was sufficient to meet the company's capital 
investment and operational needs, provide for 
dividends, and at the same time reduce external 
financing requirements. Employee stock plans 
and the dividend reinvestment plan provided an 
additional $613 million in funds. 
Conservation of capital continues to be a 
major focus in the management of IBM. Manage-
ment is mindful of the risks inherent in high 
technology, the growing scope and quality of 
competition, and uncertain economic condi-
tions. The continuing large capital requirements 
of the company have brought added focus on 
asset management. Throughout the business, 
operating measurements and unit performance 
objectives emphasize return on invested capital, 
asset turnover, cash flow and related indicators. 
A major educational program was undertaken 
this year at all management levels to center atten-
tion on these critical indices. 
IBM's consolidated financial statements 
have been restated to reflect the adoption of 
FAS No. 52. For those non-U. S. subsidiaries 
where IBM operates primarily in local currencies, 
FAS No. 52 requires that all assets and liabilities 
are translated to U S. dollars at year-end exchange 
rates. This resulted in a reduction in the 
reported book value of net assets in the current 
period of $685 million. The cumulative effect is 
reflected in the equity section of the Statement 
of Financial Position as translation adjustments. 
If the U. S. dollar continues to strengthen, 
reported net asset values will be further reduced. 
Should the dollar weaken in relation to non-U. S. 
currencies, net assets will increase. The change 
in net asset values is unrealized. There is no 
change in the productive capabilities of any of 
these assets. They continue to serve the needs of 
IBM's business activities in those countries 
affected. 
It is management's view that the translation 
adjustment account has significance in a situa-
tion where liquidation of the net assets may 
be anticipated. This is not the case with IBM's 
operations and, accordingly, the company be-
lieves this translation account is not meaningful 
when evaluating current operations and should 
be considered only over the longer term of 
the company's expected continuing operations. 
The principal effect on IBM's reported 
equity, under FAS NO. 52, given the dramatic 
strengthening of the dollar during the past three 
years, comes from translating rental machines, 
plant and other property recorded in non-U. S. 
currencies to U. S. dollars. The cumulative 
translation adjustment at December 31,1982 
amounts to $1.3 billion. Offsetting this adjust-
ment of net assets is the cumulative positive 
effect on reported earnings, for 1982 and the two 
prior years, amounting to $586 million. Thus, 
the effect on equity of implementing FAS No. 52 
is a reduction of $721 million at year-end 1982. 
The company invested $4.3 billion in rental 
machines and parts in J982 down from $4.6 
billion in the prior year. Rental machine assets 
have been and will continue to be a significant 
cash requirement for the company. However, 
a growing portion of IBM's products is being 
purchased or acquired by customers under sales 
type leases. This trend is likely to continue. 
Another dimension to the company's 
financial flexibility was added with the establish-
ment of the IBM Credit Corporation and its 
own associated capital sources. It was established 
in 1981 to finance installment payment agree-
ments with U. S. customers. In 1982 the IBM 
Credit Corporation announced a new term lease 
program which provides IBM customers with 
more financing options at competitive prices, 
terms and conditions. These financing leases are 
outright sales for accounting purposes and 
financing through the IBM Credit Corporation 
improves cash flow to IBM. Management expects 
these financing leases to become an increas-
ingly attractive means for customers to acquire 
IBM products. 
Despite periodic shortages of capital, high 
interest rates, and dramatic shifts in currency 
exchange rates, IBM has been able to utilize 
its strong credit rating to acquire appropriate 
levels of financing through worldwide sources. 
IBM has frequently borrowed in currencies other 
than the U. S. dollar. While there are risks 
associated with foreign currency obligations, 
there are also clear advantages. Interest rates 
have been much lower than comparable dollar 
loans and the exchange loss risk associated with 
repayment is minimized by the availability of 
positive cash flow from operations in most major 
countries. Consequently, the company has 
considerable financial flexibility in many different 
currencies throughout the world. IBM has approx-
imately $3.4 billion of unused lines of credit, 
mostly short term. 
The company's strong financial position, 
as exhibited by its significantly increased working 
capital, its low total debt to equity ratio of 
I to 6 and the available sources of capital around 
the world, are expected to provide IBM sufficient 
financial flexibility for the future. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1982 
1981* 
1980* 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January 1 
$ 2,029 
$ 2,112 
$ 3,771 
Provided from Operations: 
Sources: 
Net earnings 
$ 4,409 
$ 3,610 
$ 3,397 
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 
3.143 
2,753 
2,489 
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities 
capitalized in rental machines 
419 
424 
406 
Net book value of rental machines and 
other property retired or sold 
1,642 
1,212 
1,007 
Other 
85 
(189) 
90 
9,698 
7,810 
7,389 
Uses: 
Investment in rental machines 
4.^54 
4,610 
4,334 
Investment in plant and other property 
2,431 
2,235 
2,258 
6,685 
6,845 
6,592 
Increase (decrease) in deferred charges and other assets.... 
(37) 
280 
242 
Net change in working capital 
(excluding cash, marketable securities 
and loans payable) 
307 
(133) 
273 
6,955 
6,992 
7,107 
Translation effects 
30 
(53) 
(39) 
Net provided from operations 
2,773 
765 
243 
Provided from External Financing: 
Net change in long-term debt 
182 
570 
510 
Net change in loans payable 
(244) 
182 
(342) 
Net provided from external financing 
(62) 
752 
168 
Provided from (used for) Employee and Stockholder Plans 
613 
423 
(62) 
5,353 
4,052 
4,120 
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 
2,053 
2,023 
2,008 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December j 7 
$ 3,300 
$ 2,029 
$ 2,112 
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36. 
The notes on pages 35 through 42 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
$ 9 , 7 2 8 Operationst 
$ 4 , Z 5 4 Rental Machines 
$613 Stock Plans 
$ 4 8 0 New Long-Term Debt 
,431 Plant and Other Property 
flncludes Effects of Translation 
$ 2 9 8 Reduction of Long-Term Debt 
$244 Net Change in Loans Payable 
$270 Other Assets (net) 
$ 2 , 0 5 3 Cash Dividends 
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property 
Over the past five years, the company has 
invested over $10 billion in land, buildings, and 
machinery and equipment to meet customer 
demands, maintain technological leadership and 
improve productivity. These recent additions 
represent approximately two-thirds of the gross 
asset value of plant and other property as of the 
end of December, 1982. Since 1980, investments 
exceeded $2 billion in each year. Continuous 
upgrading of our facilities is essential to achieve 
our objectives. Large investments will continue 
to be required in future years. 
Investment (Additions) 
in Plant and Other Property 
(In millions) 
1 9 7 8 
' 7 9 
' 8 0 
'81 
1 9 8 1 
I Annual 
• • Cumulative for five-year period 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity 
for the year ended December 31: 
Translation 
(Dollars in millions) 
Capital Stock 
Retained Earnings 
Adjustments 
Treasury Stock 
Total 
1980* 
Stockholders' Equity, January i, 1980 
$ 3»974 
$ 11,012 
$ 
642 
$(25) 
$ 15,603 
Net earnings 
3>397 
3,397 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,008) 
(2,008) 
Capital stock issued under employee 
plans (288,816 shares) 
16 
16 
Purchases (7,674,300 shares) and sales 
(7,597,773 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee plan-net 
(75) 
(5) 
(80) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
7 
2 
Translation adjustments 
(352) 
(352) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1980 
12,326 
290 
(30) 
16,578 
1981* 
Net earnings 
3,610 
3,610 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,023) 
(2,023) 
Capital stock issued under employee 
plans (8,031,550 shares) 
394 
394 
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee plan 
(4) 
30 
26 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
3 
3 
Translation adjustments 
(912) 
(912) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1981 . . . . 
4>389 
13,909 
(622) 
17,676 
1982 
Net earnings 
4,409 
4,409 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,053) 
(2,053) 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholder plans (10,112,504 shares).... 
602 
602 
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired 
and sold under employee plans 
(6) 
(6) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
17 
17 
Translation adjustments 
(685) 
(685) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1982 
$ 5,008 
$ 16,259 
$(1,307) 
$ 
— 
$ 19,960 
*Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36. 
The notes on pages 35 through 42 
are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements: 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of 
Consolidation: 
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its U.S. and non-US. subsidiary companies, other than the IBM Credit 
Corporation, a wholly owned financing subsidiary The equity method is used to account for the 
investment in IBM Credit Corporation and for investments in joint ventures and affiliated 
companies in which IBM has 50 percent or less ownership. 
Translation of 
Non- U. S. Currency 
Amounts: 
For consolidation purposes, the financial statements of non-U, S. subsidiary companies are trans-
lated to U. S. dollars in accordance with the provisions of Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS) NO. 52, "Foreign Currency Translation." This Statement was adopted by the com-
pany in 1982, and consolidated financial statements for the years 1981 and 1980 have been restated. 
Gross 
Income: 
Gross income is recognized from sales when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon 
customer acceptance, from rentals in the month in which they accrue, and from services over the 
contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and 
contain discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly 
monthly or for a two-year period, with some covering periods up to five years. 
Depreciation: 
Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated 
useful lives. Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits 
method. Depreciation of plant and other property is computed using either accelerated methods 
or the straight-line method. 
Retirement 
Plans: 
Current service costs are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements 
in the plans are amortized generally over 10 years. 
Selling 
Expenses: 
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred. 
Income 
Taxes: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the 
effects of timing differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain 
transactions are included in taxable earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and 
amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable 
classes of property Purchased tax credits and deductions are offset against the purchase cost. 
Inventories: 
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment 
sales are included in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process applicable 
to equipment rentals is similarly valued and included in rental machines and parts. 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Accounting Change—Foreign Currency Translation 
The company adopted Statement of 
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) NO. 52, 
'Foreign Currency Translation," in the fourth 
quarter of 1982, effective January i, 1982. 
The consolidated financial statements for the 
years 1981 and 1980 have been restated to give 
effect to this change in accounting principle. 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a 
local currency environment account for approxi-
mately 85% of the company's non-U. S. gross 
income. In applying SFAS NO. 52 to financial state-
ments of these subsidiaries, assets and liabil-
ities are translated to U. S. dollars at year-end 
exchange rates. Income and expense items are 
translated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year. Translation adjustments are 
. 
accumulated in a separate component of stock-
holders' equity 
The remaining 15% of the company's 
non-U. S. gross income is derived from subsid-
iaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars 
or whose economic environment is highly 
inflationary In accordance with SFAS No. 5 2, 
inventories and plant, rental machines and other 
property, applicable to these operations, are 
remeasured in U. S. dollars at approximate rates 
prevailing when acquired. Inventories charged 
to cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured 
at historical rates. Gains and losses which result 
from remeasurement are included in earnings. 
The effects of this accounting change 
on net earnings and earnings per share are an 
increase of $449 million and $.75 in 1982, an 
increase of $302 million and $.51 in 1981 and 
a decrease of $165 million and $.28 in 1980. 
Aggregate transaction gains (losses) 
included in earnings are $(7) million in 1982, 
$78 million in 1981 and $(i8) million in 1980. 
Non-U. S. Operations 
(Dollars in millions) 
1982 
1981 
1980 
At end of year: 
Net assets employed 
Current assets 
$ 
6,299 
$ 
5^436 
$ 
5.531 
Current liabilities 
4,240 
4,108 
3.914 
Working capital 
2,059 
1,328 
1,617 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
6,740 
7,006 
Deferred charges and other assets 
887 
890 
931 
9,686 
9.370 
9.554 
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 
1,198 
1,184 
1.443 
Long-term debt 
480 
496 
437 
1,678 
1,680 
1,880 
Net assets employed 
$ 
8,008 
$ 
7,690 
$ 
7,674 
Number of employees 
150,444 
149.794 
146.973 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
$ I5»336 
$ 13,982 
$ 13,787 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 
3,226 
$ 
2,664 
$ 
2,772 
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes 
i>577 
1,123 
i.035t 
Net earnings 
$ 
1,649 
$ 
1,541 
$ 
1.737 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
$ 
2,682 
$ 
3.274 
$ 
3.367 
tSee Taxes on page 38. 
For the years 1982 and 1981, non-U. S. financial 
results were severely impacted by the strength of 
the U. S. dollar relative to the currencies of many 
countries around the world. The Management 
Discussion on page 29 refers to this effect in 
greater detail. The graphs on the following page 
further illustrate the decline in value, in rela-
tion to the dollar, of the five major foreign 
currencies in which IBM conducts most of its 
non-U. S. business. 
Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid-
iaries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $7,538 million at December 31, 
1982, $6,565 million at December 31,1981, and 
$5,943 million at December 31,1980. These 
earnings are indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S. 
operations. Accordingly, no provision has been 
made for taxes that might be payable upon 
remittance of such earnings. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Percent Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar 
German mark 
30% 
French franc 
30% 
British sterUng 
30% 
Italian lira 
Japanese yen 
1980 
1981 
198Z 
1980 
1981 
1982 
1980 
1981 
1982, 
Base-as of January i, 1980 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1982 
December 31,1981 
Finished goods 
Work in process 
Raw materials and operating supplies 
Total 
$ 
615 
2,613 
264 
$ 3,492 
$ 
544 
i»995 
264 
$ 2,803 
Rental Machines and Parts 
Rental machines and parts are comprised 
amount of $2,794 million and $2,245 million 
process and field service parts totaled $3,676 
of capitalized machines, rental machine work 
at December 31,1982 and 1981, respectively, 
million and $3,733 million at December 31,1982 
in process and field service parts. Rental machines 
with accumulated depreciation of $1,952 million 
and 1981, respectively 
include machines installed with IBM in the 
and $1,667 million. Rental machine work in 
Plant and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1982 
December 31,1981 
Land and land improvements 
Buildings 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Total 
$ 
688 
$ 
671 
5,586 
5,082 
7,966 
6,949 
14,240 
12,702 
5»794 
5»i57 
$ 8,446 
$ 7»545 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
Earnings before U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes: 
U. S. operations 
Non-U. S. operations 
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U S. income taxes: 
U. S. operations 
Non-U. S. operations 
Real estate, personal property, state and local franchise 
(including state income taxes of $292 million in 1982, $200 million in 1981, 
and $138 million in 1980), Social Security and other taxes 
Total 
The components of the provision for U. S. Federal and 
non-U S. income taxes are as follov^s: 
U.S.: 
Current 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
Net deferred investment tax credits 
Non-US.: 
Current 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
Total provision 
1982 
1981 
1980 
4,704 
$ 3,596 
$ 2,951 
3,226 
2,664 
2,77^ 
7»930 
$ 6,260 
$ 5,723 
1,944 
$ 1,527 
$ 1,291 
1.577 
1,035 
2,650 
2,326 
1,587 
1,480 
5,^63 
$ 4,237 
$ 3,806 
' 1.378 
$ 
994 
$ 
776 
212 
49 
(34) 
71 
70 
42 
1,661 
1 , 1 1 3 
784 
1,829 
1,464 
1,546 
31 
73 
(4) 
1,860 
1,537 
1,54^ 
$ 2,650 
$ 2,326 
The consolidated effective U S. Federal and 
non-U. S. income tax rate was 44.4% in 1982, 
42.3% in 1981 and 40.6% in 1980. In 1980, the 
lower effective tax rate on earnings of non-U. S. 
operations accounts for 4.2 percentage points 
of the difference between the effective rate and 
the U. S. statutory rate of 46.0%. 
The consolidated tax provision for 1980 
includes the effect of a reduction of prior 
periods income tax liabilities of $224 million 
($.38 per share), resulting from changes in tax 
laws and other adjustments of prior years income 
tax expenses. Of this amount, $207 million 
relates to non-U. S. operations. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 2 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 1 
U.S. Operations: 
9V2% notes due 1986 
S 
500 
$ 
500 
9 % % debentures due 2 0 0 4 (with sinking fund payments 1 9 8 5 - 2 0 0 3 ) 
500 
500 
1 0 . 8 0 % notes due 1 9 8 3 - 1 9 8 6 
300 
300 
Other (average interest rate at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 2 , in parentheses) payable in : 
U. S. dollars, due 1984-2012(12.9%) 
678 
416 
Swiss francs, due 1 9 8 6 - 1 9 8 7 (6.4%) 
2 5 1 
262 
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 
206 
199 
2,435 
2,177 
Non-U. S. Operations: 
Various obligations (average interest rate at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 2 , in parentheses) payable in: 
U . S . d o l l a r s , d u e 1 9 8 3 - 1 9 9 2 ( 1 2 . 1 % ) 
172 
234 
French francs, due 1 9 8 3 - 1 9 9 2 ( 1 2 . 3 % ) 
125 
179 
Japanese yen, due 1 9 8 3 - 2 0 1 2 (8.4%) 
128 
I I 
O t h e r c u r r e n c i e s , d u e 1 9 8 3 - 1 9 9 3 (16.8%) 
136 
163 
561 
587 
2,996 
2,764 
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 9V2% notes and 
debentures 
3 
4 
2,993 
2,760 
Less: Current maturities 
142 
91 
Total 
S 2,851 
$ 2,669 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on long-term 
debt outstanding at December 31, 198Z, are as follows: 
1983, $142; 1984,5265; 1985, $411; 1986,5890; 1987,5274; 1988 and beyond, 51,014. 
Interest Cost 
Interest on borrowings amounted to 
S514 million in 1982, S480 million in 1981 and 
5325 million in 1980. Of these amounts, 
S 6 o million in 1 9 8 2 , 5 7 3 million in 1981 and 5 5 2 
million in 1980 were included in the cost of 
buildings under construction, resulting in a net 
earnings increase of S3 2 million, S39 million, 
and 531 million, respectively. 
Lines of Credit 
At December 31,1982, the company had 
available unused lines of credit with a number 
of U. S. banks. These lines of credit permit the 
company to borrow up to an aggregate of 52,000 
million outstanding at any time, at interest rates 
not to exceed the banks' prime rate. Included 
in these lines of credit is 51,875 million, which is 
shared with the IBM Credit Corporation. In 
addition, a number of non-U. S. subsidiaries had 
available unused lines of credit of approximately 
5 1 , 4 0 0 million. Interest rates on borrowings 
would vary from country to country depending 
on local market conditions. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
IBM Credit Corporation 
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned 
unconsolidated subsidiary, finances install-
ment payment agreements (iPAs) relating to 
sales by IBM of its products in the United States, 
and effective July 22,1982, offers term lease 
financing to IBM customers for periods of three, 
four and five years at fixed rates. Some of the 
leases are to be effected through partnerships 
with unrelated third parties. Its operations 
commenced May I, 1981. IBM's investment in 
the IBM Credit Corporation is accounted 
for by the equity method and earnings are in-
cluded in other income iniBM's consoli-
dated statement of earnings, IBM has agreed to 
cause the IBM Credit Corporation to have a 
positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit Cor-
poration has $205 million of lines of credit 
available, in addition to those shared with the 
IBM Corporation. IBM Credit Corporation 
finances operations through public and private 
debt arrangements and retained earnings. 
IBM Credit Corporation purchased $590 million 
and $866 million of iPAs from IBM in 1982 
and 1981, respectively, and $67 million of IBM 
products for term lease customers in 1982. 
The following information has been sum-
marized from the consolidated financial 
statements of the IBM Credit Corporation. 
Additional information is available in its 1982 
Annual Report. Copies may be obtained by writ-
ing to: IBM Stockholder Relations Department, 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. 
Earnings for the year ended December 31,1982 
and for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981 
(Dollars in thousands) 
1982 
1981 
Finance and other 
income 
: S 
1 2 5 , 7 0 4 
$ 
4 9 , 2 1 2 
Expenses 
9 1 , 2 8 6 
3 4 , 2 7 0 
Provision for 
income taxes 
3,144 
5,075 
Net earnings 
: S 
31,2.74 
$ 
9,867 
Financial position 
at December 31: 
1982 
1981 
Assets: 
Cash and cash 
equivalents 
: 5 
730 
$ 
532 
Installment payment 
agreement receiv-
ables-net 
9 5 1 , 4 3 8 
6 8 9 , 5 5 3 
Net investment in 
financing leases. . . 
6 5 , 5 0 4 
— 
Note receivable-
affiliated company. 
35,000 
— 
Deferred charges 
and other assets . . 
6,697 
1,644 
Total Assets 
; i 1 , 0 5 9 , 3 6 9 
$ 6 9 1 , 7 2 9 
Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity: 
Short-term debt . . . . 
! 6 
2 0 7 , 5 7 6 
$ 3 1 8 , 4 2 6 
Due to IBM 
Corporation 
1 4 3 , 9 8 4 
9 7 , 1 6 2 
Taxes and other 
accruals 
53,975 
9,036 
Long-term debt . . . . 
5 0 8 , 1 2 0 
1 6 2 , 2 3 8 
Stockholder's equity . 
145,714 
1 0 4 , 8 6 7 
Total Liabilities and 
Stockholder's Equity J E 1 , 0 5 9 , 3 6 9 
$ 6 9 1 , 7 2 9 
Research and Development 
Research and development expenses 
amounted to $2,053 million in 1982, $1,612 
million in 1981 and $1,520 million in 1980. 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its subsidiaries have 
retirement plans covering substantially all 
employees. The company and its U. S. subsidiaries 
have trusteed, noncontributory plans for 
which costs are generally funded when accrued. 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under which 
funds are deposited with trustees, annuities are 
purchased under group contracts, or reserves are 
provided. The total cost of all plans for 1982, 
1981 and 1980 was $1,187 million, $1,060 million 
and $1,109 rnillion, respectively. Amendments 
providing for increased retirement benefits were 
adopted by the U. S. and certain non-U. S. 
plans in 1982. These amendments accounted for 
approximately $99 million of the 1982 cost. 
A comparison of the estimated accumu-
lated benefits, net assets, and number of individ-
uals receiving benefits is presented below for 
the U. S. retirement plans: 
At December 31 
(Dollars in millions) 
1981 
Actuarial present value of 
accumulated benefits: 
Vested 
$ 
6,748 
$ 
5,158 
Nonvested 
238 
2 3 2 
$ 
6,986 
$ 
5,390 
Net assets available 
for benefits 
$ 
8,390 
$ 
6 , 1 5 5 
Number of individuals 
receiving benefits 
1 5,400 
13,538 
The assumed rate of return used in deter-
mining the actuarial present value of accumulated 
benefits was 5V2% for both years. This rate repre-
sents the current estimate of the long-term 


===== PAGE 40 =====
rate of return expected to be earned over the 
life of the plans. Assumed future salary increases 
were not considered in the determination 
of the actuarial present value of accumulated 
benefits in accordance with the requirements of 
the Financial Accounting Standards Board. 
At December 31, 1982, and December 31, 
1981, it is estimated that the market value of 
fund assets and reserves of individual non-U. S. 
plans exceeded or approximated the actuarially 
calculated present value of vested benefits. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
enables employees who are not participants 
in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital 
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% 
of their compensation. The price an employee 
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. During 
1982, employees purchased 7,239,303 shares, 
including 391,743 treasury shares, for which 
$416 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, 
1982, 28,600,364 reserved unissued shares 
remain available for purchase under the Plan. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for grant-
ing officers and other key employees options 
to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the 
market price on the day of grant. Options 
have a maximum duration of 10 years and may 
be exercised in up to four annual installments, 
commencing one year from date of grant. 
The plan provides, subject to executive com-
pensation committee approval, that payment 
upon exercise may be made using IBM stock 
as well as cash. 
The following table summarizes stock 
option transactions during 1982: 
Number of Shares 
Available 
Under Option 
for Option 
Balance at 
January i, 1982. . . . 
1 4 , 8 8 5 , 0 0 9 
1 1 0 , 8 1 6 
Options granted 
2.,565,457 
(2,565,457) 
Options terminated . . 
(773,099) 
84,035 
Options exercised . . . 
(2,399,422) 
— 
Expired under 
the 1978 plan 
— 
(162,782) 
Reserved under 
the 1982 plan 
— 
9,500,000 
Balance at 
December 31,1982 . 
14,2.77,945 
6 , 9 6 6 , 6 1 2 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1982 . 
9,436,546 
Options for 2,399,422 shares were exer-
cised during 1982 at an average option price of 
$62.89 per share. The 14,277,945 shares under 
option at December 31,1982, are at option 
prices ranging from $41.60 to $85.40 per share. 
Litigation 
In December, 1980, the Commission of the 
European Communities filed a "statement of 
objections" seeking modification of certain IBM 
business practices in the Common Market 
area. The Commission may also seek to impose 
fines. Most of the practices to which the 
Commission has objected have been held to be 
legitimate competition in the United States. 
IBM has denied the charges in the proceeding 
and is defending its position. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Segment Information 
IBM operates primarily in the single industry 
segment encompassing information-handling 
systems, equipment and services. This segment 
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross 
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. 
Financial information by geographic area 
for the years 1982, 1981 and 1980 is summarized 
below to provide a better understanding of IBM's 
operations. Material interdependencies and 
overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and, 
therefore, the information may not be indicative 
of the financial results of, or investments in, 
the reported areas were they independent 
organizations. 
Geographic Areas 
(Dollars in millions) 
United States 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Americas/Far East 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Eliminations 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets 
Consolidated 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
1982 
1981 
1980 
$ 19,028 
I>875 
$ 20,903 
2,766 
19,028 
$ 10,260 
337 
$ io>597 
1.196 
9.197 
$ 
5,076 
651 
$ 
5>7^7 
450 
4,9^5 
$ (2,863) 
(3) 
(609) 
$ 34,364 
$ 4>409 
$ 3 V 5 4 I 
$ 15,088 
I>857 
$ 16,945 
2,094 
16,022 
$ 
9,312 
383 
$ 
9,695 
1,074 
8,981 
$ 
4,670 
659 
S 
5>3^9 
478 
4,694 
$ (2,899) 
(36) 
(590) 
$ 29,070 
$ 
3,610 
$ 29,107 
$ 12,426 
1,615 
$ 14,041 
1,7^5 
13,737 
$ 
9,932 
491 
$ 10,423 
1,360 
9,608 
$ 
3,855 
450 
s 
4,305 
388 
4,054 
$ (2,556) 
(76) 
(568) 
$ 26,213 
$ 
3,397 
$ 26,831 
As described on page 36, the company adopted 
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 
No. 52, Foreign Currency Translation, in the 
fourth quarter of 1982, effective January i, 1982. 
For the years 1981 and 1980, the geographic area 
information for the Europe/Middle East/Africa 
and the Americas/Far East areas has been 
restated accordingly 
The impact resulting from the restatement of 
assets and liabilities for those subsidiaries which 
operate in a local currency environment is pri-
marily afl^ecting the Europe/Middle East /Africa 
area. The remaining 15% of the company's non-
U S. gross income is derived from subsidiaries and 
branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose 
economic environment is highly inflationary, 
predominantly the Americas/Far East area. 
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, 
European operations accounted for approximately 
95% of gross income in 1982, 1981 and 1980. 
Net earnings in 1980 include the effect of a 
reduction of prior periods tax liabilities of 
$17 million in the United States, $187 million 
in Europe/Middle East/Africa and $20 
million in Americas/Far East. 
Interarea transfers, consisting principally of 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
are priced at cost plus an appropriate service 
charge, applied consistently throughout the world. 
The cost and service charges that relate to asset 
transfers are capitalized and depreciated or 
amortized by the importing area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of 
service chaises, and the net change during the 
year in unamortized service charges, have been 
eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1982 
1981* 
1980* 
1979 
1978 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales. 
rentals and services 
$ 34^364 
$ 29,070 
$ 26,213 
S 22,863 
$ 21,076 
Net earnings 
4,409 
3,610 
3.397 
3,011 
3 , 1 1 1 
Per sharet 
7-39 
6.14 
5.82 
5.16 
5.32 
Cash dividends paid 
2.053 
2,023 
2,008 
2,008 
1,685 
Per sharet 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
2.88 
Investment in plant, rental 
machines and other property 
6,685 
6,845 
6.592 
5.991 
4,046 
Return on stockholders' equity 
23.4% 
2 1 . 1 % 
2 1 . 1 % 
21.2% 
23.8' 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 32>54i 
$ 29,107 
$ 26,831 
$ 24,530 
$ 20,771 
Net investment in plant, rental 
machines and other property 
17.563 
16,797 
15,200 
12,193 
9,302 
Working capital 
4.805 
2,983 
3.381 
4,406 
4 . 5 1 1 
Long-term debt 
2,851 
2,669 
2,099 
1,589 
285 
Stockholders' equity 
19,960 
17,676 
16,578 
14,961 
13.494 
*Restated. 
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split. 
Selected Quarterly Data 
Gross 
Gross 
Net 
(Dol lars i n m i 11 ion s except per share and stock prices) 
I ncome 
Profit 
Earn i ngs 
1982 
*First Quarter 
$ 7,066 
$ 4,293 
$ 
789 
*Second Quarter 
8,053 
4y9^3 
I5O76 
*Third Quarter 
8,171 
4,870 
IJ044 
Fourth Quarter 
ii,oy4 
6,590 
i)500 
Total 
$ 34,364 
$ 20,676 
$ 4,409 
1981 
*First Quarter 
$ 6,461 
$ 3,925 
$ 
746 
*Second Quarter 
6,895 
4jI05 
855 
*Third Quarter 
6,721 
3>99° 
836 
*Fourth Quarter 
8,993 
5,313 
1 , 1 7 3 
* 
Total 
$ 29,070 
$ 17,333 
$ 3,610 
There were 725,745 stockholders of record 
March 10, 1983, will be at the rate of $.86 per 
at December 31, 1982. During 1982, stock- 
share. This dividend will be IBM's 272nd con-
holders received $2,053 million in cash dividends, 
secutive quarterly cash dividend. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
The stock prices reflect the high and low 
* Restated. 
Per Share 
Stock Prices 
Earnings 
Dividends 
High 
Low 
.86 
$ 64.75 
$ 55-63 
.86 
66.13 
57-50 
.86 
77-63 
59-38 
.86 
98.00 
73-25 
3-44 
$ 1 . 3 3 
I.81 
1-75 
M O 
$7.39 
$1.28 
1-45 
1.42 
1-99 
$ 6.14 
$ 
.86 
.86 
.86 
.86 
S 3.44 
71.50 
63.38 
58.88 
57-63 
$ 60.25 
55-13 
52-25 
48.38 
prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York 
Stock Exchange composite tape for the last 
two years. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices 
The cumulative effect of persistent inflation 
in recent years has eroded industry's abihty to 
fund the replacement and expansion of pro-
ductive capacity. Traditional financial statements 
may not adequately reflect the effects of chang-
ing prices and declines in purchasing power on 
cash flows required to replace capital assets 
and provide opportunities for future growth. 
Therefore, supplemental information, which has 
been prepared in accordance with standards 
established by the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board, is presented to assist users 
of financial statements in understanding 
the implications of changing prices on the 
company's operations. 
The following data reflect the effects on 
earnings and stockholders' equity resulting 
from using estimated changes in specific 
prices to restate the value of inventories and 
other properties at currently prevailing prices 
(current cost). The estimates are based upon 
latest production costs, published price 
indices, current suppliers' prices, and appraised 
valuations. Cost of sales and depreciation 
expense are restated to reflect the change in the 
related asset values. 
In order to provide useful trend data, 
information for each of the years presented is 
restated in 1982 dollars of purchasing power, as 
measured by movement of the Consumer Price 
Index for all Urban Consumers (CPi-u). In addi-
tion, because the company adopted Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards No. 52, 
'Foreign Currency Translation," in 1982 and 
restated its financial statements for 1981 and 1980, 
the changes in current cost amounts which 
result from translation are separately identified 
for each of the years 1982, 1981 and 1980. 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 
As Reported in 
Financial Statements 
In Average 1982 Dollars 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1982 
1982 
1981* 
1980* 
1 9 7 9 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
$ 34,364 
$ 34,364 
$ 30,852 
$ 30,706 
$ 3 0 , 4 0 3 
Cost of sales, rentals and services 
13,688 
13,778 
12,697 
1 2 , 1 5 1 
1 ' , 3 7 4 
Expenses and other income 
12,746 
12,888 
11,878 
12,142 
I ',959 
Provision for U. S. Federal and non-U. S. income taxes . 
3,521 
3,521 
2,812 
2,725 
3 , 3 8 0 
Net earnings 
$ 
4,409 
$ 
4,177 
$ 
3,465 
$ 
3,688 
$ 
3 , 6 9 0 
Earnings per share 
$7-39 
$ 7.00 
$ 5.89 
$6.32 
$ 6 . 3 3 
Stockholders' equity (net assets) 
$ 19,960 
$ 22,676 
$ 20,960 
$ 21,431 
$ 2 2 , 1 0 4 
Loss from decline in purchasing power of 
net monetary assets 
$ 
I 
$ 
66 
$ 
319 
$ 
6 0 5 
Translation adjustments 
$ 
(685) 
$ 
(777) 
$ (1,057) 
$ 
(266) 
Change in specific prices— 
net of general inflation 
$ 
(307) 
$ (1,232) 
$ 
(1,683) 
$ (1,552; 
•"Restated. See Accounting Change-
Foreign Currency Translation note on page 36. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
IBM's 1982 financial results, when adjusted 
for changing prices, show a reduction of $232 
million from reported net earnings and an in-
crease in stockholders' equity of $2,716 million. 
The estimated current cost of acquiring exist-
ing plants and other property is $2,560 million 
greater than depreciated original costs. The 
rental machine asset base would increase by $ 181 
million if valued at current production costs 
while other inventories would be reduced by $37 
million. The additional depreciation in 1982 on 
the restated rental machines, plant and other 
property would have been $264 million while 
other costs would have been reduced by $32 
million. Accordingly, 1982 earnings would have 
been reduced by the above mentioned $232 
million. Productivity improvements from tech-
nological advances continue to partially offset 
inflationary pressures, as is evidenced by the rel-
atively small increase (2%) in the cost of rental 
machine assets when adjusted for changing prices. 
Companies which retain monetary assets or 
liabilities such as cash or debt incur gains and 
losses in purchasing power during periods of in-
flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted 
in a negligible purchasing power loss in 1982. 
The effects of translation on the changes in 
specific prices of IBM's net assets have been 
estimated without any attempt to adjust the data 
for general rate of inflation differences among 
various countries. The translation adjustments 
reflect the decline in the valuation of assets de-
nominated in currencies other than the 
U.S. dollar caused by the relative strength of 
the dollar in the world economy. 
In dollars of average 1982 purchasing 
power, the increase in current costs that might 
have been expected from general inflation 
exceeded IBM's specific price level changes by 
$307 million. Management views this positively, 
in that technology and productivity improve-
ments substantially offset inflation. Similar pat-
terns are reflected in the prior years. 
Although inflation-adjusted information 
is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to 
emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation. 
It points out the importance of bringing inflation 
under control and the need for further public 
policy initiatives to encourage capital investment. 
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation 
The amounts shown below for the years 
alent purchasing power of 1982 dollars by 
1978 to 1981 have been converted into the equiv- 
applying to the amounts reported the rate of 
changes in the average CPI-U from that year to 
year 1982. 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1982 
1981 
1980 
1979 
1978 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
$ 3 4 ^ 3 6 4 
$ 30,852 
$ 30,706 
$ 30,403 
$ 3 1 , 1 8 2 
Earnings per sharet 
$ 7 - 3 9 
$ 6.52 
$ 6.82 
$6.86 
$7-87 
Cash dividends paid per sharef 
$ 3 . 4 4 
$ 3.65 
$ 4 . 0 3 
$ 4 - 5 7 
$ 4.26 
Market price per sharef (at December 31) 
$ 9 6 . 2 5 
$ 60.37 
$ 7 9 . 5 1 
$ 85.61 
S I 10.42 
Average Consumer Price Index for 
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 
2 8 9 . 1 
272.4 
246.8 
2 1 7 . 4 
195.4 
The actual market price of IBM stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape at December 31, for years 1978 to 1981 (adjusted for stock split) 
was $74.63, $64.38, $6788, $56.88 and $96.25, respectively. 
tAdjusted for 1979 stock split. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
IBM Corporation 
Stephen D. Bechteljr. 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction 
Board of Directors: George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Harold Brown 
Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, 
The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N. J.-health care products 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France-
attorneys at law 
John M. Fox 
Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Attorney,Washington, D.C.; former U.S. Secretary, Health and Human Services; 
former U.S. Secretary, Housing and Urban Development 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.G., and Los Angeles, Calif-attorneys at law 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Chairman of the Board, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.-glass products 
John N. Irwin II 
Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach . . . Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM 
T. Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller . . . Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. 
J. Richard Munro 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing 
John R. Opel 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM 
Dean P Phypers 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
William W. Scranton 
Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance 
Committee, E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products 
Cyrus R.Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
Officers: 
Board Committees: 
Executive: 
Frank T. Gary, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
T. Vincent Learson 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
William H. Moore 
John R.Opel 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Retirement Plans: 
William W. Scranton, Chairman 
George B. Beitzel 
Harold Brown 
Carla Anderson Hills 
John N.Irwin II 
J. Richard Munro 
Dean P Phypers 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Compensation: 
Cyrus R.Vance, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Audit: 
William T. Coleman, Jr., Chairman 
John M. Fox 
Richard W. Lyman 
Advisory Board: 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
George L. Hinman 
Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 
Louis H. LaMotte 
Retired Executive Vice President, IBM 
William McChesney Martin, Jr. Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dean R. McKay 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
President and Chief Executive Officer 
R Martin Foley 
Chairman of the Board 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Senior Vice President 
Ralph E. Gomory 
, . Vice President 
Senior Vice President 
John B. Jackson 
. . Vice President 
Senior Vice President 
•PaulJ.Kofmehl 
Senior Vice President 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
, , Vice President 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive 
Thomas M. Liptak 
. . Vice President 
Senior Vice President 
Edward E. Lucente 
Senior Vice President & General Counsel 
•Victor R. Macdonald 
, , Vice President 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive 
•James F. Manning 
. . Vice President 
Senior Vice President 
David E. McKinney 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive 
Charles E.McKittrick, Jr.. . , , Vice President 
Vice President, Finance & Planning 
Frank A.Metz,Jr. 
. . Vice President 
Vice President 
Theodore C. Rapes, Jr. . . . . 
Vice President 
Francis G. Rodgers 
, . Vice President 
Vice President 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
. . Vice President 
Vice President 
H.Mitchell Watson, Jr 
Vice President 
John F. Williams 
. . Vice President 
Vice President 
J. Richard "Vbung 
Vice President 
JamesJ. Forese 
Vice President 
John H. Grady 
, , Secretary 
Vice President 
C. Arthur Northrop 
. . Treasurer 
Vice President 
Robert E. Bonchick 
Vice President 
J. William Scruggs 
Vice President 
John H.Stewart 
. . Assistant Controller 
Vice President 
Thomas C. Irwin 
Vice President 
David A. Finley 
Vice President 
Bruce E. Langton 
. Assistant Treasurer 
Vice President 
•Elected 1/25/83 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Division and Subsidiary 
Chief Executives: 
Arthur G. Anderson. 
John E. Bertram 
Charles R Biggar 
KasparV Cassani 
George H.Conrades. 
Vincent N.Cook 
Edward M. Davis . . . 
David A. Finley 
Victor J. Goldberg... 
Ralph L Gomory . . . 
John E. Guthjr. 
President, General Products Division 
President, Data Systems Division 
President, Field Engineering Division 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ 
Middle East/Africa Corporation 
President, National Accounts Division 
President, Federal Systems Division 
President, General Technology Division 
President, IBM Credit Corporation 
President, Communication Products Division 
Director of Research 
, President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Thomas M. Liptak 
President, Customer Service Division 
Edward E. Lucente 
President, Information Products Division 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation 
Ralph A. PfeifFer, Jr. 
Chairman, IBM World Trade 
Americas / Far East Corporation 
Everett H. Van Hoesen 
President, Systems Supplies Division 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. 
President, System Products Division 
Cecil R Webb 
President, IBM Instruments, Inc. 
John F. Williams 
President, Real Estate and 
Construction Division 
J. Richard Young 
President, National Marketing Division 
IBM Vferld Trade 
Americas/Far East 
Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Thomas J. Bata 
Jill K.Conway 
Morton Ehrlich 
Howard G. Figueroa.. 
Ralph E. Gomory 
Thomas Moving 
Ryoichi Kawai 
Donald R. Keough 
Robeli J. Libero 
*David E. McKinney .. 
Raymond G. O'Neill . 
Ralph A.PfeifferJr.... 
Clarence B. Rogers, J r 
Takeo Shiina 
Paulo D. Villares 
Gustavo J. Vollmer.... 
Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization, Toronto, Canada 
, President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
. Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla. 
, Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
, Director of Research and Vice President, IBM 
, President, Hoving Associates, Inc., New "fcrk, N. Y, and Editor-in-Chief, "The Connoisseur" 
, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan 
President, The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga. 
, President, IBM Brazil 
, President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM 
. Vice President, Finance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/ Far East Corporation 
. Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
, Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
, President, IBM Japan, Limited 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela 
IBM W)rld Trade 
Europe/Middle East/ 
Africa Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
John RAkers 
Arthur G. Anderson. 
Tore Browaldh 
KasparV Cassani 
The Earl of Cromer 
Frank J. Cummiskey 
William W Eggleston... 
Pierre L. Gousseland 
Gilbert E.Jones 
PaulJ. Kofmehl 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Jacques Lemonnier 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Otto Sturzenegger 
Kurt Werner 
, Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
, President, General Products Division, and Vice President, IBM 
, Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, 
and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden 
, Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation, 
and Senior Vice President, IBM 
Former Chairman of the Board, IBM United Kingdom, Limited 
Retired IBM Vice President 
Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM 
Chairman, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
President-Directeur General, IBM France 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
President and Chairman, Ciba-Geigy, USA, Ardsley, N. Y 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany 
Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
Board of Directors: 
Joseph H. Allen 
George B. Beitzel 
i'atricia Albjet^ Graham 
John E. Guth, Jr. 
Wayne H. Holtzman 
H.Thomas James 
Retired Associate Dean, School of Business Education, University of Connecticut 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
President,The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex. 
President, Spencer Foundation, Chicago, 111. 
"Elected 1/31/83 


===== PAGE 47 =====
The 1983 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held in the John B. Hynes 
Veterans Auditorium, Boston, Mass., on Monday, 
April 25th, at 10 a.m. 
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement and 
Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each stock-
holder in March. The Proxy Statement describes 
the items of business to be voted on at the 
Annual Meeting and provides biographies of the 
Board's nominees for director, their principal 
affiliations with other companies or organiza-
tions, as well as other information about 
the company. 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes 
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including 
the President's report on the company, questions 
and answers of general interest and the results 
of voting on items of business. 
The following information may be obtained without 
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Department, 
Spo Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022: 
The Form IO-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
provides further details on IBM's business, includ-
ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the 
Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April. 
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting 
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of 
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles 
that the company sets for the conduct of its 
business. 
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs 
in the United States are outlined in a document 
that describes programs for women, minorities, 
handicapped persons, disabled veterans and 
Vietnam-era veterans, and also reviews IBM'S 
affirmative action efforts in the community 
IBM U. S. Retirement Plan Information, 
which is given to all regular U. S. employees, 
includes the principal provisions of the plan, 
options available, a list of the trustees and a 
summary report on the plan's financial status. 
IBM Company Citizenship 
booklet describes support programs for edu-
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts 
and other areas. 
IBM Operations in South Africa 
are summarized in a report of the company's 
business in that country. This report describes 
the personnel principles and practices to which 
IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa. 
IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings 
are available. The report is translated into 
French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette 
recording in English is available for the blind. 
A Service for Deaf Stockholders 
provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department enables deaf stockholders who have 
access to a teletypewriter to communicate with 
the department's New York City office. Stock-
holders who wish to use the service should dial 
(21Z) 407-4552 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.. 
Eastern time, on any weekday. 
IBM Stock Transfer 
is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, 
N. Y. 10022. The department maintains stock-
holder records and can answer questions 
regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders 
wishing to transfer stock or to change the name 
on a stock certificate should contact the 
department for instructions. 
Stock certificates are valuable and should 
be safeguarded, since replacement takes time 
and requires payment of a surety bond premium 
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost, 
stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations 
should be notified. Registered mail should be 
used whenever stock is mailed. 
IBM Stock is Traded 
on the New York Stock Exchange, other 
exchanges in the United States and exchanges 
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, France, 
Japan, Switzerland, the Netherlands and 
Germany. 
Stock Transfer Offices: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611 
Co-Transfer Agents: 
Trust General du Canada 
iioo University Street, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada H3B 2G7 
National Trust Company, Limited 
21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5C 1B3 
Registrars: 
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York 
30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10015 
The First National Bank of Chicago 
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670 
Montreal Trust Company 
777 Dorchester Boulevard West, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 4A5 
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5H 1B4 
International Business Machines Corporation 
Corporate Headquarters 
Armonk, N.Y. 10504 


===== PAGE 48 =====
H 
V-" ^'^t-iwsj V- •• mat h'm*^'- s>»-wm ksm xtw w-if.cvjt jsw^sBnarggai 
••••»» • 
_ 
kwmiM'-'.kKimmmmmm^mmmttmmmmmmmmM 
.rj-aissKcaaiSiiwm 
G5051982-00 
PRINTED IN USA 
4^-story office buildmgat 
jpo 
Madison 
Avenue, New York City, is slated for full occupancy this 
year. The Stockholder Relations Department is 
now headquartered here, and marketing, service and 
adm inistrative persomiel are moving in from 
IBM offices throughout Manhattan. 
The garden 
plaza 
{foreground) is open to the public. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
^i/s ' 
International 
p f - 
Business Machines 
Corporation 
Armonk,N.Y. 
10504 
