

===== PAGE 1 =====
V 
s 1 
WW>w- ••'- Un 
........ 
m^Z/MMIm 
. • •• •, 


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: 
1 Financial Highlights 
2 Letter to Stockholders 
5 Expanding Opportunities 
16 1983 in Review 
25 Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
Earnings 
Management Discussion -Results of Operations 
Financial Position 
Management Discussion-Financial 
Condition 
Funds Flow 
Stocklwlders' Equity 
Notes to Financial Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
Supplemental Financial Information 
45 IBM Organization 
46 Directors and Officers 
48 Stockholder Information 
IBM's operations: 
IBM's operations, with very minor exceptions, are 
in the field of information-handling systems, 
equipment and services to solve the increasingly 
complex problems of business, government, science, 
space exploration, defense, education, medicine 
and many other areas of human activity. IBM's 
products include data processing machines and 
systems, telecommunications systems and products, 
information distributors, office systems, typewriters, 
copiers, educational and testing materials, and 
related supplies and services. Most products are both 
leased and sold through IBM's worldwide marketing 
organizations. Selected products are distributed 
through authorized dealers and remarketers. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 31, 1983 
Highlights of the year: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1983 
1 9 8 2 
At end of year: 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
. . . . 
Earnings before income taxes 
Income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Return on stockholders' equity 
$ 
4 0 , 1 8 0 
$ 
9 , 9 4 0 
$ 
4 > 4 5 5 
$ 
5 , 4 8 5 
$ 9 . 0 4 
$ 
2 , 2 5 1 
$ 3 . 7 1 
$ 
4 , 9 3 0 
2 5 . 4 % 
34,364 
8,222 
3,813 
4,409 
$ 7 - 3 9 
2 , 0 5 3 
$ 3 . 4 4 
6 , 6 8 5 
2 3 . 4 % 
Total assets 
$ 
3 7 , ^ 4 3 
$ 
3 ^ , 5 4 1 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 
$ 
1 6 , 1 4 2 
$ 
17,563 
Working capital 
$ 
7 . 7 6 3 
$ 
4 , 8 0 5 
Long-term debt 
$ 
2 , 6 7 4 
$ 
2 , 8 5 1 
Stockholders' equity 
$ 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
$ 
1 9 , 9 6 0 
Number of employees 
3 6 9 , 5 4 5 
3 6 4 , 7 9 6 
Number of stockholders 
7 6 9 , 9 7 9 
7 2 . 5 , 7 4 5 
Cover: 
Micropositioners capable of precision to 2o-millionths of an 
inch are monitored by an IBM researcher as they travel above 
fine copper loires on a circuit board used in IBM's large-scale 
computers. Shoivn here as part of an experimental system, 
these positioners sigyiificantly extend the precision possible ivith 
automated manufacturing ayid test systems. Scientists at IBM's 
Manufacturing Research Center, part of the Thomasf. Watson 
Research Center, Yorktoxon Heights, N. Y., are working with 
engineers from IBM plants worldwide to develop advanced 
technologies for high-quality, loiu-cost production. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders 
1983 was a record year for IBM in revenues, 
earnings and return on stockholders' equity. 
We had faced 1983 with some concern about the 
worldwide economy. However, our customers 
again expressed confidence in our product 
offerings. As a result, the trends established in 
1982 gained momentum in 1983 and shipments 
of IBM products and delivery of services con-
tinued at high levels. 
In addition, significant increases in the 
purchased content of new shipments, increases 
in the purchase of installed rental equipment 
and improved before- and after-tax margins 
resulted in Z4.4 percent growth in 1983 net 
earnings. Reflecting the strength of the IBM 
product line, order activity continued to grow 
and customers installed our products at a rate 
well ahead of 1982 s brisk pace. This overall 
business performance is consistent with our 
strategic objectives and the trends established 
are expected to continue into 1984. 
Worldwide net earnings for the year 
ended December 31,1983, were $5,485 million, 
compared with $4,409 million for 1982. Net 
earnings were $9.04 per share on 606.8 million 
shares, the average number outstanding during 
1983, compared with $7.39 per share on 596.7 
million shares the year before. After-tax 
margins increased to 13.7 percent in 1983 from 
12.8 percent in 1982. 
Earnings before income taxes were 
$9,940 million in 1983, an increase of 20.9 per-
cent over $8,222 million in 1982. Pre-tax 
margins improved to 24.7 percent from 23.9 
percent in 1982. 
Worldwide gross income was $40,180 
million in 1983, up 16.9 percent from $34,364 
million in 1982. Product purchases were up 
38.4 percent, rentals were down 17.0 percent 
and services were up 19.4 percent over 1982. 
In the quarter ended December 31, net 
earnings were $1,863 million, or $3.06 per 
share, compared with $1,500 million, or $2.50 
per share, for the same period of 1982. Gross 
income for the fourth quarter of 1983 was 
$12,897 million, compared to $11,074 million 
in the fourth quarter of 1982. 
Operations outside the U. S. during 1983, 
included in consolidated results, produced 
net earnings of $2,164 million in 1983 and 
$1,649 million in 1982. Gross income from 
these operations was $17,053 million, compared 
with $15,336 million in the prior year. 
Our product line is strong throughout 
and we continue to see strong demand for it 
worldwide. 
Long-term strategy pays off 
The groundwork for our positive results 
the past two years was established back in 
the mid-1970s when, with a program of sizable 
investments in plant, equipment, research 
and development, we began to prepare for the 
great opportunities we saw ahead. Since 
then, we have reshaped our organization as 
necessary to adapt to a changing environment 
marked by the significant growth of our 
industry. Our strategy has focused on ensuring 
our full participation in that growth. 
Central to IBM's strategy are four 
key business goals—growth, product leader-
ship, efficiency and profitability. To attain these 
goals in today's highly competitive environ-
ment, we have placed increased emphasis 
on innovative programs in the design, manufac-
ture and distribution of our products and 
services. These programs have started to pro-
duce results. We are moving higher volumes of 
products through our organization and into 
our customers' offices, at the same time main-
taining effective cost control and high quality. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
John F. Akers, president, John R. Opel, chairman of the board and chief executive officer, 
and Paid J. Rizzo, vice 
chairman 
Growing with the industry 
IBM is far from alone in its confidence in 
the continued growth of information process-
ing. Interest in the industry has never been 
greater nor competition more intense. If indus-
try forecasts hold true, there is plenty of 
opportunity, not only for the manufacturers of 
quality information processing products, but 
also for the myriad new businesses springing 
up to provide a wide range of related products 
and services. 
We have said that our first goal is to grow 
with the industry, in 1983, we matched—and 
in some areas exceeded—industry growth. 
Although much attention is focused on the 
growth in small computers, large systems still 
account for a substantial portion of IBM 
revenue. Last year, our installations of large-
scale, advanced-technology systems reached 
record levels. Shipments of our 3380 large-
system disk file, the industry leader in disk 
storage technology, also increased significantly. 
In addition to our traditional product 
and service offerings, we continue to explore a 
number of areas, such as industrial automa-
tion, graphics systems and telecommunications, 
which we believe have high growth potential. 
Product leadership 
We worked toward our goal of product 
leadership in 1983 by introducing an array 
of new products. Our versatile new work-
stations—the IBM 3270 Personal Computer 
and the IBM Personal Computer XT/370 
—can be used as stand-alone Personal Com-
puters or as terminals linked to larger comput-
ers and data bases. The very affordable PCjr 
and the powerful Personal Computer XT extend 
our Personal Computer line to offer a full range 
of options for home, school and business uses. 
New 4300, System/38, Series/1 and 8100 
models continue the trend toward more speed, 
capacity, flexibility and improved price/per-
formance.The low-cost, easy-to-use System/36 
offers data and word processing, business color 
graphics and office management functions. 
Software offerings ranged from advanced 
programs for controlling IBM's largest computers 
to dozens of programs for the Personal Com-
puter. Other new software allows IBM office 
systems and workstations to be integrated via 
networks serving multiple locations. 
Greater efficiency 
We continue to make measurable progress 
toward our third goal—to be the most efficient 
company in the industry. It is this goal that 
has prompted programs aimed at achieving 
maximum productivity in every area of our 
business. In manufacturing, for example, more 
standardization and coordination among 
our plants are helping us control costs while 
we increase production. The introduction of 
many new ways to market and service our 
products has allowed us to reach more custom-
ers economically. Cost savings from these 
more efficient ways of doing business are trans-
lated into lower product and service prices 
for our customers. 
Appropriately, extensive use by IBM em-
ployees of our own products and services is 
an important aspect of our efficiency. The num-
ber of workstations in use within IBM, for ex-
ample, is approaching the number of employees. 
Profitability 
Inherent in all three goals is our fourth 
goal of profitability. While we work toward 
our growth, product leadership and efficiency 
targets, we are emphasizing the creative manage-
ment and utilization of our assets. Those efforts 
are earning a good return on our investments. 
Special attention to quality 
During 1983, we made good progress in 
quality improvement efforts which have been 
under way for some time at every IBM location. 
As a result of enthusiastic response from 
our employees, we are delivering a high percen-
tage of products that are free of even the 
smallest defect. Individuals, departments and 
entire locations continue to set new records for 
the number of consecutive months they have 
attained completely error-free performances. 
We will give special attention to quality 
improvement activities into the foreseeable 
future as quality is the key to achieving 
our goals and maintaining our edge in a very 
competitive world marketplace. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Frank T. Gary relinquishes chairman's post 
In February 1983, Frank Gary relin-
quished the post of chairman of the board 
after leading the company through some of its 
most challenging years. He served as chairman 
and chief executive officer from 1973 to 1981 
and then as chairman until last year. During 
that decade, IBM's gross income multiplied 
3.5 times, from less than $10 billion to more 
than $34 billion. At the top of the list of Frank's 
contributions is the growth strategy he defined 
w^ith excellent foresight in the mid-1970s 
to prepare us so successfully for the 80s. Invest-
ments made then in physical plant, research, 
development, education and training are pro-
viding the foundation we need to capitalize on 
the great opportunities of this decade. We are 
indebted to Frank Gary for the wisdom and 
skill with which he led the company. We are 
fortunate that he continues to serve as a mem-
ber of the Board of Directors and as 
chairman of the board's Executive Gommittee. 
Optimistic outlook 
The following pages review some of the 
ways we have adapted operations within IBM 
in order to remain competitive in our dynamic 
industry, and to ensure our participation in 
the expanding opportunities we see ahead. The 
credit for implementing and managing these 
programs in an outstanding manner goes to 
IBM employees. These talented people continue 
to be the corporation's greatest asset. Because 
of their fine efforts, we have an organization 
that is geared to combine business experience, 
technological leadership and a renewed com-
mitment to quality with the entrepreneurial 
approach necessary in today's competitive 
and growing industry. 
January 31, 1984, by order of the Board of Directors 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Corporate management structure 
During 1983, we announced the formation 
of a Gorporate Management Board with two 
committees—the Policy Gommittee and the 
Business Operations Gommittee—to replace 
our former structure. This change distributes 
decision-making authority more broadly 
throughout senior management. It also helps us 
capitalize on future growth opportunities and 
form business ventures and operating units 
more easily. 
Paul Rizzo, elected vice chairman 
of the board last year, and John Akers, elected 
IBM president, serve with me on the Policy 
Gommittee, which is responsible for major 
policy issues, establishing corporate goals and 
making major technology, capital investment, 
financing and manufacturing capacity 
decisions.The Business Operations Gommittee, 
made up of 10 senior corporate officers, is 
responsible for the day-to-day operations of 
the business. 
Through advanced manufacturing techniques 
for high-volume production, memory chips now can 
be fabricated on silicon wafers that are five inches 
in diameter and yield about twice as many chips as 
earlier three-inch wafers. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
^ 
i l l 
t m i 
! 
I 
a IK-11 i.' 
11 
M l - , 
' V h l J 
l l - S S S B i l i 
a 
I II 
H'i'ini: 
i! '.Tjfl-nHlhl 
laji 
i
B
i
i
H
i
" 
{1>J I 
f 
I ' l i r a 
ir-wm^ 
l!K 
-""LiSii^l 
It 
ir 
rM 
' 
L „ 
.. 
111 
Expanding Opportunities 
Uu 
J 
^likJcrHl' 
Ni Is3»s- 
II 
> 1 
•si 
.ill j W f S i ii 
f i i M I I I 
^ • f | l 
t'l 
^ • 
fi? 
•ftu-u-
i V i ^ i -
I|8 , 1 , III 
.! 
$ p 
' 
' 
khm 
I , 
iilf 
M ^^'r Llfiiili 
iil'Hii 
' ''t 
tV i''' 
* 
I 
m
^ 
^fivlibtui 
j l L J L ^ I ' f t l n d l 
^ J M 
1 t MIM I I I ?!' 


===== PAGE 8 =====
i f f 
VKMM 


===== PAGE 9 =====
As low-cost computing encour-
ages neiv uses for information 
systems, IBM is reaching this 
diversified marketplace through 
expanded methods of distribution 
that include dealers and remar-
keters. This application, integrat-
ing the IBM Personal Computer 
ivith specialized timing equip-
mentfor swim meet and team 
management, was developed by a 
Colorado firm that is one of 
IBM's Value Added Dealers. The 
firm purchases IBM Personal 
Computers in volume, adds 
specialized hardware and pro-
gramming then remarkets 
the system to schools and clubs. 
Ensuring a leading role in industry growth 
Over the past ten years, worldwide revenue for the information 
processing industry has grown by some 15 percent annually—from 
an estimated $55 billion in 1973 to about $230 billion in 1983. 
The high demand for information-related products and services is 
expected to continue and produce an annual revenue likely to exceed 
the $i trillion mark by 1993. Helping sustain this growth are the 
technology and cost improvements IBM has delivered with regularity 
and success over the years. These improvements continue to 
provide more function, allow lower prices and generate new uses for 
information-handling systems. 
Today's dynamic and diverse marketplace demands innovations in 
the ways products are developed, manufactured, marketed and 
serviced. Cost-effective marketing channels to reach an ever-wider 
range of customers are essential. Ways to produce higher volumes, 
keep costs low and maintain quality are of critical importance. 
Programs introduced throughout IBM both respond to and influence 
the growth of the industry. In 1983, these programs produced the 
increased volumes and improved costs IBM needs to continue its 
leading role. Quality emphasis activities improved an already fine 
record to help maintain this important IBM competitive edge. 
Examples from across the company provide an update on some 
of the ways IBM has tuned its business to capitalize on expanding 
opportunities in the information processing industry. 
New equipment, processes speed production 
In Bordeaux, France, IBM robotic systems assemble components for 
IBM's large-scale computers. In Poughkeepsie, N.Y., hundreds of 
thousands of circuit-board connections are tested automatically in a 
few hours. At the Fujisawa plant in Japan, components used in the 
3380 disk storage units are tested, in part, using automated systems. 
New equipment and processes are helping speed production, 
improve quality and keep costs low in virtually every one of IBM's 42 
manufacturing plants in 15 countries. IBM has spent some $11 billion 


===== PAGE 10 =====
on land, buildings and equipment in the last five years to accommodate 
growth and boost productivity. Such investments will continue in 
the years ahead. At the Lexington, Ky., plant, for example, a three-year, 
$350 million program under way to automate the flow of products 
through the facility is expected to increase productivity by 30 percent 
a year over the next five years. 
Managing higher production levels 
Advanced equipment and processes and new facilities are supported 
by programs to manage increasing product volumes. More products 
are being manufactured to meet predetermined demand forecasts, for 
example. This allows parts to be ordered more efficiently, and reduces 
inventory and related support costs. Once assembled, products are 
shipped to distribution centers, ready for customer delivery 
To help coordinate worldwide manufacturing operations, IBM has 
established more than 40 production management centers, each with 
responsibility for developing manufacturing processes in a particular 
product area. The aim is to design a process once and then use it 
wherever a given product is manufactured. The centers also provide a 
strong and early link to development sites to ensure that new products 
can be manufactured to IBM quality standards at competitive costs. 
Design for automation is another concept helping to keep production 
costs low. The new IBM 3178 display was developed using this approach. 
Early in the 3178 design cycle, manufacturing planners worked with 
product designers to ensure that the use of automated systems was 
maximized. As a result, many of the 3178 s parts are designed so they 
can be assembled using robotic systems. Production costs have been 
minimized, and the displays are being shipped in record numbers. 
Emphasis on quality produces results 
Providing more value for every dollar customers spend on IBM 
products—providing the best products available—is the objective of 
IBM's quality efforts. Companywide, people are being asked to think 
more critically about the jobs they are doing and how those jobs 
are done, and then find and implement more effective ways to work. 
An IBM engineer in the Raleigh, 
N.C., facility completes the 
installation of a robotic system on 
a highly automated line for 
assembling the new IBM 
display. A leading example of low-
cost, high-volume, high-quality 
production, the facility makes 
extensive use of automation for 
every task, from assembling to 
testing to packaging the product. 
Since ic)-/6, the plant has doubled its 
manufacturing population, tripled 
its space and delivered a tenfold 
increase in production. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
r -
$ 
' i M 
A 
J' 
" iliintifr^--
K 
'^jniif 
J.'.'. 
> • . 
p. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
Results already can be seen. Large-scale, advanced-technology 
processors, for example, are the most reliable in the company's his-
tory, and customer satisfaction is higher with these computers than 
with any large-scale systems in the past. In Greenock, Scotland, 
the time required to get terminals on the way to customers has been 
reduced from a week to two days. In Boulder, Col., employees im-
proved shipping procedures and, as a result, 99.5 percent of products 
delivered to customers are free of even the slightest shipping damage. 
IBM's reputation for superior service also is being enhanced through 
quality improvement programs. In the U. S., the entire process 
of providing service—from taking a customer call through problem 
resolution—was studied and measured. As a result, more inclusive 
preventive maintenance procedures were introduced and service 
improved. Just as quality standards are being raised by IBM employees, 
IBM suppliers have accepted the objective of delivering defect-free 
parts and services. Quality seminars and related activities for suppliers 
have resulted in a continuing improvement in purchased materials. 
Flexible sales programs meet diverse needs 
Cost-effective and flexible sales programs help marketing 
representatives tailor offerings to meet the needs of a rapidly 
expanding range of customers. Special bids and volume discount 
plans offer customers a reduced price in exchange for quantity 
orders. These orders reduce the cost of marketing and also provide 
cost-saving planning information for use in manufacturing. As a 
further boost to volume sales, IBM is selling through, as well as to, a 
number of large customers. Through the multiples marketing 
program, IBM helps firms such as insurance companies sell IBM 
computing equipment to their affiliates. 
For convenience and flexibility, customers in the U. S. can finance 
purchases through the IBM Credit Corporation. In many other 
countries where IBM does business, purchases can be financed 
This advanced IBM-designed tool 
in use in IBM plants in Sindelfingen, 
Germany, and East Fishkill, N.Y, 
punches 1,440 precisely placed holes 
the diameter of an eyelash in a 
second, then automatically inspects 
its own work. Ceramic substrates 
on which chips are mounted are 
processed seven times faster with the 
computer-controlled auto punch 
tool. As many as 40,000 holes 
in each of up to ^^ sheets in a chip 
carrier are punched with great 
accuracy to ensure integrity of elec-
trical connections. The chip carriers 
are used in IBM's large-scale 
computers and in the newest mid-
range computer, the 4381. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
f I 
\U 
m. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
through similar organizations. In customer centers companywide, 
IBM marketing and support professionals are demonstrating 
IBM products and services, and helping new information processing 
customers plan installations and applications. Classes geared 
toward applications for a given industry show many different users 
at one time how IBM can help solve specific problems. 
Reaching more customers efficiently 
Complementing IBM's traditional marketing force are a number of 
additional distribution channels which efficiently deliver more of the 
company's high-volume products to customers than ever before. 
In the U. S., a new division, the National Distribution Division, was 
formed in 1983 to handle the marketing of selected products through 
channels such as IBM Product Centers, direct mail and dealers. 
Worldwide, some 126 Product Centers are IBM's own retail outlets for 
Personal Computers, typewriters and other selected products. An 
increasing number of retail stores and independent dealers are selling 
IBM products as well, providing more links in the company's 
distribution network. IBM also is informing thousands of potential 
customers of its products through direct mail campaigns. Customers 
use catalogs and toll-free telephone numbers to simplify ordering 
everything from typewriters to Displaywriter and Personal Computer 
software to supplies and office furniture. In the U. S. alone, there are 
some 10,000 customer calls each day. 
IBM also is working with remarketers—firms that add their software 
or specialized hardware to IBM products to create "value added" 
systems and equipment for specific industries. The added value may 
include, for example, a software package to handle hotel reservations 
or one for hospital inventory control. These firms purchase IBM 
products such as the System/36, Series/1 or Personal Computer in 
quantity, add their software and/or hardware, and sell the combined 
systems to their customers. 
Seminars and product briefings 
for a variety of low-cost products 
are held at conveniently located 
customer centers such as this one 
in a Tokyo business district. 
The centers, established company-
uuide, are among IBM programs 
to reduce marketing costs and 
reach more potential customers. 
Classes for authorized dealers 
and local direct mail campaigns 
also are handled by these 
centers. Here, the new IBM 
a small business computer 
•with Japanese language (Kanji) 
capability, is demonstrated 
for customers. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
i 
a t 
I \ 
7 
^^ 
nmJL 
ftrftri'T^^irtftiViiif'ftf T^^mt 1 
m 


===== PAGE 16 =====
f ® 
mm 


===== PAGE 17 =====
Telecommunications equipment 
users at TELECOM 
in Geneva, 
Switzerland, saw the largest 
display of IBM telecommunications 
products ever assembled. IBM, 
among 600 exhibitors from 30 
countries participating in the show, 
has established Independent 
Business Units in Europe and the 
U. S. to develop and market 
products in the high-potential 
groivth area of telecommunications. 
Included in the demonstrations 
ivas IBM's Directory Assistance 
System to help telephone companies 
cut costs and improve service. 
Products, services for new business areas 
While additional marketing channels are helping IBM reach more 
customers than ever before, organizations called Independent 
Business Units have been created within the company to help IBM 
participate in high-potential growth areas. These units are given 
the latitude and resources necessary to shorten the time required to 
bring new products or services to the marketplace. 
Independent Business Units are expanding IBM's remote computing 
offerings and introducing high-technology products for the office, 
home, shop floor, classroom and laboratory. In Japan and Europe, 
these units are tailoring standard IBM products to meet country-by-
country requirements or, where necessary, developing specialized 
products for use in telecommunications, industry and finance. 
Innovations to support higher volumes 
More efficient systems and procedures are helping support IBM's 
high-volume requirements. The Distribution Support System, for 
example, links manufacturing plants, distribution points and branch 
office support professionals. It is used to track shipments, enter and 
fill orders, and for inventory control and invoicing. At branch offices, 
marketing representatives use terminals connected to a regional 
information network to reduce the time needed to prepare complex 
volume sales presentations. Variables such as prices, quantity 
discounts and financing options are entered into the system, and mar-
keting proposals tailored to each customer situation are generated. 
In the area of customer service, new systems and expanded programs 
are helping contain costs and maintain quality. Service representatives 
are using hand-held terminals to transmit information to centralized 
support locations, which reduces paperwork and speeds parts order-
ing. Service repair centers give users of certain high-volume, low-cost 
IBM products attractively priced repair options, which offer savings 
of 50 to 75 percent compared with on-site service. Users of mid-range 
and large-scale computers can take advantage of remote software 
support. In the U. S., almost 9 of every 10 calls for assistance are resolved 
over the telephone by IBM software support specialists. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
1983 in Review 
From initial customer shipments of the most 
powerful processor in the company's history 
to announcement of a Personal Computer 
priced under $1,000, IBM extended the per-
formance range and flexibility of its industry-
leading information-handling products 
in 1983. New telecommunications products 
and small systems tailored to meet expanding 
customer requirements also were announced, 
as were products specifically designed 
for use in manufacturing, finance, research, 
education and government. 
While 1983 was a year of new products 
offering customers wider options and more 
computing power for less money, it also was a 
# 
A technician at IBM's San Jose, Calif, plant 
adjusts an assembly used in IBM's advanced 
disk storage unit. 
Logic circuits housed in this advanced packaging 
7nodule provide the computing power far the 
new IBM4^81 processor. The air-cooled modules 
measure about 
inches square by 1.4 inches high. 
year marked by expanded support of job 
training, community service and cultural pro-
grams. Support for education at all levels— 
from grammar school through postdoctoral 
programs—received special emphasis 
during 1983. 
Advanced-technology systems 
IBM began deliveries of the 3084, the 
most powerful computer in the company's his-
tory, and continued high-volume shipments of 
the advanced 3380 disk storage unit. 
The IBM 3084 is designed to meet the 
growth needs of IBM's largest customers and 
provides up to 96 million characters of main 
memory. Like the 3081, which provides up to 
48 million characters of main memory, and the 
3083, the entry level processor in IBM's large-
scale, advanced-technology series, the 3084 is 
based on highly reliable circuit packaging 
technology, including Thermal Conduction 
Modules and high-performance circuit boards. 
IBM also began customer shipments of 
Multiple Virtual Storage/Extended Architec-
ture control programming. This software is 
designed to increase the information-handling 
capacity of IBM's large-scale computers. 
Worldwide demand for IBM 3380 disk 
storage units continued to build, and deliveries 
again increased. The 3380 can store up to 
2.5 billion characters of information and is 
designed to work with a range of large IBM 
computers. It uses IBM-developed thin film 
read /write heads to transfer data at a rate 
of up to 3 million characters per second. 
Mid-range and small processors 
The speed, capacity and performance 
options available to users of mid-range and 
A customer engineer performs final installation 
tests on an IBM large-scale computer These computers 
are being installed, on average, in about one-third 
the time required fiist a few years ago. 
small-scale IBM computers were expanded as 
new 4300, System/38, 8100 and Series/l 
models were added. In addition, System/}6, a 
versatile, easy-to-use computer for small 
businesses or departments in larger organiza-
tions, was introduced. 
The IBM 4381, the most powerful com-
puter in the 4300 series, provides up to 16 
million characters of main memory and inter-
nal performance as much as three times that 
previously available with processors in this 
group. Also announced was the 4361, which 
provides improved price and performance 
for customers installing a 4300 computer for 
the first time or adding remote computers 
in distributed networks. 
The System/36 offers up to i million 
characters of main memory and 800 million 
characters of integrated disk storage. This 
capacity, up to four times the maximum main 
memory and three times the disk storage of 
the System/34, gives users the flexibility of 
automating many data and word processing 
tasks, office management functions and 
business graphics applications. The System/36 
can run many application programs written 
for the System/34 and is an attractive growth 
option for users of this system who require 
additional computing power. 
The new System/38 Model 8 provides up 
to 8 million characters of main memory. 
The Model 6 offers up to 4 million characters. 
Both models significantly improve the price/ 


===== PAGE 19 =====
performance of this computer line. New 
programming gives System/38 users greater 
flexibility in linking these computers to other 
types of IBM systems in computer networks. 
Four new IBM 3370 direct access storage 
unit models offering improved performance 
and expanded capacity were announced. 
These units are for use with the 4300 series 
and System/38 computers. 
Users of distributed information systems 
can select from a wider range of IBM 8100 
processors. The new IBM 8150 distributed in-
formation system, the highest-performance 
computer in this series, provides up to 
6 million characters of main memory, a three-
fold increase compared with the 8140. 
It also provides a twofold increase in internal 
performance and can support more than 
80 terminals, twice the previous maximum. 
The performance and capacity options 
available to users of the modular IBM Series/l 
also were expanded, and new programming 
enabling users to control these small computers 
from a central processor was announced. 
The new Series/1 offers performance up to 
1 0 percent greater than that of earlier models. 
The maximum main memory of this versatile 
computer also was doubled to i million 
characters. Other new Series/l computers inte-
grate disk storage, power supplies and proc-
essors in highly compact, economical units. 
The new System/36 is being manufactured 
at IBM 
plants in Rochester, Minn., 
Guadalajara, 
Mexico, 
and Santa Pcdomba, Italy. 
The IBM 81^0 distributed information system 
contcnns advanced 
logic chips, some with more than 
4,400 circuits. It is the first machine in the industry 
to use custom bipolar chips of this density. 
IBM Personal Computer 
IBM significantly expanded its Personal 
Computer line, adding a low-cost model for the 
home or classroom and powerful units that 
am be used as stand-alone computers or 
as workstations linked to central processors. 
IBM PCjr, the most affordable computer in 
the company's history, can be used as an 
educational tool, to prepare letters or reports, 
and manage personal or household finances. 
With available options, it can be linked to com-
puter information networks to obtain stock 
prices, weather reports and other information. 
It also am be used to send and receive letters, 
memos and other documents. Programs 
to acquaint users with the PCjr and materials 
to help them write computer programs are 
included with the system. PCjr can run many 
software packages written for other IBM 
Personal Computer models. Several programs 
from IBM's subsidiary, Science Research 
Associates, Inc., help customers learn how to 
use computers quickly and easily. 
The IBM Personal Computer XT is a pow-
erful personal computing system that provides 
more than 10 million characters of disk storage. 
An optional expansion unit increases the max-
imum storage of this computer to nearly 22 
million characters, the equivalent of 11,000 
double-spaced typewritten pages.This storage 
capacity allows users to maintain lengthy 
customer lists, files and records, and process a 
range of business reports and forecasts. 
IBM introduced the PCjr, the lowest-priced 
computer 
in the company's history. A new division.. 
Entry 
Systems, was foryned to manage IBM's growing line of 
personal-use 
computers. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
IBM began marketing the Personal Computer in 
eleven countries in the Far East in 198^. Here, 
a Hong Kong boutique uses modified PCs as part 
of the sUrre's check- out system. 
Two programming languages, APL and 
Logo, increase the range of uses for the IBM Per-
sonal Computer. APL works with an optional, 
specialized chip that increases the speed at 
which the Personal Computer processes certain 
mathematical functions. Logo can be used to 
develop problem-solving skills or learn mathe-
matical concepts. 
Two workstations based on the IBM Per-
sonal Computer are designed to improve pro-
ductivity of business professionals. The IBM 
3Z70 Personal Computer features a display 
screen that am be divided into as many 
as seven separate viewing areas. This enables 
users to run Personal Computer applications in 
one area and display information from as many 
as four host computers while using the remain-
ing areas to record notes or for calculations. 
The second workstation, the IBM Personal 
Computer XT/370, is a desk-top unit with the 
processing power of earlier, large-scale 
computers and the versatility to be used as a 
stand-alone computer or terminal linked to 
larger processors. 
IBM Japan announced the 5550 Multi-
station, a small, high-performance computer 
with Japanese language capability. This ver-
satile system can be used as a personal business 
computer and supports many of the application 
programs available on the IBM Personal 
Computer. It also can be used as a Japanese 
This detail of the IBM ^290 display screen shoius 
dot pa ttern created by glowing neon-argon gas 
to produce high - resolution, flicher-free images. 
IBM's major office systems are linked 
easily 
and effectively xoith nexv IBM program 
products. 
language word processing system or terminal 
linked to many types of IBM computers. 
In Taiwan, IBM announced a modified IBM 
5550 with Chinese language capability 
Display terminals 
The IBM 3270 display series was expanded 
and users given a wider range of choices to 
meet requirements for data entry and analysis, 
programming, and other professional and 
office tasks. 
The compact, lightweight IBM 3178 
provides many of the functions of the 3278 
Model 2, the company's most widely used 
display, at a significantly lower price. This new 
display was developed at IBM's Fujisawa 
Development Laboratory in Japan. 
New attachment features allow IBM 3278 
and 3279 displays to be used as IBM Personal 
Computers, giving these widely used terminals 
added data processing capabilities and flexibility. 
Also announced was the IBM 3290, 
which uses state-of-the-art gas panel technol-
ogy and can display almost 10,000 characters 
on a distort ion-free, high-resolution screen. 
Designed for uses such as program develop-
ment and data communications, the 3290 can 
display letters, numbers or graphs simultane-
ously. Its screen can be divided into four sepa-
rate areas to view data from various computers. 
Four new IBM 3274 control unit models, 
used for directing communications between a 
host computer and displays or printers, provide 
improved price/performance. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
The new IBM 5080 can display high-
resolution color graphics to help scientists and 
engineers with a range of manufacturing and 
design tasks. More than a million points on 
the display's 19-inch screen can be used to 
create and show details of machine or vehicle 
parts, circuit designs or stress analysis models. 
The IBM 5080 can use many existing com-
puter-aided design, manufacturing and simu-
lation programs without alteration. 
Office productivity 
IBM extended the capabilities of its office 
systems offerings to improve the productivity of 
end users and enable customers to plan and 
implement more efficient networks linking 
multiple locations within an enterprise. 
Letters, memos or other documents can 
be exchanged electronically among IBM System/ 
370-based computers using new Distributed 
Office Support System programming and 
extensions to IBM's Systems Network Architec-
ture. These software products also allow the 
IBM 8100 distributed information system and 
55ZO administrative system to be integrated 
into the networks and support a variety 
of IBM workstations, including Displaywriter 
and selected IBM 3270 displays. New cus-
tomer self-education courses on network fun-
damentals were offered by Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
The versatility of the Displaywriter system 
also was enhanced with extended data pro-
cessing and business graphics capabilities. 
Also announced were communications 
features that allow the Electronic Typewriter 95 
and 85 to be linked to a variety of display ter-
minals, word processing systems and computers. 
More than 4,000 hiies are available to create 
high-resolution, computer-generated images on the 
IBM 5(><S'o graphics system. 
Data base programming 
IBM Database 2 and two related programs 
offer large manufacturing, insurance, financial 
or public utility organizations easier access to 
data for strategic planning or day-to-day 
decision making. These software products 
allow users to establish relational data bases in 
which data can be rearranged easily. Organizing 
information in this way simplifies the task of 
working with large amounts of information, 
and permits managers, economists, scientists or 
engineers to explore the many combinations 
and interrelationships of data and test the 
efi-ects of decisions. 
Printers and storage units 
The IBM 4250 printer, based on advanced, 
electro-erosion technology, produces high-
resolution, camera-ready masters for computer-
based printing applications. Electrodes in its 
print head create 360,000 individually address-
able picture elements per square inch to form 
crisp, clear numbers, letters or graphics. The 
4250 joins a series of IBM products that can be 
integrated into a computer-based document 
processing and publishing system. 
A new IBM 3268 serial printer model 
makes a range of graphics applications possible 
for users of a variety of IBM computers and 
Engineers at IBM's Fujisaiua laboratory iri 
Japan are ivorking to develop advanced image 
workstations that will make it easier to 
create, modify, store and transmit text, data and 
draivings via computer netivorks. 
The print head of the IBM 42^0 printer contains 
32 tiny electrodes which form letters or other images 
by removing an cdumimim coating from a special 
paper to create "camera-ready" masters for printing. 
The printer was developed in the Boeblingen, 
Germany, laboratorM 


===== PAGE 22 =====
The compact IBM 
tape subsystem, developed 
at IBM's Tiicson facility, gives users of mid-range 
IBM computers ynajiy of the performance and 
reliability features previously available only with 
larger tape units. 
display systems. The new model prints in four 
colors and operates at a maximum speed of 
340 characters per second, more than two-and-
a-half times the rate of the previous compa-
rable printer. 
The compact IBM 3430 magnetic tape 
subsystem is designed for use with mid-range 
computers such as the System/38 and 
4300 series. It can read and record more than 
300,000 characters of information each 
second and store up to 6,250 characters per 
inch of tape. 
Finance systems 
The IBM 4730 personal banking machine 
can dispense exact change, cash paychecks 
and accept check deposits without deposit slips 
or envelopes. Designed to reduce the number 
and type of forms needed to complete many 
routine transactions, the 4730 also provides 
new self-service banking features such as 
cashing Social Security or other "third party" 
checks, hi addition, this new automated teller 
machine can be used to transfer money 
between accounts and make payments and 
withdrawals. In supermarkets and other stores, 
it can authorize personal checks for accep-
tance at check-out counters. 
A new administrative terminal and a 
forms/passbook printer to handle a range of 
'back-office" and teller tasks expand the 
4700 finance communication system. The 
New evaluation techniques introduced by this 
component procurement center in Bordeaux, 
France, and a counterpart center in Poughkeepsie, 
N.Y., helped reduce costs and raise quality 
levels of purclmsed components. 
The IBM4j^o banking machine can dispense exact 
change and bills in five denominations, giving users 
added self-service banking convenience. It also can 
be used to authorize or cash checks, providing a cost-
effective -way for supermarkets and other stores to 
offer these customer services. 
new printer models can be used to prepare 
letters, receipts and checks or print a variety of 
business forms, including passbooks. 
Plant, laboratory systems 
IBM s line of industrial automation prod-
ucts was expanded with the introduction of the 
7540 Manufacturing System for use in a range 
of assembly and material-handling tasks. This 
new robotic system is controlled by a micro-
processor that can store up to five applioition 
programs, enabling users to change quickly 
from one task to another. It also features data 
communications capabilities that allow mul-
tiple robotic systems to be linked to a host 
computer for online control and data collection. 
To help improve productivity in research 
and clinical laboratories, IBM Instruments, 
Inc., announced an automated sample-handling 
device for use with the LC/934 Liquid Chro-
matography System. These machines, when 
used with the System 9000 computer, provide a 
highly automated system for both standard 
and complex laboratory analysis. This IBM sub-
sidiary also announced a multicolor plotter 
that can be used to prepare precise technical 
charts or business graphs. 
Image processor 
IBM began shipments of the 7350 image 
processing system, a specialized system 
that can be used by scientists, engineers and 


===== PAGE 23 =====
technicians to display detailed pictures created 
from large amounts of geological, medical or 
other research data. In mineral exploration, for 
example, the 7350 could be used by geologists 
to depict subterranean formations based on 
seismic data. Users of the 7350 can display 
color images made up of some 32,000 hues, 
4,000 of which can be displayed at any one 
time. The ii^M 7350 has a 19-inch viewing 
screen and can be used with a variety of inter-
mediate and large-scale IBM computers. 
Controlling networks 
New communications devices help users 
establish and operate computer networks 
and make it easier to change configurations to 
accommodate growth. The IBM 3715 can 
link up to eight computers, and allows data to 
be transmitted over as many as 256 lines 
concurrently. Key elements of the controller are 
based on microprocessors and are designed to 
make the job of adding new terminals to a 
network or rearranging data transmission pat-
terns easier. The 3725's internal performance 
is up to 3.5 times that of an IBM 3705-11, a 
previously announced communications device. 
A microprocessor-based IBM modem 
allows products such as terminals or control-
lers to be linked to computers or networks 
via voice-quality telephone lines. The new 3868 
features extended diagnostic capabilities 
that help operators identify and isolate trans-
mission errors and speed repair. 
Financing options 
In the U.S., IBM Credit Corporation 
added more than 100 machine types to the list 
of IBM products that can be financed through 
this wholly owned subsidiary. Also, for 
IBM 
communicatims controllers and 
rack- mounted modems undergo systems test at tlie 
La Gaiide development laboratory in France. 
The extensive test, a mwly inaugurated quality 
measure, siynulates a customer network environment. 
commercial customers, the minimum down 
payment for financing most equipment 
was reduced from 25 percent to 10 percent, 
and the maximum financing term was length-
ened to five years. Two new lease options for 
state and local governments were offered. 
Wholly owned subsidiaries similar to IBM 
Credit Corporation also have been formed in 
six other countries, including Canada, France 
and the United Kingdom. To meet Japanese 
customers' requirements for term leases and 
flexible financing, IBM Japan formed a joint 
venture with Morgan Guaranty International 
Finance Corporation and Orient Leasing 
Company, Ltd. to establish Computer Systems 
Leasing, Ltd. 
Independent Business Units 
At the end of 1983, there were 11 Inde-
pendent Business Units operating in the U. S. 
These units were: Academic Information 
Systems, Biomedical Systems, Financial 
Services, General Products, Graphics Systems 
Programs, Industrial Automation, Informa-
tion Services, IBM Instruments, Inc., Low-End 
Storage, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
and Telecommunications Carrier Products. 
European Independent Business Units are 
Motor assemblies used in IBM's 3380 disk storage 
units are tested automaticcdly idth a robotic system 
installed at tJie suggestion of an employee quality 
circle at the Fujisawa plant 
injapari. 
I B M t A t 
IBM was one of 60 companies to display equipment at 
the first international scientific and computer 
exhibition held in the Shenzhen Special Economic Zone, 
a trade zone established by the People's Republic of 
China to promote economic development. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
IBM researchers have developed, fabricated 
and 
tested an experimental Field Effect Transistor (FET) 
memory chip that can store viore than 64,000 bits 
of data and can read or write information at speeds 
of about 20 nanoseconds—billionths of a second. 
The chip operates at speeds about twice that of the 
fastest such chips now in use. 
providing products and services tailored to the 
needs of individual countries in such fields as 
telecommunications, manufacturing, academic 
information systems and information net-
works. In addition, Independent Business Units 
in Japan are responsible for developing and 
introducing products that meet the unique 
needs of the Japanese marketplace. 
Lawsuit settled 
Agreements reached with Hitachi, Ltd. 
and with National Semiconductor Corporation 
and its subsidiary. National Advanced Systems, 
bring to an end existing civil litigation between 
IBM and those companies. The corporations 
and several individuals were named in a civil suit 
filed by IBM in 1982 in connection with the 
theft of confidential IBM documents and mate-
rials. The agreements call for the companies to 
refrain from using or disclosing IBM proprietary 
information, give IBM the right to inspect each 
company's new products for a period of five 
years to ensure compliance, compensate IBM 
for its expenses, and establish a system for resolv-
ing any future disputes by arbitration. Three 
individuals remain defendants in this action. 
Federal Systems Division 
The Federal Systems Division, which sup-
plies specialized information-handling equip-
ment and services to the U.S. government, was 
involved in more than 25 major projects for 
Felephone customers in Munich, Germany, 
get much faster responses to information requests 
since the installation in 
of IBM's Directory 
Assistance System. The government-oiuned 
telephone company plans to extend the service 
throughout Germany. 
A U.S. Navy helicopter eciuipped with advanced 
electronic detection, processing and transmission 
systems developed by IBM's Federal Systems 
Division is tested in a specicd chamber in the 
division's Oiuego, N.Y., facility. 
some 15 government agencies during the year. 
The projects included working on a global 
navigation system and an advanced air traffic 
control system. In addition, this division is the 
prime contractor for the U. S. Navy's L.AM I'S 
(Light Airborne Multipurpose System) MK ill, 
a system in which equipment aboard hch-
copters and ships is linked to provide improved 
submarine-detection capabilities. The first 
production LAM PS system was delivered to the 
Navy in September, a month ahead of schedule. 
Investing in the future 
IBM continued investing in new tech-
nologies and advanced processes, and expand-
ing its manufacturing and development facili-
ties to prepare for growth in the years ahead. 
During the year, IBM spent $3.6 billion on 
research, development and engineering, bring-
ing the company's five-year investment to 
$13.4 billion. 
The company invested $2.6 billion 
in new plant and more efiicient equipment in 
1983. More than 1.7 million square feet of 
plant and laboratory space were completed 
during the year. An additional 3.5 million 
square feet were under construction. 
Major projects completed during 1983 
included a programming and administration 
facility in Kingston, N.Y., manufacturing 
facilities in Charlotte, N.C., and Rochester, 
Minn., and manufacturing support centers in 
Don Mills, Canada, and Jarfalla, Sweden. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Companywide, major expansion projects 
include a research laboratory and manufac-
turing data center in San Jose, Calif., a chip 
production facility in East Fishkill, N.Y., and 
manufacturing plants in Manassas, Va., and 
Vimercate, Italy. 
In 1983, IBM-owned and leased manu-
facturing and laboratory space was increased 
9.1 percent to a total of approximately 81 
million square feet. 
Cooperative development, investments 
IBM and ROLM Corporation announced 
an agreement to work together to find ways to 
link their respective products. ROLM is a 
California-based manufacturer of commu-
nications products such as private automatic 
branch exchanges. The agreement also pro-
vides for IBM to purchase a minority interest in 
ROLM. At the end of 1983, IBM o w n e d 
about 20 percent of ROLM'S common stock. 
IBM also increased its investment in 
Intel Corporation, a major semiconductor 
manufacturer and an important supplier to 
IBM. The investment helps strengthen 
Intel's research, development and production 
capacity At year end, IBM owned about 17.5 
percent of Intel's common stock. 
Employee suggestions 
In 1983, six IBM employees were awarded 
$100,000 each for cost-saving ideas that helped 
IBM improve operations. The awards, the 
maximum under IBM's employee suggestion 
program, were part of approximately $14 mil-
lion awarded to employees companywide. 
The 36,000 suggestions recognized under this 
program during the year represent a savings 
to the company of at least $65 million. 
Satellite Business Systems 
Satellite Business Systems (SBS), a partner-
ship formed by COMSAT General Corporation, 
Aetna Life & Casualty and IBM, continued 
expanding its highly reliable voice and data 
transmission services during 1983. A growing 
number of large corporations, small busi-
nesses and residential customers are using SBS 
fiicilities, and traffic is increasing significantly. 
The future progress of SBS will be significantly 
afi^ected by actions associated with the de-
regulation of the telecommunications industry. 
SBS will work with others to arrive at solutions 
which will foster the healthiest economic 
climate in the industry. 
Support to education 
IBM introduced new support programs for 
schools and universities in order to help im-
prove the quality of education and prepare 
teachers and students to work with advanced 
information-handling products. 
Twenty-two U. S. universities received 
advanced IBM computer-aided design and man-
ufacturing systems or cash grants as part of a 
$50 million program to encourage excellence in 
manufacturing systems engineering education. 
The donation program, the largest in the com-
pany's history, is in response to the need in 
industry for people who can make full use of 
advanced-technology manufacturing systems. 
Another program named 50 untenured 
faculty members from 25 U.S. universities as 
the first recipients of IBM grants established to 
help universities retain outstanding teachers 
in computer science, materials science and 
related engineering fields. The IBM Faculty 
Development Awards Program provides two-
year grants of $30,000 a year to each recipi-
ent to help support research work. Fifty 
more recipients will be named in 1984. 
In Europe, IBM is sponsoring the devel-
opment of an international network that will 
link university scientists and IBM research 
facilities in Europe and the U. S. Called the 
European Aaidemic and Research Network, it 
will be the first such privately sponsored net-
An IBM instructor in Neiv York City 
provides 
technical training via satellite network to customers 
in New York, Houston and Minneapolis. 
In 
1984, 
this cost-effective training will be offered in eight 
IBM is an official sponsor of the 1984 
Olympics, 
and IBM Personal Computers and office systems are 
being used by the. Los Angeles Olympic 
Organizing 
Committee to help handle a luide range of 
adminis-
trative a nd other support tasks. 
more cities. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
New businesses such as this small furniture 
refinishing shop in London receive support and 
counselingfrmn IBM employees on loan to 
inner city revitalization agencies throughout the 
United Kingdom. 
work and will encourage the exchange of 
scientific and technical information among in-
stitutions and colleagues in many countries. 
IBM also sponsors annual summer institutes in 
Europe to facilitate the exchange of informa-
tion among scientists and IBM specialists. 
IBM is working with several leading 
universities in the U. S. and Europe to develop 
communications links that will tie powerful 
workstations to central computers serving the 
entire academic community. These projects 
are aimed at the development of new hardware 
and software that will improve and simplify 
access to information systems. 
Twelve teacher-training institutions and 
89 schools in California, Florida and New 
York are participating in an IBM-sponsored 
program designed to help secondary schools 
determine the best ways to use computers 
and software in the classroom. IBM is providing 
some 1,500 Personal Computers, related 
software, technical support and cash grants. 
Companywide, Personal Computers have 
been donated to schools, colleges, universities 
and nonprofit research centers in 29 countries. 
Fifty-seven IBM employees were partici-
pants in the Faculty Loan Program in 1983, 
and will spend at least one academic year teach-
ing or working at educational institutions 
which have programs that serve disadvantaged 
students. Since the program was established 
in 1971, more than 400 employees have been 
loaned at full pay to participating institutions. 
An IBM-sponsored television program on 
the scientific and artistic contributions of 
Leonardo da Vinci was telecast in nine coun-
tries. In the U S., educational materials for 
use in conjunction with the program were sent 
to some 22,000 schools and community 
colleges. Commercial time during the U. S. 
broadcast was devoted to the importance of 
quality education in America. 
IBM and the community 
Community programs initiated by 
IBM during 1983 included providing support to 
a drug awareness program in the U. S. Teachers' 
guides and classroom materials dealing with the 
devastating effects of drug abuse will be distrib-
uted to elementary school students in 35,000 
schools. IBM also supported nonprofit organiza-
tions working on a range of problems such as 
delivering health care and social services to 
elderly and handicapped persons and improving 
housing in inner city neighborhoods. 
IBM expanded its support of job training 
programs, providing equipment and technical 
support at 30 major centers in the U. S. 
The centers—nine of them new in 1983—are 
operated in connection with nonprofit, com-
munity-based organizations. They provide 
training for the socially and economically dis-
advantaged in fields such as computer operations 
and word processing. 
Since the mid-r970S, IBM has helped estab-
lish 27 job training centers for the physically 
disabled. More than r,ioo handicapped people 
have received training as entry-level programmers. 
In addition, more than 100 employees began 
participating in the IBM Social Service Leave 
Program during 1983. Under this program, IBM 
employees work for nonprofit organizations. 
Worldwide, IBM's contributions of cash, 
equipment and other resources to social, 
cultural and educational programs reached a 
record $115 million in 1983. 
Affirmative Action within IBM 
During 1983, IBM hired about 10,000 
people in the U. S. Of these, 45 percent were 
women and 19 percent were minorities. At 
year end, IBM had approximately 3,600 women 
managers and 3,000 minority managers in the 
U. S. Companywide, several thousand handi-
capped persons are employed by IBM. 
IBM expanded its program to support 
minority-owned businesses in the U.S. In 1983, 
IBM did business exceeding $90 million with 
more than 750 such firms. IBM also purchased 
more than $50 million in products and services 
from more than 500 companies owned primar-
ily by women and more than $16 million from 
more than 80 companies which employ large 
numbers of handicapped workers. 
IBM's support of the arts in 
included sponsor-
ship of an exhibition of the works of American 
artist Robert Motherwell. The exhibition opened 
in Buffalo, N.Y., and will travel to Los Angeles, 
San Francisco, Seattle, Washington, D.C. and 
Nexv York City iii 1984. 
Classes in an IBM-sponsored job training center 
in Enschede, Holland, are designed to help students 
develop basic business and data processing skills. 
IBM sponsors similar job training programs in many 
other European countries. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity 
of the financial information presented in this 
Annual Report rests with IBM management. The 
accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles, applying certain esti-
mates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of 
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, 
of organizational arrangements with clearly 
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of 
authority We believe this system provides 
reasonable assurance that transactions are 
executed in accordance with management au-
thorization, and that they are appropriately 
recorded, in order to permit preparation of 
financial statements in conformity with generally 
accepted accounting principles and to 
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain 
accountability of assets. An important element 
of the system is an ongoing internal audit 
program. 
To assure the effective administration of 
internal control, we carefully select and train 
our employees, develop and disseminate written 
policies and procedures, provide appropriate 
communication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of 
controls. We continue to believe that it is 
essential for the company to conduct its business 
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
lated into numerous languages, are distributed 
to employees throughout the world, and 
reemphasized through internal programs to 
assure that they are understood and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial 
statements. Their accompanying report is 
based on an examination conducted in accor-
dance with generally accepted auditing stan-
dards, including a review of internal accounting 
controls and tests of accounting procedures 
and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors is composed solely of outside directors, 
and is responsible for recommending to 
the Board the independent accounting firm to 
be retained for the coming year, subject to 
stockholder approval. The Audit Committee 
meets periodically and privately with the 
independent accountants, with our internal 
auditors, as well as with IBM management, to 
review accounting, auditing, internal account-
ing controls and financial reporting matters. 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Allen J. Krowe 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance &: Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors 
of International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 26, 28, 
30, and 32 through 41, present fairly the financial 
position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiary companies 
at December 31,1983 and 1982, and the results 
of their operations and changes in funds 
for each of the three years in the period ended 
December 31,1983, in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles con-
sistently applied. Our examinations of these 
January 31,1984 
statements were made in accordance with 
generally accepted auditing standards and accord-
ingly included such tests of the accounting 
records and such other auditing procedures as we 
considered necessary in the circumstances. 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
New York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross Income: 
Sales 
Rentals 
Services 
Cost of sales 
Cost of rentals 
Cost of services 
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . . 
Research, development and engineering expenses. 
Interest expense 
Other income, principally interest 
Earnings before income taxes 
Provision for income taxes 
Net Earnings 
Per share 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1983-606,769,848 
1 9 8 2 - 5 9 6 , 6 8 8 , 5 0 1 
1 9 8 1 - 5 8 7 , 8 0 3 , 3 7 3 
t State and local income taxes have been reclassified to 
conform with 1983 presentation. (See note on page 37) 
1983 
1982 
9,^30 
7^676 
9»748 
3>i4i 
3,506 
10,614 
3,582 
390 
$40,180 
30>98I 
9»i99 
741 
9,940 
4>455 
$ 
5,485 
$ 9.04 
1 6 , 8 1 5 
1 1 , 1 2 1 
6,428 
6,682 
3,959 
3,047 
9,286t 
3,042 
454 
$34,364 
26,470 
7,894 
8,222 
3 , 8 i 3 t 
$ 
4,409 
$7-39 
1 2 , 9 0 1 
10,839 
5,330 
$29,070 
5 , 1 6 2 
4,041 
2,534 
8,383t 
2,451 
407 
22,978 
6,092 
368 
6,460 
2,850t 
$ 3 , 6 1 0 
$ 6 . 1 4 


===== PAGE 29 =====
Results of Operations 
Operations in 1983 showed positive results 
across the broad range of our activities and 
exceeded our prior year's record performance. 
Gross income in 1983 increased by 16.9 per-
cent to $40.2 billion. Gross income from U. S. 
operations rose 21.5 percent and gross income 
from non-U. S. operations increased by 11.2 
percent. 
Net earnings for the year increased by 24.4 
percent to $5.5 billion, yielding a 13.7 percent 
margin, an increase of approximately one per-
centage point. Net earnings from U. S. operations 
grew by 20.3 percent to $3.3 billion and net 
earnings from non-U. S. operations increased by 
31.2 percent to $2.2 billion. 
The effects of price elasticity and improved 
technologies have been key elements in IBM's 
growth. As technology and productivity 
programs have yielded improved costs, customers 
have benefited through lower prices and enhanced 
function. These factors have been vital in the 
broad, strong market expansion the industry has 
experienced. In anticipation of this expanding 
market, IBM has, since the mid-seventies, made 
significant investments in research, development, 
engineering and in efficient production facilities. 
Simultaneously, there has been sustained 
emphasis on quality and greater efficiency in all 
aspects of our business. These factors have 
led to a continuing flow of successful product and 
service offerings, which are benefiting our cus-
tomers and providing favorable financial returns 
to IBM. 
Gross income from sales in 1983 grew by 
38.4 percent to $23.3 billion. As illustrated 
in the table below, gross income from sales has 
grown steadily over the past several years as a 
portion of total gross income, while gross income 
from rentals, primarily convenience leases, has 
steadily declined. This decline in rental gross 
income amounted to 17 percent as compared to 
the prior year. 
IBM's participation in the financing of our 
customers' acquisition of products is growing 
steadily In 1983, customers financed through the 
IBM Credit Corporation and similar IBM activities 
around the world, approximately $2 billion 
in purchase value of IBM equipment. The trend 
toward purchase and long-term leases is expected 
to continue. 
The information on Industry Segments for 
classes of similar products or services is set 
forth on page 41. The trend toward greater sales 
and diminished rental revenues is evident in 
each of the major classes of product groupings. 
Year-to-year growth is expected in each of 
the major classes. 
Services gross income, which consists pri-
marily of maintenance and program products 
revenues, rose in 1983 by 19.4 percent over the 
prior year. Program products gross income 
increased by 36.0 percent. Maintenance gross 
income grew by 16.2 percent. 
In 1983, gross profits increased by 15.0 
percent to a total of $23.8 billion, and the overall 
gross profit margin decreased to 59.2 percent 
from 60.2 percent in 1982.This margin change 
was caused primarily by changes in product 
and revenue mix. A decline in sales gross profit 
margin of 2.2 percentage points was partially 
offset by an increase in both rental and service 
gross profit margins of 1.6 and 1.7 percentage 
points respectively The development of new 
marketing distribution channels, volume 
procurement agreements and similar marketing 
plans contributed to higher revenues and lower 
selling, general and administrative expense ratios, 
thereby compensating for the lower price-to-cost 
relationship for many of our newer products. 
In 1983, selling, general and administrative 
expenses were 26.4 percent of gross revenues, as 
compared to 27.0 percent in 1982. This ratio has 
declined steadily since 1979. In 1983, the cor-
poration announced a special opportunity plan 
applicable to selected locations around the world. 
In those areas where the corporation has excess 
skills, incentives were offered to employees with 
25 years or more of service to leave the company 
voluntarily Had this action not been reflected in 
the 1983 financial results, the reduction in the 
selling, general and administrative expense to rev-
enue ratio would have more than offset the one 
percent reduction in gross profit margin. 
Research, development and engineering 
remains a vital factor in IBM's leadership strategy 
In 1983, the company expended $3.6 billion in 
research, development and engineering, an 
increase of 17.7 percent over the prior year. 
Other income grew substantially in 1983 to 
$741 million, primarily from earnings on our 
improved cash and marketable securities position. 
Interest income accounted for in excess of 70 
percent of the total. Other items included net 
earnings from the unconsolidated IBM Credit 
Corporation and settlements with other computer 
manufacturers for their prior use of IBM's pro-
gramming materials. 
The effective tax rate in 1983 decreased by 
1.6 percentage points from the prior year, 
resulting primarily from increased tax credits due 
to cash flows from non-U. S. operations. 
The continued strengthening of the U. S. 
dollar in 1983, in relation to most other major 
currencies (see graphs on page 35), had an adverse 
impact on IBM's non-U. S. performance when 
translated into U. S. dollars. 
In 1983, we have seen renewed economic 
expansion in the U. S. economy and evidence 
of increased economic activity in other countries 
around the world. 
IBM Consolidated Gross Income: (In millions) 
>40,000 
44,000 
40,000 
36,000 
>40,000 
44,000 
40,000 
36,000 
>40,000 
44,000 
40,000 
36,000 
>40,000 
44,000 
40,000 
36,000 
19% 
31,000 
31,000 
19% 
28,000 
24,000 
20,000 
28,000 
24,000 
20,000 
18% 
28,000 
24,000 
20,000 
15% 
r 
32.% 
16,000 
12,000 
44% 
41%' 
( .Jf 
K V 
• :' ! 
'58%-
8,000 
4,000 
'41%^ 
42% 
•tjs/y 
.45% 
0 
i 
t ' ~ 1 
E 
3 
L 
ttJ 
1979 
'80 
'81 
'82 
1983 
! mm 
Sales 
J 
Rentals 
Services 
IBM 
Annual Report 
irj 


===== PAGE 30 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1 9 8 3 
1982 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
$ 
616 
$ 
405 
Marketable securities, at lower of cost or market 
4,920 
2,895 
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 
5 . 7 3 5 
4,976 
Other accounts receivable 
6 4 5 
457 
Inventories 
4,381 
3,492 
Prepaid expenses 
9 7 3 
789 
$ 17,270 
$ I 3,0 1 4 
Rental Machines and Parts 
13,409 
16,527 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
6 , 5 9 7 
7,410 
6,812 
9,1 ' 7 
Plant and Other Property 
1 5 , 7 7 8 
14,240 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
6,448 
5,794 
9 , 3 3 0 
8,446 
Investments and Other Assets 
3 , 8 3 1 
1,964 
$ 
3 7 , 2 4 3 
( 5 32,541 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
$ 
3,220 
$ 
2,854 
Loans payable 
5 3 2 
529 
Accounts payable 
1 , ^ 5 3 
983 
Compensation and benefits 
2 , 4 5 0 
',959 
Deferred income 
382 
402 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
1,670 
1,482 
$ 
9 , 5 0 7 
( t 
8,209 
Deferred Income Taxes 
7 1 3 
323 
Reserves for Employees' Indemnities and Retirement Plans 
1 , 1 3 0 
1,198 
Long-Term Debt 
2,674 
2 , 8 5 1 
Stockholders' Equity: 
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 
5,800 
5,008 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1983-610,724,641; 1982-602,406,128 
Retained earnings 
19,489 
1 6 , 2 5 9 
Translation adjustments 
(2,070) 
( 1 , 3 0 7 ) 
23,219 
I 9,960 
s 
3 7 , 2 4 3 
< 5 32,541 
The notes on pages 33 through 41 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Financial Condition 
In 1983, IBM further improved its financial 
condition while continuing to make significant 
investments in research, development and engi-
neering, technology, efficient production facilities 
and product distribution and service networks. 
Expenditures for research, development and 
engineering amounted to $3.6 billion in 1983, 
which brought the total for the past five years to 
more than $13 billion.The scope of these invest-
ments, all of which are expensed as incurred, 
covers a broad range of activities from basic 
research to applied development. In an increas-
ingly competitive international environment, 
these investments are required to maintain 
a steady flow of innovative new products that 
provide the basis for future growth. 
Investments in land, buildings, machinery 
and equipment amounted to $2.6 billion in 1983, 
a 6 percent increase over the prior year. Over the 
past five years these investments have amounted 
to more than $ 11 billion and provide the capac-
ity for growth to allow us to meet the increasing 
demand for our products (see graph depicting 
these investments on page 31). Management 
intends to continue to invest prudently at levels 
commensurate with the anticipated market 
expansion. 
IBM invested $588 million in program prod-
ucts in the current year and almost $2 billion over 
the past five years. The unamortized portion 
of this investment amounted to $1.3 billion at the 
end of 1983. The continuing success of these 
program products is evidenced by an annual 
compound growth rate of revenue in excess of 
42 percent over the past five years. Revenue in 
1983 amounted to $2.3 billion. 
Investments in rental machines and parts 
declined by 45 percent in 1983. This trend is 
consistent with the changing character of our 
business, as described on page 27, and is expected 
to continue. 
In 1983, IBM invested $501 million in long-
term fixed rate U. S. Government securities matur-
ing in 1985 and 1986, with the intent to hold such 
securities to maturity to offset long-term debt 
maturing at approximately the same time. 
In addition, investments totaling $843 million 
were made during 1983 in the Intel and ROLM 
Corporations. Our investments help to provide 
these companies with the necessary capital 
resources to participate in significant growth 
opportunities in an orderly fashion and offer IBM 
a sound investment. 
Funds from operations amounted to $11.9 
billion in 1983, an increase of almost 20 percent 
over the prior year. This increase was primarily the 
result of the 24.4 percent increase in net earn-
ings. The shift toward higher levels of sales has 
resulted in improved funds flow and greater return 
on assets. Sufficient funds were generated by 
operations to meet all of our operational needs, 
reduce our debt, provide for dividends, and increase 
our cash and marketable securities position. 
The strong growth of our business, and the 
rate of technological change, require management 
to maintain an environment conducive to the 
acceptance of new ideas without losing the disci-
plines of the past. The company has placed 
considerable emphasis on training and education 
to help prepare employees to manage the business 
during this period of change. 
Conservation of capital continues to be a 
major focus in managing IBM. Management is 
mindful of the risks inherent in high technology, 
the growing scope and quality of competition, 
and uncertain economic conditions. Renewed 
focus has been placed on key measurements with 
special emphasis on quality, turnover rates, 
return on assets, and return on investments and 
equity. Return on assets in 1983 was 15.7 percent, 
an increase of 1.4 percentage points over 1982. 
Return on stockholders' equity improved to 
25.4 percent from 23.4 percent in the prior year, 
an historic high for IBM. 
Although it is not expected that the 
corporation will require any appreciable external 
financing to provide for its growth in 1984, 
significant worldwide capital resources continue 
to be available to the corporation. The company 
has considerable financial flexibility throughout 
the world. 
At December 31,1983, the equity translation 
adjustment amounted to $2,070 million, an 
increase of $763 million over the prior year. This 
change is attributable to the continued strength 
of the U. S. dollar in relation to most other 
currencies and the method used for purposes of 
translation of non-U. S. operations into U. S. 
dollars for IBM's consolidated results. It is manage-
ment's view that the translation adjustment has 
significance only in situations where liquidation 
of net assets may be anticipated, and even in 
such circumstances, does not reflect the current 
market value of the assets as translated. Were 
the U. S. dollar to weaken in relation to other 
currencies, the translation adjustment would be 
reduced in proportion to the change in currency 
values, and IBM's net asset position in those 
countries affected. 
IBM's 1983 results were consistent with our 
stated goals for the Eighties. The company has 
exceeded the industry's growth rate for the past 
two years. Demand for our products, from the 
Personal Computer through high-performance 
large-scale processors, continues to be strong. The 
continued improvement in expense to revenue 
ratios reflects our commitment to greater efficiency. 
Our earnings results are providing the financial 
flexibility necessary to achieve our goals. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1983 
1982 
1981 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January i 
$ 3,300 
$ 2,029 
$ 2 , 1 1 2 
Provided from (used for) Operations: 
Sources: 
Net earnings 
$ 
5^485 
$4,409 
$ 3,610 
Items not requiring the current use of funds: 
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 
3^362 
3 , 1 4 3 
2 , 7 5 3 
Net book value of rental machines and 
other property retired or sold 
2,108 
1,642 
1 , 2 1 2 
Amortization of program products 
3 1 1 
249 
1 7 3 
Other 
322 
85 
(189) 
11,588 
9,528 
7 , 5 5 9 
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities 
capitalized in rental machines 
265 
4 1 9 
4 2 4 
1 1 , 8 5 3 
9,947 
7 , 9 8 3 
Uses: 
Investment in rental machines 
4 , 2 5 4 
4,610 
Investment in plant and other property 
2,578 
2 , 4 3 1 
2,235 
4,930 
6,685 
6,845 
Investment in program products 
588 
468 
348 
Increase (decrease) in investments and other assets 
. . . . 
1,590 
(256) 
105 
Net change in w^orking capital 
(excluding cash, marketable securities 
and loans payable) 
725 
307 
( 1 3 3 ) 
7 , 8 3 3 
7,204 
7 , 1 6 5 
Translation effects 
(147) 
30 
(53) 
Net provided from operations 
3,873 
2,773 
7 6 5 
Provided from External Financing: 
Net change in long-term debt 
(177) 
1 8 2 
5 7 0 
Net change in loans payable 
3 
(244) 
1 8 2 
Net provided from external financing 
(174) 
(62) 
7 5 2 
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 
788 
6 1 3 
423 
7,787 
5 , 3 5 3 
4,052 
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 
2,251 
2,053 
2,023 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December 31 
$5,536 
$ 3 , 3 0 0 
$ 2,029 
The notes on pages 33 through 41 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Plant and Other Property $2,578 
$788 Stock Plans 
$ 174 New Long-Term Debt 
$ 11,706 Operations! 
Rental Machines 
$351 Reduction of Long-Term Debt 
: 
$588 Program Products 
$722 Working Capital t 
$ 1,590 Investments and Other Assets 
$2,251 Cash Dividends 
tlnciudes Effects oriranslation 
+ Excludes Cash and Marketable Securities 
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property 
Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property 
Over the past five years, the company has 
invested over $11 billion in land, buildings, and 
machinery and equipment to meet customer 
demands, maintain technological leadership and 
improve productivity These recent additions 
represent approximately tw^o-thirds of the gross 
asset value of plant and other property as of the 
end of December, 1983. Since 1980, investments 
exceeded $2 billion in each year. Continuous 
upgrading of our facilities is essential to achieve 
our objectives. Large investments will continue to 
be required in future years. 
(In millions) 
1979 
'80 
81 
8 1 
1983 
i A n n u a l 
i S ? ' C u m u l a t i v e f o r 
five-year 
p e r i o d 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity 
for the year ended December 31: 
Translation 
(Dollars in millions) 
Capital Stock 
Retained Earnings 
Adjustments 
Treasury Stock 
Total 
1981 
, 
Stockholders'Equity, January 1,1981 
. . . . 
$ 3 , 9 9 2 
$ 1 2 , 3 2 6 
$ 
2 9 0 
$(30) 
$ 1 6 , 5 7 8 
Net earnings 
3 , 6 1 0 
3 , 6 1 0 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,023) 
(2,023) 
Capital stock issued 
under employee plans (8,031,550 shares). . 
394 
394 
Sales (455,242 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee plan 
(4) 
3 0 
26 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
3 
3 
Translation adjustments 
( 9 1 2 ) 
( 9 1 2 ) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1981 . . . 
4,389 
1 3 , 9 0 9 
(622) 
1 7 , 6 7 6 
1982 
Net earnings 
4 , 4 0 9 
4,409 
Cash dividends declared 
(2.,053) 
(2,053) 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholder plans (10,112,504 shares) 
. . 
6 0 2 
6 0 2 
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired 
and sold under employee plans 
(6) 
(6) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
1 7 
1 7 
Translation adjustments 
(685) 
(685) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1982 . . . 
5,008 
1 6 , 2 5 9 
(1,307) 
1 9 , 9 6 0 
1983 
Net earnings 
5,485 
5,485 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,251) 
(2,251) 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) . . . 
7 4 1 
741 
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired 
and sold under employee plans 
(4) 
(4) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
51 
51 
Translation adjustments 
(763) 
(763) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 . . . 
$ 5,800 
$ 1 9 , 4 8 9 
$ (2,070) 
$ 
— 
$ 2 3 , 2 1 9 
The notes on pages 33 through 41 
are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements; 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of Consolidation: 
The consohdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation 
and its U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned IBM Credit Corporation 
and similar non-U. S. finance subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. Investments in joint ventures, and 
other companies in which IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method. 
Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted for by the cost method. 
Translation of 
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S. 
dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly 
inflationary, inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates 
prevailing when acquired. All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories 
charged to cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items 
are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from 
remeasurement are included in earnings. 
Gross Income: 
Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon 
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services 
over the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain 
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period. 
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM's financing subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales. 
Program Products: 
Depreciation: 
Retirement Plans: 
Selling Expenses: 
Inventories: 
Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and 
development. Costs incurred subsequent to a design verification test to produce the finished product are generally 
capitalized as program products assets. The assets are amortized over the estimated revenue-producing life of 
the program, but not in excess of five years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed. 
Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives. 
Depreciation of rental machines is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method. Depreciation of plant and 
other property is computed using either accelerated methods or the straight-line method. 
Current service costs are accrued currently Prior service costs resulting from improvements in the plans are 
amortized generally over 10 years. 
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing 
differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable 
earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense 
over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property. 
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process applicable to equipment sales are included 
in inventories at the lower of average cost or market. Work in process applicable to equipment rentals is similarly 
valued and included in rental machines and parts. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Non-U. S. Operations 
(Dollars in millions) 
1983 
1982 
1981 
At end of year: 
Net assets employed 
Current assets 
$ 
8,294 
$ 
6,299 
$ 
5,436 
Current liabilities 
4,704 
4,240 
4,108 
Working capital 
3»590 
2,059 
1,328 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
5,622 
6,740 
7 , 1 5 2 . 
Investments and other assets 
904 
887 
890 
1 0 , 1 1 6 
9,686 
9 , 3 7 0 
Deferred income taxes 
48 
— 
— 
Reserves for employees' indemnities and retirement plans 
1,130 
1,198 
1 , 1 8 4 
Long-term debt 
466 
480 
496 
1,644 
1,678 
1,680 
Net assets employed 
$ 
8,472 
$ 
8,008 
$ 
7,690 
Number of employees 
150,944 
150,444 
1 4 9 , 7 9 4 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
$ 
17,053 
$ 
1 5 , 3 3 6 
$ 13,982 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 
3,841 
$ 
3,226 
$ 
2,664 
Provision for income taxes 
1,677 
1 , 5 7 7 
1 , 1 2 3 
Net earnings 
$ 
2,164 
$ 
1,649 
$ 
1,541 
Investment in rental machines 
$ 
1,257 
$ 
1,893 
$ 
2,451 
Investment in plant and other property 
7 3 0 
789 
823 
S 
1,987 
$ 
2,682 
$ 
3 , 2 7 4 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local 
currency environment account for approximately 
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. 
The remaining 15% of the company's non-U. S. 
gross income is from subsidiaries and branches 
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic 
environment is highly inflationary. 
For the years 1983,1982 and 1981, non-U. S. 
financial results have been impacted by the 
strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the cur-
rencies of many countries. As the dollar strength-
ens, net assets and net earnings recorded in local 
currencies are translated into fewer U S. dollars 
than they would have been at the previous year's 
rates. The graphs on the next page illustrate 
the decline in relation to the dollar of the five 
major foreign currencies in which IBM conducts 
most of its non-U. S. business. 
Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid-
iaries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $8,510 million at December 31, 
1983, $7,538 million at December 31,1982, and 
$6,565 million at December 31,1981. These 
earnings are indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S. 
operations. Accordingly, no provision has been 
made for taxes that might be payable upon 
remittance of such earnings. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Percent Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar 
German mark 
0% 
French franc 
0% 
British sterling 
0% 
Italian lira 
Japanese yen 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1981 
1982 
1983 
1981 
1982 
198 3 
1981 
[982 
1983 
Base-as of January i, 1981 
Marketable Securities 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1983 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 2 
U. S. Government securities 
$ 
I >745 
$ 
1 , 1 6 7 
Time deposits and other bank obligations . . 
^>314 
1,388 
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed--term obligations 
. . . . 
861 
340 
Total 
$ 
4,920 
$ 
2,895 
Market value 
$ 
4,929 
$ 
2,899 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1983 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 2 
Finished goods 
$ 
872 
$ 
6 1 5 
Work in process 
3.267 
2 , 6 1 3 
Raw materials and operating supplies 
. . . . 
242 
264 
Total 
$ 
4,381 
$ 
3,492 
Rental Machines and Parts 
Rental machines and parts are comprised of 
amount of $3,331 million and $2,794 million at 
capitalized machines, rental machine work 
December 31,1983 and 1982, respectively, 
in process and field service parts. Rental machines 
with accumulated depreciation of $2,143 million 
include machines installed with IBM in the 
and $1,952 million. Rental machine work in 
process and field service parts totaled $2,534 
million and $3,676 million at December 31,1983 
and 1982, respectively. 
Plant and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 3 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 
Land and land improvements . . . . 
Buildings 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Total 
$ 
698 
$ 
688 
6,051 
5,586 
9,029 
7,966 
1 5 . 7 7 8 
14,240 
6,448 
5 . 7 9 4 
$ 
9.330 
$ 
8,446 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Investments and Other Assets 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1983 
December 31,1982 
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1983,$1,045; 1982., $763) 
IBM Credit Corporation 
U. S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value $502) 
Other investments and sundry assets 
Total 
Included in other investments and sundry assets are 1983 investments in Intel and 
ROLM Corporations amounting to $843 million. 
$ 1,287 
$ 1 , 0 1 0 
5^5 
290 
501 
— 
1 , 5 1 8 
664 
$ 3 , 8 3 1 
$ 1 , 9 6 4 
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1983 
December 31,1982 
U. S. Operations: 
9^/2% notes due 1986 
<)y%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments 1985-2003) 
10.80% notes due 1984-1986 
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1983, in parentheses) payable in : 
U.S. dollars, due 1984-2012 (12.9%) 
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (5.5%) 
German marks, due 1985-1988 (10.1%) 
Non-U. S. Operations: 
Various obligations (average interest rate at December 31,1983, in parentheses) payable in: 
U. S. dollars, due 1984-1992 (11.6%) 
Japanese yen, due 1984-2013 (8.3%) 
French francs, due 1984-1994 (12.8%) 
Other currencies, due 1984-1993 (18.2%) 
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 9V2% notes and 9%% debentures 
Less: Current maturities 
Total 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars 
on long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1983, are as follows: 1984, $248; 
1985, $416; 1986, $905; 1987, $338; 1988, $275; 1989 and beyond, $743. 
500 
500 
240 
678 
249 
^>370 
249 
1 3 3 
75 
98 
555 
2,925 
1 
2,922 
248 
$ 2,674 
500 
500 
300 
678 
2 5 1 
206 
^>455 
1 7 2 
1 2 8 
1 2 5 
^ 
2,996 
3 
^,993 
$ 2 , 8 5 1 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
1983 
1982! 
19811 
Earnings before income taxes: 
U.S. operations 
$ 6,099 
$4,996 
$3,796 
Non-U. S. operations 
3^841 
3,226 
2,664 
$ 9,940 
$ 8,222 
$ 6,460 
Provision for income taxes: 
U. S. operations 
$ 2,778 
$ 2,236 
$ 1,727 
Non-U. S. operations 
1 , 6 7 7 
1 , 5 7 7 
1 , 1 2 3 
4,455 
3 , 8 1 3 
2,850 
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 
1 , 5 5 0 
1,450 
1 , 3 8 7 
Total 
$ 6,005 
$5,263 
$4,237 
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows: 
US. Federal: 
Current 
$ 1,624 
$ 1 , 3 7 8 
$ 
994 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
188 
2 1 2 
49 
Net deferred investment tax credits 
47 
7 1 
70 
1,859 
1,661 
1 , 1 1 3 
Non-US.: 
Current 
2,250 
1,829 
1,464 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
3 1 
7 3 
2,282 
1,860 
1 , 5 3 7 
U.S. State and local: 
Current 
265 
288 
2 3 1 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
49 
4 
( 3 1 ) 
3 1 4 
292 
200 
Total provision 
$ 4,455 
$ 3 , 8 1 3 
$ 2,850 
t State and local income taxes for U. S. operations, previously included in 
selling, general and administrative expenses, are now included in provision for 
income taxes. Prior years have been reclassified to conform with 1983 presentation. 
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 44.8% in 1983, 
46.4% in 1982 and 44.1% in 1981. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
IBM Credit Corporation 
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned 
unconsolidated subsidiary, finances installment 
payment agreements (iPAs) relating to sales by 
IBM of its products in the United States, and 
offers term lease financing to IBM customers for 
periods of three, four and five years at fixed 
rates. Some of the leases are effected through 
partnerships with unrelated third parties. IBM's 
investment in the IBM Credit Corporation 
is accounted for by the equity method and earn-
ings are included in other income in IBM's 
consolidated statement of earnings. IBM has 
agreed to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to 
have a positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit 
Corporation has $205 million of lines of credit 
available, in addition to $875 million shared 
with the IBM Corporation. IBM Credit Corpora-
tion finances operations through public and 
private debt arrangements and retained earnings. 
IBM Credit Corporation purchased $848 million 
in 1983 and $68z million in 1982 of iPAs from 
IBM, and $334 million in 1983 and $67 million in 
1982 of IBM products for term lease customers. 
The following information has been 
summarized from the consolidated financial 
statements of the IBM Credit Corporation. 
Additional information is available in its 1983 
Annual Report. Copies may be obtained 
by writing to: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department, 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. 
Earnings for the years ended December 31,1983 and 1982, 
and for the period May i, 1981 to December 31,1981: 
(Dollars in thousands) 
1983 
Finance and Other income 
$ 1 6 2 , 6 5 5 
Interest and other expenses 
1 1 7 , 1 4 9 
Provision for income taxes 
3»836 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
$ 
4 1 , 6 7 0 
tReclassified to conform with 1983 presentation. 
1982 
1981 
$ I l8,Oi7t 
8 3 , 5 9 9 ! 
3>M4 
$ 
3 1 , 2 7 4 
$ 49,^12. 
34,^70 
5,075 
$ 
9 , 8 6 7 
Financial position at December 31: 
(Dollars in thousands) 
1983 
1982 
Assets: 
Cash and marketable 
securities 
$ 
6 0 , 7 2 4 
$ 
7 3 0 
Installment payment 
agreement 
receivables-net. . 
1 , 1 8 2 , 0 4 7 
9 5 1 , 4 3 8 
Net investment in 
financing leases . 
3 6 7 , 9 8 1 
65^504 
Note receivable-
affiliated 
company 
3 5 , 0 0 0 
3 5 , 0 0 0 
Deferred charges 
and other assets . 
1^,934 
6 , 6 9 7 
Total Assets 
$ 1 , 6 5 8 , 6 8 6 
$ 
1 , 0 5 9 , 3 6 9 
1983 
1982 
Liabilities and Stockholder's ; Equity: 
Short-term d e b t . . . 
$ 
558,935 
$ 
2 0 7 , 5 7 6 
Taxes and other 
accruals 
6 2 , 2 8 7 
53,975 
Due to IBM 
Corporation: 
Current 
2 3 9 , 4 7 0 
1 4 3 , 9 8 4 
Noncurrent . . 
1 0 0 , 0 0 0 
— 
Long-term debt . . . 
5 1 2 , 8 1 0 
5 0 8 , 1 2 0 
Stockholder's 
equity 
1 8 5 , 1 8 4 
1 4 5 , 7 1 4 
Total Liabilities 
and Stockholder's 
Equity 
$ i , 6 5 8 , 6 8 6 
$ 1 , 0 5 9 , 3 6 9 
Research and Development 
Research and development expenses 
amounted to $2,514 million in 1983, $2,053 mil-
lion in 1982 and $1,612 million in 1981. 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its subsidiaries have retire-
ment plans covering substantially all employees. 
The total cost of all plans for 1983,1982 and 1981 
was $1,180 million, $ 1,187 million and $1,060 
million, respectively. 
U. S. employees are covered by noncontribu-
tory plans which are funded by company con-
tributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is 
held for the sole benefit of employees. Benefits are 
based principally on earnings and length of ser-
vice and become vested upon completion of ten 
years of service. At December 31,1983, benefits 
were being received by 17,064 individuals. 
The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter-
mined using an actuarial cost method which 
relates pension cost to direct compensation. The 
prior service portion of plan changes and re-
visions to actuarial assumptions is amortized in 
equal annual amounts over ten years. Significant 
assumptions include: rate of return on fund as-
sets, future compensation levels, retirement ages, 
turnover and mortality Variances between actual 
and assumed experience are amortized as a per-
centage of direct compensation over the remain-
ing working years of current employees. 
The cost of U. S. plans was $702 million 
in 1983, $701 million in 1982 and $553 million in 
1981, and represented 9.7%, 10.9% and 9.9% 
of direct compensation in each of the respective 
years. Most of the increased costs in 1982 re-
sulted from plan changes announced in that year. 
The effect of plan changes announced in 1983, 
on 1983 costs was offset by refinements of actu-
arial techniques and amortization of the 1982 
variance between actual and assumed experience. 
It is the company's policy to fund costs in 
the year accrued, to the extent such costs are tax 
deductible in that year. Contributions to the fund 
were $644 million, $619 million and $553 million 
in the years 1983,1982 and 1981, respectively. 
At December 31,1983, the unamortized 
cost of plan and assumption changes, to be amor-
tized during the next ten years, amounted to 
$532 million. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
The following table provides information 
on the status of the U. S. pension plans. The table 
shows the actuarial present value of accumulated 
benefits based on actual compensation and 
service to date and assumes a rate of return of 
This rate represents the current estimate of 
the long-term actuarial rate of return expected to 
be earned over the life of the plans. 
At December 31 
(Dollars in millions) 
1983 
Actuarial present value 
of accumulated benefits: 
Vested 
Nonvested 
$ 
7 , 1 5 4 
298 
$ 6,748 
238 
$ 
7 , 4 5 2 
$ 6,986 
Plan net assets (estimated 
market value) 
$ 1 0 , 3 8 8 
$ 8,390 
A comparison of fair market value of plan 
net assets with these estimates provides an indi-
cation, at a point in time, of the company's 
progress toward meeting its future commitment 
to pay benefits when due. However, it must be 
recognized that the market value of plan net as-
sets available for benefits will fluctuate. 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under 
which funds are deposited with trustees, annu-
ities are purchased under group contracts, or 
reserves are provided. At December 31,1983 and 
December 31,1982, it is estimated that the 
market value of fund assets and reserves of indi-
vidual non-U. S. subsidiaries exceeded or 
approximated the actuarial present value of 
accumulated benefits. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
enables employees who are not participants 
in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital 
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% 
of eligible compensation. The price an employee 
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. During 
1983, employees purchased 4,796,942 shares, 
including 221,508 treasury shares, for which 
$465 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, 
1983, 23,803,422 reserved unissued shares 
remain available for purchase under the Plan. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for granting 
officers and other key employees options to pur-
chase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the market 
price on the day of grant. Options have a max-
imum duration of 10 years and may be exercised 
in up to four annual installments, commencing 
one year from date of grant. 
The plans are administered by the Executive 
Compensation Committee of the Board of 
Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, 
grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to holders 
of options. Such rights offer optionees the 
alternative of electing not to exercise the related 
stock option, but to receive instead an amount 
in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock 
equivalent to the difference between the option 
price and the average market price of IBM stock 
on the date of exercising the right. 
The 1982 plan also provides, subject to 
Committee approval, that payment by the 
optionee upon exercise of an option may be made 
using IBM stock as well as cash. 
The following table summarizes stock 
option transactions during 1983: 
Number of Shares 
Under Option 
Balance at 
January i, 1983 . . . . 
14,^77,945 
Options granted 
1,799,905 
Options terminated . . 
(62,989) 
Options cancelled-
SARs exercised. . . . 
( 1 1 6 , 4 4 5 ) 
Options exercised . . . 
( 2 , 7 1 1 , 5 5 7 ) 
Balance at 
December 31,1983. . 
1 3 , 1 8 6 , 8 5 9 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1983. . 
8,925,960 
Available 
for Option 
6 , 9 6 6 , 6 1 2 
( i , 7 9 9 > 9 0 5 ) 
3 1 , 1 6 6 
5 , 1 9 7 , 8 7 3 
The options exercised during 1983 were at 
an average option price of $64.79 per share. The 
13,186,859 shares under option at December 31, 
1983, are at option prices ranging from $41.60 to 
$114.00 per share. 
Litigation 
In December, 1980, the Commission of the 
European Communities filed a "statement of 
objections" seeking modification of certain IBM 
business practices in the Common Market 
area. The Commission may also seek to impose 
fines. Most of the practices to which the 
Commission has objected have been held to be 
legitimate competition in the United States. 
IBM has denied the charges in the proceeding and 
is defending its position. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Segment Information 
IBM operates primarily in the single industry 
segment encompassing information-handling 
systems, equipment and services. This segment 
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross 
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. 
The schedule on the next page shows gross 
income by industry segment and by classes of 
similar products or services within the informa-
tion-handling segment. 
Financial information by geographic area 
for the years 1983,1982 and 1981 is summarized 
below to provide a better understanding of IBM's 
operations. Material interdependencies and 
overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and, 
therefore, the information may not be indicative 
of the financial results of, or investments in, 
the reported areas were they independent 
organizations. 
United States 
Gross income-Customers 
$ 23,127 
$ 19,028 
$ 15,088 
Interarea transfers 
1,875 
1,857 
Total 
$ 25,402 
$ 20,903 
$ 16,945 
Net earnings 
3,296 
2,766 
2,094 
Assets at December 31 
23,083 
19,028 
16,022 
Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Gross income-Customers 
$ 11,324 
$ 10,260 
$ 
9,312 
Interarea transfers 
235 
337 
383 
Total 
$ 11,559 
$ 10,597 
$ 
9,695 
Net earnings 
1,580 
1,196 
1,074 
Assets at December 31 
10,011 
9,197 
8,981 
Americas/Far East 
Gross income-Customers 
$ 
5,729 
$ 
5,076 
$ 
4,670 
Interarea transfers 
728 
651 
659 
Total 
$ 
6,457 
$ 
5,7^7 
$ 
5,329 
Net earnings 
562 
450 
478 
Assets at December 31 
5»iio 
4,925 
4,694 
Eliminations 
Gross income 
$ (3,238) 
$ (2,863) 
$ (2,899) 
Net earnings 
47 
(3) 
(36) 
Assets 
(961) 
(609) 
(590) 
Consolidated 
Gross income 
$ 40,180 
$ 3 4 , 3 6 4 
$ 29,070 
Net earnings 
$ 
5,485 
$ 
4,409 
$ 
3,610 
Assets at December 31 
$ 37,^43 
$ 32.,54I 
$ 29,107 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local cur-
rency environment account for approximately 85% 
of the company's non-U. S. gross income. The re-
maining 15% is from subsidiaries and branches, pre-
dominantly in the Americas/Far East area, which 
operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environ-
ment is highly inflationary. 
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, 
European operations accounted for approximately 
95% of gross income in 1983,1982 and 1981. 
Interarea transfers, consisting principally of 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate 
service charge, applied consistently throughout the 
world. The cost and service charges that relate to 
asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or 
amortized by the importing area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of 
service charges, and the net change during the 
year in unamortized service charges, have been 
eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services 
Consolidated 
U.S. Only 
(Dollars in millions) 
1983 
19821 
1983 
19821 
Information-Handling: 
Processors: 
Sales 
$ 
9,046 
$ 
7,784 
$ 
4,908 
$ 
4,203 
Rentals 
1,692 
2,363 
7 1 1 
1,086 
Peripherals: 
10,738 
10,147 
5,619 
5,289 
Peripherals: 
Sales 
6,205 
3 , 3 1 1 
3,669 
1 , 7 1 7 
Rentals 
4,778 
5,371 
2,533 
2,917 
10,983 
8,682 
6,202 
4,634 
Office Systems/Workstations: 
10,983 
8,682 
6,202 
4,634 
Sales 
5,752 
3,667 
3,667 
2,278 
Rentals 
2,275 
2,778 
1,295 
1,498 
8,027 
6,445 
4,962 
3,776 
Program Products 
2,302 
1,693 
1,288 
935 
Maintenance Services 
4,577 
3,940 
2,633 
2,230 
Other: 
Sales 
1,181 
1,238 
778 
768 
Rentals 
485 
609 
278 
372 
Services 
648 
689 
135 
n o 
2,314 
2,536 
1,191 
1,250 
Federal Systems: 
38,941 
33,443 
21,895 
1 8 , 1 1 4 
Federal Systems: 
Sales 
1,028 
753 
1,028 
753 
Services 
148 
105 
148 
105 
Other Business: 
1,176 
858 
1,176 
858 
Other Business: 
Sales 
62 
62 
55 
55 
Services 
I 
I 
I 
I 
63 
63 
56 
56 
Total 
$ 40,180 
$ 34,364 
$ 23,127 
$ 19,028 
tReclassified to conform with 1983 presentation. 
While IBM operates primarily in a single industry 
segment and manages its worldwide business 
as such, gross income has been categorized into 
major classes of product. 
For purposes of classifying similar products 
of the Information-Handling industry segment, 
user programmable equipment having the 
capability of manipulating data arithmetically or 
logically and making calculations, in a manner 
directly addressable by the user through the 
operation of a stored program, has been classified 
as Processors, except that small business com-
puters and intelligent workstations are included 
under Office Systems/Workstations. Typewriters 
have also been classified under Office Systems/ 
Workstations. Peripherals include printers, 
copiers, storage and telecommunication devices. 
Peripheral functions embedded in processors are 
classified with Processors. Program Products 
include both applications and systems software. 
Maintenance Services consist of separately billed 
charges for maintenance. Other consists prin-
cipally of supplies and unit record equipment. 
Some products logically fit in more than 
one class and are assigned to a specific class based 
on a variety of factors. Over time, products tend 
to overlap, merge into or split from existing 
classes as a result of changing technologies, 
market perceptions, and /or customer use. For 
example, market demand may create require-
ments for technological enhancements to permit a 
peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be functionally inte-
grated with a display, telecommunication device and 
a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
changeability and technological progress tend to 
make year to year comparisons less valid than they 
would be in an industry less subject to rapid change. 
Federal Systems consists of specialized infor-
mation-handling products and services primarily for 
the United States defense, space and other agencies. 
Other Business consists of training and 
testing materials and services for school, home and 
industrial use. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1983 
1982 
1981 
1980 
19791 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales, 
rentals and services 
$ 40,180 
$ 34,364 
$ 29,070 
$ 2 6 , 2 1 3 
$ 22,863 
Net earnings 
5,485 
4,409 
3 , 6 1 0 
3,397 
3 , 0 1 1 
Per share 
9.04 
7-39 
6 . 1 4 
5.82 
5.16 
Cash dividends paid 
2,251 
2,053 
2,023 
2,008 
2,008 
Per share 
3-71 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
Investment in rental machines 
. . . . 
2,352 
4,254 
4,610 
4,334 
4 , 2 1 2 
Investment in plant and other property. 
2,578 
2,431 
2,235 
2,258 
1 , 7 7 9 
Return on stockholders' equity 
. . . 
25.4% 
23.4% 
2 1 . 1 % 
2 1 . 1 % 
21.2^ 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 37,243 
$ 3 2 , 5 4 1 
$ 2 9 , 1 0 7 
$ 26,831 
$ 24,530 
Net investment in rental machines . . 
6,812 
9 , 1 1 7 
9,252 
8,390 
6,927 
Net investment in plant and 
other property 
9,330 
8,446 
7,545 
6 , 8 1 0 
5,266 
Working capital 
7,763 
4,805 
2,983 
3,381 
4,406 
Long-term debt 
2,674 
2,851 
2,669 
2,099 
1,589 
Stockholders' equity 
23,219 
19,960 
17,676 
16,578 
14,961 
t N o t restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change. 
Selected Quarterly Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) 
Gross 
Income 
Gross 
Profit 
Net 
Earnings 
Per Share 
Earnings 
Dividends 
Stock Prices 
High 
Low 
1983 
First Quarter 
. . . . 
$ 
8,287 
$ 
5,018 
$ 
976 
$ 1.62 
$ 
.86 
$ 104.88 
$ 
92.25 
Second Quarter 
. . . . 
9,590 
5,776 
1,343 
2.22 
•95 
124.50 
1 0 1 . 1 3 
Third Quarter 
. . . . 
9,406 
5,502 
1,303 
2.14 
•95 
129.50 
115-25 
Fourth Quarter 
. . . . 
12,897 
7,489 
1,863 
3.06 
•95 
134-25 
1 1 7 - 1 3 
Total 
. . . . 
$ 40,180 
$ 23,785 
$ 5,485 
$ 9.04 
$ 3.71 
1982 
First Quarter 
. . . . 
$ 
7,066 
$ 
4,293 
$ 
789 
$ 1 . 3 3 
$ 
.86 
$ 6 4 . 7 5 
$ 55.63 
Second Quarter 
. . . . 
8,053 
4,923 
1,076 
1 . 8 1 
.86 
6 6 . 1 3 
57-50 
Third Quarter 
. . . . 
8 , 1 7 1 
4,870 
1,044 
1-75 
.86 
77.63 
59.38 
Fourth Quarter 
. . . . 
1 1 , 0 7 4 
6,590 
1,500 
2.50 
.86 
98.00 
73-25 
Total 
. . . . 
$ 34,364 
$ 20,676 
$4,409 
$ 7 . 3 9 
$ 3 . 4 4 
There were 769,979 stockholders of record 
at December 31,1983. During 1983, stock-
holders received $2,251 million in cash dividends. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
March 10,1984, will be at the rate of $.95 per 
share. This dividend will be IBM'S 276th con-
secutive quarterly cash dividend. 
The stock prices reflect the high and low 
prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York 
Stock Exchange composite tape for the last 
two years. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices 
Although inflation rates moderated signifi-
cantly in the United States, and to a lesser extent 
in many other countries during 1983, its cumu-
lative effect over the past several years has eroded 
industry's ability to fund the replacement and 
expansion of productive capacity. Traditional 
financial statements may not adequately reflect 
the effects of changing prices and declines in 
purchasing power on cash flows required to 
replace capital assets and provide opportunities 
for future growth. Therefore, supplemental 
information, which has been prepared in accord-
ance with standards established by the Financial 
Accounting Standards Board, is presented to 
assist users of financial statements in understand-
ing the implications of changing prices on the 
company's operations. 
The following data reflect the effects on 
earnings and stockholders' equity resulting from 
using estimated changes in specific prices to 
restate the value of inventories and other proper-
ties at currently prevailing prices (current cost). 
The estimates are based upon latest production 
costs, published price indices, current suppliers' 
prices, and appraised valuations. Cost of sales and 
depreciation expense are restated to reflect the 
change in the related asset values. 
In order to provide useful trend data, 
information for each of the years presented is 
restated in 1983 dollars of purchasing power, as 
measured by movement of the Consumer Price 
Index for all Urban Consumers (CPI-U). 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 
As Reported in 
Financial Statements 
In Average 1983 Dollars 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1983 
1983 
1982 
1981 
1980 
i979t 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
. . 
Cost of sales, rentals and services 
Expenses and other income 
Provision for income taxes 
$ 40,180 
16,395 
13^845 
4,455 
$ 40,180 
16,593 
14,001 
4,455 
$ 35,469 
14,221 
13,001 
3,936 
$ 31,844 
13,105 
12,041 
3,122 
$ 31,694 
12,542 
12,365 
2,980 
$ 31,381 
11,740 
12,169 
3,663 
Net earnings 
$ 5,485 
$ 5,131 
$ 
4 , 3 1 1 
$ 
3,576 
$ 
3,807 
$ 
3,809 
Earnings per share 
$9.04 
$8.46 
$7.23 
$6.08 
$6.52 
$6.53 
Stockholders' equity (net assets) 
$ 23,219 
$ 26,076 
$ 23,405 
$ 21,634 
$ 22,120 
$ 22,815 
Loss from decline in purchasing power of 
net monetary assets 
$ 
77 
$ 
I 
$ 
68 
$ 
329 
$ 
624 
Translation adjustments 
$ 
(763) 
$ 
(904) 
$ 
(802) 
$ (1,091) 
$ 
(i75) 
Change in specific prices-
net of general inflation 
$ 
(72) 
$ 
(317) 
$ (1,272) 
$ (1,737) 
$ (1,602) 
f N o t restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices (continued) 
IBM's 1983 financial results, when adjusted 
for changing prices, show a reduction of $354 
million from reported net earnings and an in-
crease in stockholders' equity of $2,857 million. 
The estimated current cost of acquiring exist-
ing plants and other property is $2,718 million 
greater than depreciated original costs. The 
rental machine asset base would increase by $181 
million if valued at current production costs 
while other inventories would be increased by $4 
million. The additional depreciation in 1983 on 
the restated rental machines, plant and other 
property would have been $326 million while 
other costs would have been increased by $28 
million. Accordingly, 1983 earnings would have 
been reduced by the above-mentioned $354 
million. Productivity improvements from tech-
nological advances continue to partially offset in-
flationary pressures, as is evidenced by the rela-
tively small increase (3%) in the cost of rental 
machine assets when adjusted for changing prices. 
Companies which retain monetary assets or 
liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains and 
losses in purchasing power during periods of in-
flation. IBM's net monetary asset position resulted 
in a purchasing power loss of $77 million in 1983. 
The effects of translation on the changes in 
specific prices of IBM's net assets have been 
estimated without any attempt to adjust the data 
for general rate of inflation differences among 
various countries. The translation adjustments 
reflect the decline in the valuation of assets de-
nominated in currencies other than the 
U. S. dollar caused by the relative strength of 
the dollar in the world economy. 
In dollars of average 1983 purchasing 
power, the increase in current costs that might 
have been expected from general inflation 
exceeded IBM's specific price level changes by 
$72 million. Management views this positively, 
in that technology and productivity improve-
ments substantially offset inflation. Similar pat-
terns are reflected in the prior years. 
Although inflation-adjusted information 
is an imprecise estimate, it nevertheless serves to 
emphasize the debilitating effects of inflation. 
It points out the importance of bringing inflation 
under control and the need for further public 
policy initiatives to encourage capital investment. 
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for General Inflation 
The amounts shown below for the years 
1979 to 1982 have been converted into the equiv-
alent purchasing power of 1983 dollars by 
applying to the amounts reported the rate of 
changes in the average C P I - U from that year to year 
1983. 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1983 
1982 
1981 
1980 
19791 
Gross income from sales, rentals and services 
. . . . 
$ 40,180 
$ 3 5 , 4 6 9 
$ 31,844 
$ 31,694 
$ 3 1 , 3 8 1 
Earnings per share 
$ 9.04 
$7.63 
$ 6 . 7 3 
$ 7.04 
$ 7.08 
Cash dividends paid per share 
$ 3 . 7 1 
$ 3 . 5 5 
$ 3.77 
$ 4.16 
$ 4 . 7 2 
Market price per share (at December 31) 
$ 122.00 
$99.35 
$ 62.31 
$ 82.07 
$ 88.36 
Average Consumer Price Index for 
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 
298.4 
289.1 
272.4 
246.8 
2 1 7 . 4 
The actual market price of IBM stock on the New York Stock Exchange 
composite tape at December 31, for years 1979 to 1983 
vras $64.38, $67.88, $56.88, $96.2.5 and $122.00, respectively. 
f N o t restated for 1982 SFAS No. 52 accounting change. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
IBM is organized into the folloioing groups, divisions 
and wholly owned subsidiaries: 
Information Systems Group 
Customer Service Division 
Provides maintenance, related support and 
programming services within the U. S. and its 
territories for assigned products. 
Federal Systems Division 
Provides specialized information-handling and 
control systems to the Federal government for 
seaborne, spaceborne, airborne and ground-
based environments. Also participates in applied 
research and exploratory development. 
Field Engineeriyig Division 
Provides maintenance and related services within 
the U. S. and its territories for assigned products, 
as well as support for specified IBM program 
offerings. Has overall responsibility for the distri-
bution of all hardware and software products and 
related publications. Also provides maintenance 
marketing support and central programming 
services for assigned products. 
IBM Instruments, Inc. (a subsidiary) 
Has responsibility for IBM's efforts in the 
analytical instruments field, including marketing 
and servicing selected products in the U. S. 
National Accounts Division 
Has marketing and field administration 
responsibility within the U. S. and its territories 
for the full standard line of IBM products. Its 
assigned customers are selected large accounts 
with complex information processing needs. 
National Distribution Division 
Has marketing responsibility within the U. S. 
for selected systems and high-volume products 
delivered through alternate channels of distribu-
tion such as IBM Product Centers, value added 
remarketers and authorized dealers. In addition, 
the division has responsibility for manufacturing 
or procurement and marketing within the 
U. S. of IBM supplies and accessories, as well as 
for the worldwide supplies business strategy. 
Nationcd Marketing Division 
Has marketing and field administration respon-
sibility within the U. S. and its territories for the 
full standard line of IBM products. Its assigned 
customers are large and medium accounts. 
Information Systems and Technology Group 
Data Systems Division 
Has worldwide development and associated 
programming responsibility for large, complex 
systems, with primary emphasis on high-
performance products, plus U. S. manufacturing 
responsibility for those systems. 
General Products Divisicm 
Has worldwide development and U. S. man-
ufacturing responsibility for storage systems, 
including tape units, disk products and 
mass storage systems, program products and 
product-related programming. 
General Technology Division 
Has worldwide development and product assur-
ance and U. S. manufacturing responsibility 
for logic, memory and special semiconductor 
devices and multi-layer ceramics. The division 
also procures components for the IBM World 
Trade Americas/Far East Corporation and U. S. 
operating units. 
Systems Technology Division 
Has worldwide development and product assur-
ance and U. S. manufacturing responsibility 
for circuit packaging used in IBM computing 
systems. Also develops and manufactures inter-
mediate processors and printers and develops 
programming systems. 
Information Systems 
and Communications Group 
Communication Products Division 
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
facturing responsibility for telecommunications 
systems, display products, distribution industry 
systems and related programming. The division 
serves as the worldwide architectural and 
systems focal point for office systems and Systems 
Network Architecture activities. 
Entry Systems Diiision 
Has worldwide development and product man-
agement, and U. S. manufacturing responsibility 
for IBM's general purpose, low-cost, personal-
use computer systems and related software. 
Information Products Division 
Has worldwide development and related pro-
gramming and U. S. manufacturing responsibility 
for typewriters, copiers and systems for the 
banking industry, and for peripheral equipment, 
including printers, copier systems, diskettes 
and associated supplies. 
System Products Division 
Has worldwide development and U. S. manu-
facturing responsibility for small and inter-
mediate-sized general purpose systems and 
related programming, as well as for low-end 
direct access storage devices. 
Other Divisions 
Reed Estate and Construction Division 
Manages the selection and acquisition of sites, 
the design and construction of buildings and the 
purchase or lease of facilities for all IBM opera-
tions in the U. S. The division has responsibility 
for assessing real estate projects outside the 
U. S., as well as for IBM's worldwide energy and 
environmental programs. It also provides facility 
services to selected headquarters locations. 
Research Division 
Brings scientific understanding to bear on 
areas of company interest through basic research 
and development of technologies of potential 
long-range importance. 
Other Subsidiaries 
IBM Credit Corporation 
Offers lease financing of IBM products, either 
directly or through partnerships, and finances 
installment receivables resulting from sales 
by IBM of its information processing systems and 
equipment to customers in the U. S. It also 
finances non-IBM equipment. 
Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Has worldwide development, publication and/or 
marketing responsibility for a wide range of educa-
tional and testing materials and services, includ-
ing microcomputer software designed for use in 
schools, colleges, businesses and the home. 
IBM World Trade Americas / Far East Corporation 
With a territory extending across four continents, 
this subsidiary is responsible for IBM operations 
in 46 countries, including Australia, Brazil, 
Canada and Japan. 
IBM World Trade Europe / Middle East / 
Africa Corporation 
Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe, located 
in Paris, it is responsible for IBM operations in 
85 countries. 
IBM World Trade Corporation 
Provides designated support to IBM World Trade 
organizational units. 


===== PAGE 48 =====
IBM Corporation 
John F. Akers 
President, IBM 
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Harold Brown 
Visiting Professor, School of Advanced International Studies, 
The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D. C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J.-health care products 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif., and Paris, France-
attorneys at law 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Professor of Law, George Washington University, Washington, D.C. 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif.-
attorneys at law 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N. Y.-
glass products 
John N. Irwin II 
Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller ... Chief Executive Officer, A. R Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. 
J. Richard Munro 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Dean P. Phypers 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William W. Scranton 
Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance 
Committee, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
Board Committees: 
Executive: 
Frank T. Gary, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
William H. Moore 
John R. Opel 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Retirement Plans: 
William W. Scranton, Chairman 
George B. Beitzel 
Harold Brown 
William T Coleman, Jr. 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Dean P. Phypers 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Compensation: 
Cyrus R.Vance, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Audit: 
John N. Irwin 11, Chairman 
Richard W. Lyman 
J. Richard Munro 
Advisory Board: 
John M. Fox 
Vice Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass. -waste disposal services 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
George L. Hinman 
Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kartell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y 
Louis H. LaMotte 
Retired Executive Vice President, IBM 
T. Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William McChesney Martin,Jr. Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dean R. McKay 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Officers: 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Paul J. Rizzo 
, , Vice Chairman of the Board 
John F. Akers 
. , President 
C. Michael Armstrong 
. , Senior Vice President 
C. Michael Armstrong 
& Group Executive 
George B. Beitzel 
, . Senior Vice President 
Kaspar V. Cassani 
.. Senior Vice President 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach.. .. Senior Vice President 
& General Counsel 
AllenJ. Krowe 
.. Senior Vice President, 
AllenJ. Krowe 
Finance & Planning 
JackD.Kuehler 
.. Senior Vice President 
JackD.Kuehler 
& Group Executive 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge ... .. Senior Vice President 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. 
.. Senior Vice President 
Dean P. Phypers 
.. Senior Vice President 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. 
.. Senior Vice President 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. 
& Group Executive 
Arthur G.Anderson 
.. Vice President 
John E. Bertram 
.. Vice President 
Charles P. Biggar 
.. Vice President 
James A. Bitonti 
.. Vice President 
Erich Bloch 
Vice President 
Charles E. Branscomb .. Vice President 
Lewis M. Branscomb ... Vice President 
Walton E. Burdick 
Vice President 
Ronald F. Casella 
Vice President 
George H. Conrades 
Vice President 
*Carl J. Conti 
Vice President 
Vincent N. Cook 
Vice President 
Edward M. Davis 
Vice President 
Wallace C. Doud 
Vice President 
Robert B. Dunlop 
Vice President 
William W. Eggleston... Vice President 
*Philip D. Estridge 
Vice President 
Donato A. Evangelista .. Vice President 
Bob O. Evans 
Vice President 
P. Martin Foley 
Vice President 
James J. Forese 
Vice President 
& Controller 
Richard T. Gerstner 
Vice President 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Vice President 
Ralph E. Gomory 
Vice President 
John B.Jackson 
Vice President 
Paul J. Kofmehl 
Vice President 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
Vice President 
Thomas M. Liptak 
Vice President 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President 
Victor R. Macdonald 
Vice President 
James F. Manning 
Vice President 
David E. McKinney 
Vice President 
Charles E.McKittrick,Jr. . .Vice President 
Frank A. Metz, Jr. 
Vice President 
Theodore C. Papes, Jr. 
Vice President 
Francis G. Rodgers 
Vice President 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
Vice President 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. 
Vice President 
John F. Williams 
Vice President 
John H.Grady 
Secretary 
Jon W. Rotenstreich 
Treasurer 
Robert E. Bonchick 
Assistant Controller 
J. William Scruggs 
Assistant Controller 
John H. Stewart 
Assistant Controller 
Thomas C. Irwin 
Assistant Secretary 
Sidney Handler 
Assistant Treasurer 
Bruce E. Langton 
Assistant Treasurer 
*Elected 1/31/84 


===== PAGE 49 =====
Division and Subsidiary 
Chief Executives: 
John E. Bertram.. 
Charles P. Biggar . 
James A. Bitonti.. 
KasparV. Cassani 
Ronald F.Casella.. 
CarlJ. Conti 
Vincent N.Cook.. 
Philip D. Estridge . 
David A. Finley ... 
Victor J. Goldberg. 
Ralph E. Gomory . 
William O. Grabe . 
President, General Products Division 
President, Field Engineering Division 
President, Communication Products Division 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ 
Middle East/Africa Corporation 
President, Customer Service Division 
President, Data Systems Division 
President, Federal Systems Division 
President, Entry Systems Division 
President, IBM Credit Corporation 
President, National Distribution Division 
Director of Research 
President, National Accounts Division 
Lewis W. Gray 
President, National Marketing Division 
John E. Guth,Jr. 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Paul R. Low 
President, General Technology Division 
Edward E. Lucente 
President, Information Products Division 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge .. Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. 
Chairman, IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East Corporation 
Patrick A. Toole 
President, Systems Technology Division 
Everett H. Van Hoesen 
President, Industrial Systems 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. ... President, System Products Division 
Cecil R Webb 
President, IBM Instruments, Inc. 
John F. Williams 
President, Real Estate and 
Construction Division 
IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East 
Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Thomas J. Bata 
Jill K. Conway 
Morton Ehrlich 
Howard G. Figueroa., 
T. Brian Finn 
Ralph E. Gomory ..., 
Thomas Moving 
Ryoichi Kawai 
Donald R. Keough ... 
David E.McKinney... 
Raymond G. O'Neill . 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr.... 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr.. 
Takeo Shiina 
Paulo D.Villares 
Gustavo J. VolImer.... 
Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization,Toronto, Canada 
President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla. 
IBM Director of Commercial Relations 
Managing Director, IBM Australia, Limited 
Director of Research and Vice President, IBM 
President, Hoving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y., and Editor-in-Chief, The Connoisseur 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan 
President, The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga. 
President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM 
Vice President, Finance and Operations Staffs, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
President, IBM Japan, Limited 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela 
IBM World Trade 
Eu rope / M idd le East / 
Africa Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Tore Browaldh 
Kaspar V. Cassani 
Frank J. Cummiskey.. 
William W. Eggleston. 
P Martin Foley 
Pierre L. Gousseland.. 
Gilbert E.Jones 
PaulJ.Kofmehl 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Umberto Nordio 
Sir Philip Shelbourne ... 
Otto Sturzenegger 
Ruud Van Ommeren.... 
Kurt Werner 
. Vice Chairman of the Board, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, 
and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden 
. Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; President, IBM Europe 
and Senior Vice President, IBM 
. Retired Vice President, IBM 
. Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe, and Vice President, IBM 
. Executive Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation and Vice President, IBM 
. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
. Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
, President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe, 
and Vice President, IBM 
, Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
. Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy 
, Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England 
, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N. Y. 
, Directeur-Generaal, IBM Netherlands 
, Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany 
Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
Board of Directors: 
Joseph H. Allen 
George B. Beitzel 
Patricia Albjerg Graham 
John E. Guth, Jr 
Wayne H. Holtzman.... 
Retired Associate Dean, School of Business Administration, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Conn. 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass. 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
President, The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin, Tex. 


===== PAGE 50 =====
The follordng information may be obtained without 
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Depart-
ment, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022: 
The Form 10-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
provides further details on IBM's business, includ-
ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the 
Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April. 
The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting 
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of 
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
Innovation in IBM Computer Technology 
is a booklet that describes the hardware, software 
and manfecturing advances within IBM during 
the last four decades. 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles that 
the company sets for the conduct of its business. 
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs 
in the United States are outlined in a 
document that describes programs for women, 
minorities and handicapped persons, and 
also reviews IBM's Affirmative Action efforts 
in the community. 
IBM Company Citizenship 
booklet describes support programs for edu-
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts 
and other areas. 
IBM Operations in South Africa 
are summarized in a report of the company's 
business in that country This report describes the 
personnel principles and practices to which 
IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa. 
IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings 
are available.The report is translated into 
French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette 
recording in English is available for the blind. 
A Service for Deaf Stockholders 
provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department enables deaf stockholders who have 
access to a teletypewriter to communicate with 
the department's New York City office. Stock-
holders who wish to use the service should 
call (212) 407-4552 between 9 a.m. and 5 p.m.. 
Eastern time, on any weekday 
Four decades of technological advances within IBM 
are described in a new booklet, "Innovation in 
IBM Computer Techyiology." The booklet is available 
loithout charge from Stockfwlder Relations, 
Madison Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022. 


===== PAGE 51 =====
The folloxving information is provided as a 
convenient reference for IBM stockholders: 
The 1984 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held in the Los Angeles 
Convention Center, Los Angeles, Calif., on 
Monday, April 30th, at 10 a.m. 
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement 
and Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each stock-
holder in March. The Proxy Statement describes 
the items of business to be voted on at the Annual 
Meeting and provides biographies of the Board's 
nominees for director and their principal affiliations 
with other companies or organizations, as well as 
other information about the company. 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes 
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including 
the Chairman's report on the company, questions 
and answers of general interest, and the results 
of voting on items of business. 
IBM Stock Transfer 
is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, 
N. Y. IOOZ2. The department maintains stock-
holder records and can answer questions 
regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders 
wishing to transfer stock or to change the 
name on a stock certificate should contact the 
department for instructions. 
Stock certificates are valuable and should 
be safeguarded, since replacement takes time 
and requires payment of a surety bond premium 
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost, 
stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations 
should be notified. Registered mail should be 
used whenever stock is mailed. 
IBM Stock is Traded 
on the New York Stock Exchange, other 
exchanges in the United States and exchanges 
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, 
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and the 
Netherlands. 
Stock Transfer Offices: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611 
Co-Transfer Agents: 
Trust General du Canada 
1100 University Street, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada H3B 2G7 
National Trust Company, Limited 
21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5C 1B3 
Registrars: 
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York 
30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10015 
The First National Bank of Chicago 
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670 
Montreal Trust Company 
777 Dorchester Boulevard West, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 4A5 
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5H 1B4 
For Information: 
Regarding stockholders' accounts, call 
(212) 407-4000. 
General questions about IBM, call 
(800)426-3333. 
International Business Machines Corporation 
Corporate Headquarters 
Armonk, N.Y. 10504 
G505-1983-00 
PRINTED IN USA 


===== PAGE 52 =====
International 
Business Machines 
Corporation 
Armonk, N. Y. 
10504 
