

===== PAGE 1 =====
1 
* 
1,1, 
... 
m 
mmmm 


===== PAGE 2 =====
I Financial Highlights 
z Letter to Stockholders 
5 More Uses, More Users 
i6 1984 in Review 
25 Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
Earnings 
Management Discussion—Results of Operations 
Financial Position 
Management Discussion—Financial 
Condition 
Funds Flow 
Stockholders' Equity 
Notes to Financial Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
Supplemental Financial 
Information 
46 Directors and Officers 
48 IBM Organization 
Stockholder Information 
Cover: 
Software, one of the fastest-growing elements of 
IBM's business, is symbolized in a sampling of Personal 
Computer programs shown by IBM marketing repre-
sentative Judy Engstrom. As the central, common link 
that makes computers more useful, particularly to 
people without special training, program products 
comprise a worldwide industry currently growing at 
a compound rate of over 30 percent a year, with indus-
try revenues expected to reach more than $150 billion 
by 1994. Customers can choose from more than 2,500 
different IBM programs to extend the usefulness of 
systems from the largest 308X computer to the smallest 
desk-top PC. More visible since the introduction of PC 
programs, IBM software has delivered steadily increasing 
productivity for more than three decades. 
yiY^. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 31,1984 
Highlights of the year: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1984 
1983 
At end of year: 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 
. . . . 
Earnings before income taxes 
Income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Return on stockholders' equity 
45,937 
11,623 
5,041 
6,582 \ 
$ 10.77 
2,507 
$ 
4 . 1 0 
5,473 
26.5% 
4 0 , 1 8 0 
9,940 
4,455 
5,485 
$ 9.04 
2 , 2 5 1 
$ 3 . 7 1 
4,930 
2 5 . 4 % 
Total assets 
$ 
42,808 
$ 
3 7 , 4 6 1 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
. . 
$ 
16,363 
$ 
1 6 , 1 4 2 
Working capital 
$ 
10,735 
$ 
8 , 1 6 8 
Long-term debt 
$ 
3,269 
$ 
2 , 6 7 4 
Stockholders'equity 
$ 
26,489 
$ 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
Number of employees 
394,930 
369,545 
Number of stockholders 
792,506 
769,979 
IBM's operations: 
IBM's operations are primarily in the field of 
information-handling systems, equipment and services 
to solve the increasingly complex problems of 
business, government, science, space exploration, 
defense, education, medicine and many other areas of 
human activity IBM's products include infor-
mation processing products and systems, program 
products, telecommunications systems, information 
distributors, office systems, typewriters, copiers, 
educational and testing materials, and related supplies 
and services. Most products are both leased and 
sold through IBM's worldwide marketing organizations. 
Selected products are marketed and distributed 
through authorized dealers and remarketers. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders 
John R. Opel, chairman of the board, John F. Akers, president, and Paid J. Rizzo, vice chairman 
IBM's Strong performance reflects continued 
high demand, worldwide, for IBM products and 
services during 1984. Earnings also improved 
as a result of substantial productivity gains 
in 1984, as reflected by increases in before- and 
after-tax margins. 
Worldwide net earnings for the year were 
$6,582 million, compared with $5,485 million 
for 1983, an increase of 20.0 percent. Net 
earnings were $10.77 per share on 611.4 million 
shares, the average number outstanding 
during 1984, compared with $9.04 per share on 
606.8 million shares during 1983. After-tax 
margins increased to 14.3 percent in 1984 from 
13.7 percent in 1983. 
Earnings before income taxes were 
$11,623 rnillion in 1984, an increase of 16.9 
percent over $9,940 million in 1983. Before-tax 
margins improved to 25.3 percent from 
24.7 percent in 1983. 
Worldwide gross income was $45,937 
million in 1984, up 14.3 percent from $40,180 
million in 1983. Operations within the U. S. 
were strong, with revenue growth of 18.3 per-
cent and net earnings growth of 20.3 percent. 
Gross income from operations outside 
the U. S. during 1984, included in consolidated 
results, was $18,566 million, up 8.9 percent 
from $17,053 million in the prior year. 
Non-U. S. net earnings of $2,587 million in 
1984 showed an increase of 19.6 percent 
over $2,164 million in 1983. 
Shipments of our products reached high 
levels in many non-U. S. countries as economic 
activity increased during the year. Despite this 
success, the stronger U. S. dollar, relative to 
other major currencies, had a severe impact on 
period-to-period financial comparisons. It is 
estimated that, if currency rates had remained 
the same as in 1983, gross income for non-U. S. 
operations would have been $1,675 million 
greater, resulting in non-U. S. gross income 
growth of 18.7 percent and a corresponding net 
earnings growth of 32.4 percent. This excellent 


===== PAGE 5 =====
performance, as measured in local currency, 
was the result of both strong demand and 
highly efficient and effective operations by IBM 
employees worldwide. 
In the quarter ended December 31,1984, 
net earnings were $2,172 million, or $3.55 per 
share, compared with $1,863 million, or 
$3.06 per share, for the same period of 1983. 
Gross income for the fourth quarter of 1984 
was $14,496 million compared with 
$12,897 million in the fourth quarter of 1983. 
The impact of currency exchange rates on 
financial results was strongest in the fourth 
quarter. Gross income would have been an 
estimated $690 million higher than the 1983 
fourth quarter, yielding a revenue growth rate 
of 17.7 percent, and a corresponding net earn-
ings growth of 24.6 percent. If the strong dollar 
continues at the present level, it will affect 
1985 non-U. S. revenue growth, as reported in 
dollars, particularly in the first six months. 
Long-term prospects 
IBM's performance for 1984 was gratifying, 
and the fundamental forces that produced 
those results are cause for us to remain optimis-
tic about the company's long-term prospects. 
Every economy around the world is faced 
with a rapidly growing need for information, 
and that provides great opportunity for our 
industry—an industry now estimated to be 
more than $250 billion in annual revenues 
worldwide. 
Our positive results also underscore the sus-
tained progress IBM is making toward the goals 
of growth, product leadership, efficiency and 
profitability we set for the company in the 1980s. 
Continued growth 
Growth continues to be substantial across 
our major business areas. Demand for large-
scale computers and our most advanced disk 
storage devices was especially strong. Last 
year, for example, customers for these products 
increased their total computing capacity by 
nearly 50 percent, and disk storage capacity by 
about 55 percent. Deliveries of mid-range 
systems and revenues from software products 
also were up sharply. 
IBM's Personal Computer line, in recent 
years a rapidly growing part of our business, 
again registered impressive gains. We shipped 
three times more PC units during 1984 than 
we did the preceding year. 
IBM is well-positioned to participate 
fully in meeting the expanding worldwide 
demand for information processing technology. 
The company also continues to explore 
additional avenues for future growth, including 
participation in joint ventures where IBM's 
strengths complement those of other leading 
companies in the pursuit of new and promising 
business opportunities. 
Product leadership strengthened 
Our record shipments during 1984 reflect 
customer confidence in IBM's continuing 
ability to introduce advances in technology 
and improvements in productivity. 
Performance enhancements and addi-
tional computing options were introduced 
across the range of IBM systems, from top-of-
the-line 308X processors, through the 4300 
series and the smaller System736, to the 
desktop products of the Personal Computer 
line. New software enables users to link a 
wider array of systems, terminals and 
input/output devices for sharing information 
and computing resources. 
Disk control devices announced in 1984 
provide up to four times the storage capacity 
of earlier models, and are among the first in the 
industry to use an advanced memory chip 
with a capacity of 256,000 bits of information. 
A new generation of tape storage units replaces 
familiar tape reels with easy-to-handle car-
tridges, providing cost savings and greater 
convenience. With powerful workstations such 
as the new Personal Computer AT, business 
professionals, scientists and engineers have the 
option of using powerful programs at their 
desks, or interacting with a network that 
includes the resources of larger computers. 
A new impact printer and an enhanced 
laser printer offer customers greater flexibility 
in performing text and graphics printing 
applications. The Selectric System /2000 
electronic typewriters, also introduced during 
the year, feature a model with a unique 
ribbon technology; they also can be used as 
personal computer printers. 
Increased efficiency 
Becoming the industry's low-cost producer, 
distributor, seller and servicer is central to IBM's 
long-term strategy. To help meet our cost goals, 
we have pursued a program of plant moderniza-
tion and expansion unparalleled in the industry. 
As a result, our overall manufacturing capacity 
has been substantially renewed and designed 
to support highly efficient production. 
The drive for more efficient operations 
extends beyond manufacturing, however. 
Increasingly, our products are marketed through 
a range of distribution channels that enables 
us to reach more customers in cost-effective 
ways. IBM products are available from IBM mar-
keting representatives and in IBM Product 
Centers, as well as through catalog sales and 
other direct marketing programs. In addition, 
selected products are offered through authorized 
dealers and by companies that add their 
expertise and specialized offerings to our own. 
The results have been impressive. A few years 
ago, sales through non-traditional channels 
accounted for less than one percent of total reve-
nue; in 1984, the figure was nearly ten percent. 
Similarly, we have introduced more effi-
cient ways of providing service to our customers. 
IBM specialists are available via toll-free 
numbers to solve service and software problems 
over the phone. Lower priced carry-in and 


===== PAGE 6 =====
mail-in service agreements have been added to 
give customers a wider range of choices. 
We also offer such agreements at our Product 
Centers, reducing the cost of making high-
quality IBM service available to more people. 
We continue to adjust our organization 
to decentralize decision-making and streamline 
operations. During 1984, new operating units 
in both the IBM World Trade Europe/Middle 
East/Africa and Americas/Far East corpo-
rations were created, with greater autonomy in 
making business decisions within their geo-
graphic areas. In the U. S., the National Service 
Division was given responsibility for delivering 
high-quality service to customers, a mission 
formerly shared by two divisions. 
Profitability 
Sustained profitability is the key element in the 
investment-innovation-demand cycle. In 1984, 
we were successful in meeting our profitability 
goals, achieving a return on stockholder equity 
of 26.5 percent, a new record for IBM. 
Importance of quality 
The importance of quality to IBM's 
continued success cannot be overemphasized. 
Providing reliable, defect-free products and 
error-free service to our customers is essential 
to attaining our business objectives. We have 
established guidelines requiring that each new 
IBM product be superior in quality to the 
one it replaces, and to comparable products in 
the marketplace. It is less obvious, but no less 
important, that our focus on quality extends 
beyond products and services to all other 
facets of IBM's operations. We believe that 
improvement can be achieved in the office as well 
as on the plant floor, and intend to strengthen 
IBM's well-deserved reputation for quality 
by continuing to improve the business processes 
throughout the company. 
R O L M merger 
In September, IBM and ROLM Corporation 
entered into a merger agreement, a proposal 
that was approved by R O L M ' S stockholders in 
November. The merger grew from a close and 
productive relationship in which IBM and ROLM 
both sought to improve the ways in which 
our respective products work together. ROLM 
will now operate as a wholly owned IBM sub-
sidiary under its own name. The merger enables 
each company to draw on the expertise and 
traditional strengths of the other to create 
sophisticated telecommunications products. 
R O L M ' S employees have made their company 
a leader in a highly competitive field, and their 
talents will become an even more significant 
asset to IBM in the years ahead. We are con-
vinced that both companies, and especially our 
customers, will benefit from this relationship. 
John F. Akers elected CEO 
John F. Akers, IBM's president since February 
1983, becomes the chief executive officer in 
February 1985. He has performed with excel-
lence in executive positions in marketing and 
service, finance, development and manufac-
turing. His broad experience in these areas has 
prepared him particularly well to lead our 
company. While I am stepping down as chief 
executive officer, I will retain my responsibilities 
as chairman of the board. I look forward to the 
continued opportunity to work closely with 
John and with Paul Rizzo, IBM's vice chairman. 
Building on innovation 
The expansion of the information industry 
continues to be driven by new technology that 
makes computing accessible and useful to 
more and more people. The trend has been 
dramatic. A dollar now buys more than zoo 
times the processing power it did thirty years 
ago. This has given individuals tremendous 
opportunity to increase their productivity and 
creativity and, in the process, has created 
worldwide demand that is likely to exceed 
$i trillion for our industry by the early 1990s. 
This report reviews some of the ways IBM 
employees and customers are adapting informa-
tion products to contribute to virtually every 
aspect of our lives. 
Future based on people 
It has been my good fortune to serve as chief 
executive officer of IBM, a company I believe to 
be the finest in the world. And it has been 
my privilege to meet and work with the people 
of IBM, who share uncommon skill, energy and 
dedication. The company's success and long-
term prosperity rest with them. I am confident 
it is in good hands. 
January 29, 1985, by order of the Board of Directors 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
IBM engineers apply the advanced technology of 
the ^080 graphics system to the design of complex 
computer chips that will continue to expand the 
usefulness of information-handling products. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
.IBM employees and customers 
are adapting information products 
to contribute to virtually every 
aspect of our lives." 
» 
^ 
. 
v.. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
c 
>omputers are greatly expanding 
the capabilities of this student and 
his classmates in special education 
classes at a Brooklyn, N.Y., high schoo' 
Students with special needs due to 
disabilities such as cerebral palsy and 
hearing or vision impairments are 
becoming computer literate in record 
time, experiencing new levels of 
accomplishment and control over 
their environment. Educators in 
N e w York City public schools, where 
IBM Personal Computers are being 
introduced as an integral part of the 
special education program, say 
computers can be effective equalizers 
for students who may be at a dis-
advantage in a typical classroom envi-
ronment. The city's board of edu-
cation purchased PCs to equip two 
schools and plans to expand the 
program over the next several years 
to include most of the city's 
25,000 special education students. 
IRM JCR^ Anniml. Rp/hnrt 


===== PAGE 9 =====
T 
he development of high-quality 
digital image processing systems 
is creating new ways to analyze data 
and new uses for information tech-
nology At IBM's Rome Scientific 
Center, experimental image processing 
techniques have been applied to art 
restoration. An IBM 7350 image proc-
essing system, capable of displaying 
more than 32,000 hues, has been 
used to analyze damaged portions 
of a i6th century painting being 
restored at Rome's Central Institute 
for Restoration. The analysis helps 
experts select restoration colors that 
will minimize the damage yet 
retain the integrity of the original 
painting. Digital techniques also 
can be used to record, store and trans-
mit images of art work, creating 
permanent, practical "galleries" for 
schools and libraries. 
8 
IBM IQ8A Annual Reijorf. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
# « 
» » * • • % t 
i « » t # # • • W 
« 
» 
«• % t. * 
* * 
« 
# • * • 
I * 
'i 
A « » * 
i 
i 
5 • 
« f * 
* ^ 
* 
* 
• 
* 
* 
» 
* 
^ 
« 
• 
* 
* 
» 
> • 1 1 
.his chain of DIY (do-it-yourself) 
home improvement stores in the 
United Kingdom is typical of compa-
nies moving to larger systems to 
meet growing information processing 
needs for point-of-sale, inventory 
management and other business 
applications. To help such customers 
expand their systems with minimum 
disruption, IBM programmers have 
developed a customized approach to 
system installations and upgrades. 
It enabled this operation of more than 
150 stores to install an IBM 4381 and 
a powerful software system, called 
M V S / X A , 65 percent faster than pre-
viously possible. Customers using large 
IBM systems, on average, are doubling 
their computer power every two years. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
Xarents of these boys at a nursery 
school in Toyama, Japan, will receive a 
report on their activities, including 
how much the children ate for lunch, 
when they come to school to take 
the children home at the end of the 
day. The individualized daily reports 
are part of a nursery school software 
package developed for the IBM 5550 
computer by one of IBM's value 
added dealers in Japan. The system 
enables the school to keep detailed 
records on its 100 youngsters, handles 
accounting functions and salary 
records for the staff, and tracks nutri-
tional content of school meals. 
* > 
§ 
« 
• 


===== PAGE 12 =====
. : 
\ 
mal statistics of this young orang-
utan being examined by a veterinarian 
at the San Diego Zoo will become 
part of a growing data base aimed 
at maintaining healthy, self-sustaining 
animal populations worldwide. 
The zoo uses an IBM System/38 and 
an international veterinary medicine 
coding system to provide access 
to detailed clinical and pathological 
information throughout its various 
departments and to other zoological 
institutions, veterinary colleges 
and medical schools. 
• 
/ 
M 
V. 
ill 
^i.; 
IM-f, 
WM 
t 
^ 
V > y v.. 
t » i 
. / V r 


===== PAGE 13 =====
1984 in Review 
During 1984, research, development and 
engineering efforts remained a primary focus, 
and the company introduced a wide range of 
products that continued to increase the produc-
tivity, flexibihty and rehabihty of information-
handling systems. IBM also continued to 
explore new business opportunities. 
Quality emphasis programs directed the 
attention of employees throughout the 
company to the importance of error-free work 
in every aspect of IBM's activities. In addition, 
IBM emphasized and expanded its corporate 
responsibility programs in support of education 
and community service worldwide. 
Advances in technology 
Major advances were made in sciences and 
technologies important to the company's future. 
IBM engineers in Burlington, Vt., success-
fully produced a memory chip that can store 
This experimental amplifier chip used in conjunc-
tion with fiber optics can transmit data at a rate 
equivalent to ij,ooo typewritten pages per second. 
more than one million bits of information. 
The experimental chip was fabricated on 
an existing manufacturing line used to mass-
produce other high-density chips. Each 
one-million-bit chip can store about 100 pages 
of double-spaced typewritten text. 
The Federal Systems Division developed 
a signal processor chip capable of executing 
100 million multiplications a second, 10 times 
the rate of any previously reported chip. The 
new chip has 37,000 circuits on a piece of 
silicon about three-tenths of an inch square, 
An IBM engineer inspects an experimental 
eight-inch silicon wafer that can accommodate 
more than 2,000 chips. 
making it the densest signal processor ever 
reported. Key to the development of the chip 
was an advanced fabrication process that 
produced transistors about one-third the size 
of those currently available in the industry. 
Researchers at IBM's Yorktown and East 
Fishkill, N.Y., laboratories have developed 
an experimental amplifier chip that speeds the 
exchange of data between computers and 
storage devices or other computers. Used in 
conjunction with a fiber optics line, the chip 
can send data at a rate equivalent to about 
17,000 typewritten pages per second, 16 times 
faster than amplifiers currently in use by IBM. 
Yorktown researchers also have 
developed a new method for creating precise 
patterns of gold in making circuit inter-
connections. The approach uses a laser and 
a liquid jet to direct gold-bearing liquid to 
spots less than one-fiftieth of an inch wide. 
The process is much faster and more accurate 
than other methods. 
The world's shortest light pulses, bursts 
lasting just 12 femtoseconds, have been 
generated by IBM scientists. A femtosecond is 
to a second as a second is to 30 million 
years. These ultra-short pulses can serve as 
"strobe lights," slowing or freezing the motion 
of molecules, atoms and electrons. The tech-
nique could help researchers better understand 
physical processes important to the devel-
opment of ultra-fast computer components. 
IBM engineers also have produced an 
experimental eight-inch silicon crystal, the 
largest ever "grown" in IBM. Wafers from the 
crystal can accommodate more than 2,000 
chips, roughly two and a half times the number 
possible on a five-inch wafer. 
In addition, researchers are working on an 
experimental speech recognition system that 
transforms human speech into text. The system 
employs a statistical technique designed to 
find the best match between spoken words and 
those in its 5,ooo-word vocabulary. Words 
that sound alike are distinguished by examining 
the context in which they are used. 
Large-scale systems 
Improved models of IBM's 308x large-scale, 
advanced-technology computers and the 
introduction of a new entry-level 3083 system 
increased the span of computing options 
available to customers requiring the company's 
most powerful computers. Within the 308X 
series, customers can incrementally upgrade 
their systems from the entry-level 3083 to the 
top-of-the-line 3084—about a tenfold increase 
in performance—with minimal disruption to 
their information processing operations. 
The improved 308X processors feature 
design and circuit packaging enhancements 
and offer 5 to 14 percent increases in internal 
performance at no increase in price. Memory 
options providing customers with up to 
128 million characters of main memory were 
announced, as were programming enhance-
ments to the MVS/XA operating system that 
extended the communications capabilities 
available to large system users. Enhancements 
to Virtual Machine control programming 
provided performance improvements ranging 
from 10 to 25 percent for 308 X computers. 
A laser and a liquid jet direct gold for circuit 
interconnections to precise spots in this experimental 
device developed by IBM researchers. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
Each technician in a control room at IBM's 
Kingston, N. Y., plant can monitor testing 0/40 large-
scale ^o8Xsystems simultaneously. 
Mid-range and small processors 
IBM expanded the growth paths available to 
customers with mid-range information process-
ing needs, introducing new or enhanced 
models of the 4300, System738, System736, 8100 
and Series71 computers. Programming and 
attachments designed to increase the productiv-
ity of these systems also were announced. 
The IBM 4381 model 3, which features 
two processors operating under a single control 
program, offers significant performance im-
provements in both commercial and scientific 
applications. It can process information 
almost twice as fast as the largest 4300 series 
computer previously available. The new 4381 
model makes use of an advanced memory 
chip that can store some 256,000 bits of 
information. 
The IBM 4361 model 3 is a new, low-cost 
entry in the 4300 computer family. Equipped 
with up to 4 million characters of main 
memory, the model 3 can accommodate CADAM • 
Express, an easily installed, computer-aided 
design and manufacturing program product. 
Two additional System738 models are 
available for customers with rapidly expanding 
information processing needs. The IBM 
System738 model 40 offers twice the main 
memory and 70 percent greater internal 
performance than the IBM System738 model 8. 
The IBM System738 model 20 offers 30 percent 
greater internal performance than the model 8. 
IBM extended the range of its System736 
*CADAM is a registered trademark of CADAM, Inc. 
family of computers with the addition of an 
entry-level system small enough to fit under a 
desk. The new system can attach up to 22 
local and 64 remote workstations. Compact 
packaging makes it possible for users to add 
communications features, memory or work-
stations by simply inserting plug-in modules. 
A new Conversion Aid program also makes it 
easier for System736 customers requiring 
greater capability to upgrade to the more pow-
erful System738.The new IBM 4214 matrix 
printer provides high-quality printing capabil-
ity for System736 and System738 processors. 
Also announced was a series of 
complementary programs, called the Office 
Systems Family, that offers full-function text 
editing, library services and electronic docu-
ment distribution. These programs also permit 
exchange of information within networks of 
IBM Personal Computers, System736s and 
models of the System/^jo. 
Five new models of the IBM 8150 
computer expand the capacity and flexibility 
of the 8100 information system family. The 
new units offer up to 8 million characters 
of main memory. A PC Adapter, which extends 
the 8ioo's utility in the workstation environ-
ment, also was introduced. The adapter allows 
users to attach IBM Personal Computers 
directly to an 8100, enabling them to shift 
quickly from a program running on the PC's 
operating system to one running on an 8100 or 
on a host System7370 computer. 
Two new models of the IBM Series71 
processor enable customers to extend their 
distributed processing, communications and 
IBM 
diskfiles, shown here in production 
at the Vimercate, Italy, plant, now are manufactured 
in four locations worldwide. 
data processing applications. The model E 
provides twice the main memory, and offers 
one and a half times the internal perform-
ance of the previous high-end Series71. The 
model 60 E also offers memory and performance 
improvements, along with an integrated 
disk file capable of storing up to 60 million 
characters of information. 
IBM Personal Computer 
Additional Personal Computer products 
were introduced at a rapid pace in 1984, while 
the price7performance of other PC products 
was improved. Innovative PC hardware options 
and program products also were announced. 
A technician at the Greenock, Scotland, plant 
monitors tests of the IBM Personal Computer AT. 
The new IBM Personal Computer AT^"^ 
system delivers up to three times the system 
performance and twice the storage of pre-
viously available IBM PCs. It can be used as a 
powerful single-user system or, with optional 
programming, can be shared by up to three 
users. The AT model also is ideal for use with the 
new PC Network, a series of products that 
enables customers to link up to 72 IBM PCs to 
share information and peripheral devices. 
The IBM Portable Personal Computer, 
announced in February, is a compact version of 
the IBM Personal Computer. The Portable PC 
is easily transported as work requirements 
change and can accommodate two slim-line 
diskette drives. 
More cost-effective models of the IBM 
Personal Computer and PC X T ™ system were 
introduced. Also, several features that extend 
the power and versatility of IBM PC;R™ 
computers became available. One such feature 


===== PAGE 15 =====
is a memory expansion attachment which 
allows memory to be increased to 512,000 
characters of information, or roughly 330 pages 
of typed text. Other enhancements include an 
economical color display, new typewriter-style 
keyboard, speech synthesizer, and a program 
that allows the expanded memory to be used as 
if it were a second diskette drive. 
Two workstations based on the IBM 
Personal Computer were added to the product 
line in 1984. The IBM 3270 Personal Com-
puter/G and Personal Computer/GX bring to a 
workstation sophisticated graphics functions 
previously offered only on large host computers. 
Expanded disk storage capacity and pro-
gram products offering greater communications 
and graphics flexibility were other options intro-
duced. A compact IBM 3852 ink-jet printer, 
designed for use with the 3270 Personal Com-
puter/G and Personal Computer/GX, can 
A PC application developed by the Red Cross in 
Brisbane, Australia, combines Personal Computers 
and laser readers to verify blood type labels. 
produce color graphics, text and images on 
both paper and transparencies. 
The new IBM PC AT/370 and an enhanced 
model of the IBM PC XT/370 workstation can 
function either as standalone processors 
or intelligent terminals. They also can provide 
additional data and word processing capability. 
IBM began manufacturing PCs at 
the Wangaratta, Australia, plant for delivery to 
Australia, New Zealand and the Southeast 
Asian countries. 
IBM Japan enhanced its high-performance 
personal business computer, the 5550 multi-
station, adding English, Korean and Chinese 
language word processing functions to the 
A Nova Scotia fishery uses IBM PC XTs with 
a System 
in a system developed for the fishing 
industry by an IBM value added remarketer 
formerly announced Japanese language— 
Kanji—capability 
IBM Japan also announced the IBMJX, 
IBM Japan's first low-cost Japanese language 
personal computer designed for home and 
business, and the IBM 5295 Japanese work-
station, a low-cost workstation with Japanese 
language capability for use with IBM System/ 
36 and System/38 computers. 
PC program products 
A number of innovative program products 
extended the range of applications available 
with the Personal Computer family of products. 
The TopView^ 
program enables users to 
access and display data from several applica-
tions concurrently on a single display screen. 
The IBM Personal Computer Assistant Series 
programs offer a range of business and graphics 
applications and text-handling activities. 
PC text processing programs include the 
IBM Personal Computer DisplayWrite Series and 
the IBM PCWriter program products.These 
products feature programs similar to those avail-
able with the IBM Displaywriter, 5520 Adminis-
trative System and System/23 Datamaster. 
The IBM Business Management Series 
and IBM Personal Decision Series are designed 
to help small businesses or departments in 
larger organizations with a range of accounting 
and business management tasks, including 
inventory control, text processing, financial 
reporting and graphics presentation. 
"Writing to Read" is a complete language 
laboratory designed to teach kindergarten and 
first-grade children how to write everything 
they can say and read everything they write. 
Other educational programs include an earth 
science series, programs to teach computer skills, 
and instructional aids for teachers and students. 
Additional PC program products include: 
a full-function version of the FORTRAN lan-
guage compiler, which offers increased perform-
ance; the Personal Computer Cluster Program, 
which allows up to 64 IBM Personal Computers 
to be connected to share information; the 
Electric Literature Series of educational pro-
grams; several PC entertainment programs, and 
a variety of instructional programs from Science 
Research Associates, Inc., an IBM subsidiary. 
Workstations 
Three compact, low-cost display stations offer-
ing customers new data entry and handling 
alternatives became available. Two of them— 
the IBM 3179 color and 3180 monochrome 
displays—include as standard features most of 
the frequently ordered options of IBM's 
popular 3278 and 3279 termmals.They 
occupy less desk space, are lighter and use less 
power than the 3270 displays. Both have 
keyboards that can be modified by users to 
accommodate their particular applications. 
The third new workstation is the 
compact IBM 3205, a low-priced console for 
IBM 4381 and 4361 processors.The 3205 is 
about one-third smaller and 22 pounds lighter 
than a comparable IBM 3279 console. 
Storage units and printers 
A new generation of magnetic tape drives, 
advanced storage control units and faster. 
Programmers from Korea, China, the U. S. 
and Japan confer on multiple language capabilities 
of the IBM 5550 multistation. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
A laboratory test specialist at the Tucson, Ariz., 
facility uses a special camera to inspect a 3480 tape 
system's cartridge load mechanism. 
more flexible printers were introduced in 1984. 
The new generation of tape drives 
replaces the familiar tape reel with a compact 
cartridge. The new drives, part of the IBM 
3480 magnetic tape subsystem, can transfer 
data at up to 3 million characters a second, 
more than double the previous rate. An 
innovative tape head using thin-film technol-
ogy delivers a significant improvement in 
data reliability. The new cartridge, about one-
third the size of a tape reel, can store about 
20 percent more data. 
The il^M 3880 models 23 and 21 storage 
control units speed the flow of data by acting 
as temporary storage for the most frequently 
used data being transferred between disk 
storage units and a host computer. The units 
offer storage capacities up to 32 million 
characters of information and are less expen-
sive than previous comparable 3880 models. 
The IBM 4248 printer, the company's 
fastest impact printer, can print at three 
different speeds to accommodate varying 
volume and print quality requirements. The 
4248, designed for quiet operation, prints at 
3,600, 3,000 and 2,200 lines a minute. 
Advanced-function printing programs for 
the IBM 3800 model 3 laser printer enable users 
to combine text, graphics, signatures, logos 
and type styles on a single page. The model 3 
prints up to 20,040 lines per minute. 
Typewriters 
A new generation of IBM typewriters made 
its debut last year. The IBM Selectric® 
System/2000 typewriter family includes 
the IBM Quietwriter® 7 typewriter, which 
features a unique print technology that 
electronically "paints" characters onto the 
paper.The IBM Wheelwriter^*^ 5 and IBM 
Wheelwriter 3 typewriters use cartridge 
printwheels. 
The Selectric System/zooo typewriters 
offer an optional 50,ooo-word dictionary that 
detects possible spelling errors, and have paper 
movement keys which align paper so precisely 
that traditional platen knobs are not needed. 
They also can be used as personal computer 
printers. Also introduced were two associated 
letter-quality printers—the IBM Quietwriter 
printer and the IBM Wheelprinter—for use 
with personal computers. 
A new electronic typewriter, the IBM 
Electronic 95, offers twice the memory capacity 
of the model 85. A diskette drive for use with 
the IBM Electronic 85 and 95 typewriters 
provides the added storage capacity of single-
or double-sided 5^A-inch diskettes. 
Manufacturing systems 
IBM's offerings of automated manufacturing 
systems were expanded with new robotic 
systems, industrial computers and program-
ming support. 
This advanced print head is the heart of the 
IBM Quietwriter 7 typewriter, one model in the new 
Selectric System /2000 family. 
The IBM 7545 manufacturing system, a 
low-cost addition to the company's robotic 
systems family, is designed for a range of 
electromechanical assembly, fabrication and 
materials-handling tasks. The IBM 7547 
manufacturing system, another programmable 
robotic system with a longer reach and larger 
payload than the 7545, is especially suited for 
materials-handling tasks. 
The IBM 5531 industrial computer 
is an IBM PC XT specially modified for the 
physical conditions typically found in a 
manufacturing environment. The computer, 
its display and printer can be used for a 
A keyboard in production at the Lexington, Ky., 
plant is put through its paces by a robotic tester. 
spectrum of applications on the manufac-
turing floor, as well as for traditional office 
applications. 
Enhanced versions of IBM's entry-level 
robotic programming language—AML/Entry 
Versions 3 and 4—enable manufacturers to 
create application programs tailored for their 
production requirements. 
New Series/1 programs that simplify the 
implementation of control and monitoring 
applications also were introduced. These 
programs allow users to set up data commu-
nications between programmable controllers 
supplied by other manufacturers. 
Scientific products 
The company also extended its product 
offerings geared specifically for the scientific 
and engineering communities. 
The IBM Personal Computer Engineering/ 
Scientific Series enables IBM Personal Com-
puter products to be tailored to support engi-
neering design, control laboratory experiments 
and perform high-speed mathematical com-
putations. The series includes the IBM PC 
Professional Graphics Display and Professional 
Graphics Controller, which make it possible 
to generate advanced color graphics, and the 
IBM PC Graphics Development Toolkit, which 


===== PAGE 17 =====
allows users to design graphics applications 
independent of displays, printers and plotters. 
A new line of Nuclear Magnetic 
Resonance spectrometers and an advanced 
desktop computer were introduced by IBM 
Instruments, Inc. Spectrometers are used in the 
pharmaceutical, petroleum, biotechnology and 
other industries to study the molecular 
structure of compounds. A new model of the 
IBM 9000 computer, the IBM 9002 is an 
economical, compact computer that provides 
customers the power of a minicomputer. The 
9002, when used in conjunction with an 
optional operating system, also can function as 
a host computer, supporting up to four users. 
Telecommunications products 
Several products that make it easier for users 
to transmit information were announced. 
They include enhancements to IBM's Systems 
Network Architecture (SNA) that increase the 
number of available "logical addresses" 
125-fold, expanding the number of devices that 
can be linked in a single network. SNA is 
a communications architecture that allows ter-
minals, workstations, printers and storage 
devices to be combined into networks. 
IBM's SNA is helping a major producer of silicone 
products link 80 percent of its employees, such 
as this engineer designing a chemical plant, to an 
interactive network of workstations. 
Introduced by IBM in 1974, it is the most widely 
used network architecture in the industry 
Another new software enhancement 
enables customers to transmit forms contain-
ing both handwritten and printed information 
and to display the documents on a variety of 
terminals. Document images are entered into a 
A waitress in a Tokyo restaurant uses 
CATNET, 
a nationmde credit verification system introduced 
by IBM in Japan. 
host computer using an IBM Scanmaster 
information terminal, then distributed to 
designated workstations. 
The IBM Cabling System permits users 
to install permanent computer cabling in their 
offices or buildings, eliminating the need for 
rewiring every time a computer, workstation or 
related information-handling device is moved. 
Programs that increase the effectiveness of 
telephone systems became available in 1984. 
One, used in conjunction with IBM's 
Professional Office System, allows messages 
taken by an operator to be directed to a 
terminal in an individual's office. The capacity 
of IBM's Audio Distribution System also was 
tripled to 3,000 users. 
The IBM 3710 network controller reduces 
the number and cost of telecommunications 
lines and devices needed to connect worksta-
tions and other equipment to remote computers. 
The 3710 can consolidate up to 32 lines into 
one or more high-speed transmission lines. 
The new IBM 7171 ASCII control unit en-
ables users to connect up to 64 ASCII devices— 
either directly or remotely via a modem—to host 
computers without programming changes. 
Industry systems 
The IBM 3680 restaurant system, the first 
restaurant system to run on an IBM point-of-
sale terminal, was introduced. The system 
enables restaurant operators to manage sales, 
food inventories and other key areas of their 
business more efficiently. 
IBM Japan added two products in support 
of the financial industry in Japan. CATNET, 
a 
nationwide credit verification system, connects 
computers at credit companies with terminals 
installed in stores around the country. The 
IBM 4743 Automatic Cash-In counts and com-
putes the values of a stack of currency. Used 
in conjunction with one of IBM's finance 
communication systems, the 4743 also can 
complete a variety of banking transactions. 
Enhanced graphics 
Graphics capabilities previously available 
only on large computers now are available to 
IBM System738 users following enhancements 
to the computer's operating system. 
The Graphical Data Display Manager 
enables users to create diagrams and charts 
using an IBM 5292 model 2 color display. 
Another program—Graphics Data File— 
permits graphics to be exchanged with another 
System738 or a System/370 computer. 
Presentation Graphics Routines enable 
user-written application programs to create a 
variety of charts on one screen. OFFICE/38 
Business Graphics Utility, a simplified graphics 
capability, enables a customer to create eight 
types of charts, using menus and prompts. 
Federal Systems Division 
The Federal Aviation Administration has 
selected IBM'S Federal Systems Division (FSD) 
as one of two primary participants in a 
competition to design an advanced U. S. air 
traffic control system. The competition 
requires IBM to demonstrate an advanced flight 
control workstation and to submit an im-
proved approach to air traffic control. 
Employees of a German furniture 
cooperative 
handle customer inquiries and orders received over 
a nationwide videotex information system. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
IBM instructors train U. S. Department of 
Agriculture employees as part of a government con-
tract that includes the installation of almost 2,goo 
System/^S computers in state and county offices. 
FSD also was awarded a U. S. Department 
of Agriculture contract for the USDA State 
and County Office Automation Project. The 
contract calls for installation, systems support 
and maintenance of nearly 2,900 System/36s 
in Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation 
Service offices across the country. The net-
work also will include more than 13,500 work-
stations and 6,400 printers. 
ROLM 
With the ROLM Corporation merger in 
November, IBM expanded its range of business 
communications products for voice, data 
and networking applications. Among these 
products is the CBX 11, one of the most advanced 
communications controllers currently avail-
able. The CBX II handles up to 4.4 billion bits 
of information a second. The ROLM Cedar^^ 
personal communications computer combines 
personal computing with advanced voice 
and data communications in a single unit. 
Another product—the PhoneMaiP 
system— 
is an advanced voice message system which 
allows customers to leave and retrieve voice 
messages from any pushbutton phone. 
Headquartered in Santa Clara, Calif., the 
ROLM organization includes some 10,000 
employees who provide professional services 
ranging from design and engineering to 
manufacturing, sales and customer support. 
IBM Credit Corporation 
The IBM Credit Corporation continued to 
promote the growth of the company's tradi-
tional business, providing customers attractive 
financing options for leasing or purchasing 
new equipment. Last year, the Credit Corpora-
tion financed, solely or through partnerships, 
$2.4 billion in new equipment in the U. S. 
The Credit Corporation also introduced its own 
credit card for the purchase of IBM PCs and 
related products at IBM Product Centers and at 
more than 1,300 of IBM's authorized dealers 
in the U. S. 
Satellite Business Systems 
Satellite Business Systems (SBS) successfully 
launched its fourth satellite in August. Carried 
aloft by the space shuttle Discovery, the 
satellite will be used for the expansion of SBS 
Skyline* long-distance telephone services and 
other communications services. 
SBS is owned by Aetna Life and Casualty 
and IBM. COMSAT General Corporation, 
one of the original partners in Satellite 
Business Systems, sold its one-third interest to 
IBM and Aetna in December. 
A technician works on IxK/L-iiVl Cedar personal 
communications computers in final assembly at 
ROLM's Austin, Tex., plant. 
New joint ventures 
IBM announced its participation in two 
additional joint ventures in the U. S. last year, 
IBM and Merrill Lynch & Co., Inc., formed a 
joint venture called International MarketNet 
to market a new information delivery system 
for the financial industry. The system combines 
IBM Personal Computer-based workstations 
and specialized communications and office 
*Skyline is a service mark of Satellite Business Systems. 
automation programming to deliver a range of 
market data and financial services. 
IBM formed a partnership called Trintex 
with CBS, Inc., and Sears, Roebuck and Co., 
to develop a commercial videotex service 
directed at households with home and personal 
computers. Videotex, a two-way, interactive 
The IBM Credit Corporation credit card can be used 
to purchase supplies and many IBM products. 
service, enables consumers to call up infor-
mation, send messages and perform trans-
actions like banking, bill-paying and home 
shopping. 
Also announced was an agreement 
by IBM Italy and STET, a government-owned 
holding company in Italy, to form a joint 
venture between IBM Italy and ELSAG-STET 
Group, a firm specializing in numerical 
control equipment, robotic systems, mail 
automation products and naval systems. The 
joint venture will develop and market 
software products for factory management, 
production process control, and design and 
development functions. 
European Commission proceedings 
In August, the Commission of the European 
Communities agreed to settle proceedings 
against the company. IBM agreed to provide, 
within specified time limits, interface 
information to facilitate the attachment of 
competitive products to new IBM System/370 
products, and technical information about 
IBM's Systems Network Architecture. IBM will 
not release any proprietary product design 
details. In turn, the Commission suspended 
proceedings against the company. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
An advanced digital communications net-
work designed to improve response to customer 
requests for service soon will be available in 
more than 300 U. S. cities. The network links 
IBM service representatives equipped with 
portable terminals to computers at central 
service data centers, giving them two-way com-
munications capabilities while traveling 
between locations or working in a customer's 
office. The hand-held terminals provide 
updated customer call information and enable 
service representatives to transmit service data 
and parts orders directly to their offices. 
IBM also installed an " e x p e r t system" in 
Service coordinators in Atlanta use a computer-
based dispatch system to assign representatives to 
handle customer service calls. 
its support centers in Boulder, Colo., Chicago 
and Tampa, Fla., to improve the ability of 
service personnel to resolve customers' pro-
gramming problems. The computer system 
helps service personnel compare current prob-
lems with similar ones previously resolved, 
so they can suggest solutions immediately. 
IBM's two U. S. service organizations— 
the Customer Service and Field Engineering 
divisions—were consolidated into a new field 
division, the National Service Division, which 
will provide service to IBM's full product line in 
the United States. A separate group service 
staff will ensure continued emphasis on service 
in the company's strategic planning process. 
Independent Business Units 
IBM's Independent Business Units (iBUs) 
continued efforts to develop and market prod-
ucts and services in specialized fields. 
Automated testing systems at the East Fishkill, N.Y., 
plant help ensure the quality of logic circuitry used in 
models of the 4^00 computer 
IBM World Trade IBUs focused on unique 
needs for individual countries. I BUS operating 
in the U. S. at the end of 1984 were: Academic 
Information Systems, Engineering Systems 
Products, Financial Services Business Unit, 
General Products Business Unit, IBM Informa-
tion Services, IBM Instruments, Inc., Low-End 
Storage Business Unit, Manufacturing Systems 
Products and Science Research Associates, Inc. 
IBM China, Inc. 
IBM announced the establishment of IBM 
China, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of IBM 
World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, 
to conduct IBM's business in the People's 
Republic of China. The company also named 
seven authorized dealers to market the IBM 
5550 and IBM Personal Computer products in 
the People's Republic of China. 
New facilities 
One of the largest, most highly automated 
test facilities in the world was completed at the 
IBM East Fishkill site. The 153,000-square-
foot facility houses testers capable of generating 
up to 100 million test signals a second. 
The testers are used to ensure the quality 
of state-of-the-art Very Large Scale Integration 
(VLSL) chips manufactured at the site. 
Programs to automate manufacturing 
operations continued at a number of 
IBM plants. At the Lexington, Ky., facility, new 
Selectric System/2000 typewriters and 
printers now are being manufactured on auto-
mated lines put in place as part of the site's 
$350 million automation project. 
The company invested more than 
$4.6 billion in plant and other property in 
1984, adding more than 2.3 million square feet 
of plant and laboratory space. An additional 
6.7 million square feet are under construction. 
Major projects completed during 1984 
include a computing center in Owego, N.Y.; 
a data center in San Jose, Calif.; manufacturing 
facilities in Burlington, Vt., Charlotte, N.C., 
Endicott, N.Y., Lexington, Ky, Mainz, 
Germany, Poughkeepsie, N.Y., and Vimercate, 
Italy; an expansion of research facilities 
at Yorktown, and administration buildings in 
Manassas, Va., and Purchase, N.Y 
Employee suggestions 
IBM employees earned approximately 
$17 million in awards under the IBM Sugges-
tion Plan in 1984. The cost-saving ideas 
recognized under the suggestion program 
during the year represent savings to the com-
pany of more than $ 100 million. 
Affirmative action 
IBM hired more than 19,700 new employees 
in the U. S. in 1984. About 42 percent of 
those hired were women and 23 percent were 
minorities. At year end, IBM employed approx-
imately 4,500 women and 3,350 minority 
managers in the U. S. 
IBM continued its efforts in support 
of minority-owned businesses. In 1984, 
IBM purchased in excess of $110 million in 
products and services from some 750 minority-
owned firms. IBM also made purchases 
totaling over $60 million from more than 550 
A giant-sized PC keyboard was part of a traveling 
computer show and exhibit sponsored by IBM for 
school children in Australia. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
companies that are owned primarily by 
women, and in excess of $15 million from more 
than 80 companies employing large numbers 
of handicapped workers. 
Support to education 
IBM also expanded its programs aimed at 
improving the quality of education in 1984. 
The company added the Education 
Executive Program, a program tailored for 
school superintendents, principals and other 
senior administrators. The program is designed 
to familiarize them with personnel and 
business management techniques that have 
proven successful in the private sector. More 
than 562 educators from 135 school districts 
have participated in the program since it 
was established in May. 
A program to educate more than 200,000 
students and teachers from selected public and 
private school systems in the use of com-
puters also was implemented.The IBM Model 
Computer Literacy Program was designed to 
help schools and their faculties use computers 
effectively in classrooms. 
In the fall, 67 employees were granted 
leaves under the Faculty Loan Program to 
A totem pole is carved in the Garden Plaza of 
IBM's 5po Madison Avenue building in New York 
City in preparation for an exhibit of Indian art 
at the IBM Gallery of Science and Art. 
teach engineering, computer science, marketing 
and business courses, and to assist with admin-
istration at educational institutions with large 
minority and disadvantaged student enroll-
ments. More than 490 employees have partici-
pated in the program since it began in 1971. 
IBM supported or introduced computer 
IBM employees participating in the Faculty Loan 
Program are on assignment during the '84-'8^ term 
at ^8 schools in 24 states and Washington, D.C. 
literacy programs in many countries where 
the company does business. In many cases, 
IBM support included the contribution of IBM 
Personal Computers and programming. 
In Europe, the company donated 770 
IBM Personal Computers and software to 
secondary schools in Germany, Italy, the 
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and 
the United Kingdom to familiarize teachers 
and students with the use and potential 
of computers. 
The University of Cambridge and IBM 
United Kingdom announced a joint project to 
develop methods for using computers to 
enhance engineering education programs. 
In support of the program, IBM is providing 
equipment, funding, programming and 
technical guidance. 
A third IBM Europe Institute was held 
in Davos, Switzerland. Intended to increase 
technical dialogue between industry and 
universities, the institute brought together 
more than 700 scientists and researchers from 
across Europe for a series of presentations. 
IBM announced a $25 million grant 
program to help U. S. graduate schools of 
business strengthen instruction and research 
in the management of information systems. 
Under the program, 12 graduate schools, to be 
selected in the spring of 1985, will receive 
both cash grants and IBM information process-
ing equipment and software. 
IBM announced a similar program to help 
universities initiate research programs and 
develop graduate-level curricula in the 
materials and processing sciences. Twelve 
grants of cash and equipment will be made to 
selected U. S. universities. 
The company also provided more than 
$8 million to more than 1,400 colleges and 
universities in the U. S. under the IBM Match-
ing Grants Program for Higher Education. 
IBM matches, two for one, contributions by 
employees and their spouses. 
IBM and the c o m m u n i t y 
Worldwide, IBM's contributions of cash, 
equipment and other resources to social, 
cultural and educational programs totaled 
more than $145 million in 1984. 
Among community programs in the U. S., 
the nationwide "Project to Train the Disabled" 
marked a milestone with its i,oooth place-
ment. Begun in 1972, the IBM-initiated project 
seeks to establish self-sustaining, locally 
operated projects to teach programming skills 
to people with severe physical disabilities 
and to help them become gainfully employed. 
Another IBM-initiated program—the 
An extensive exhibition of IBM products and 
technology was held in London, one stop on a three-
year, 14-nation European tour 
Summer Youth Employment Program— 
resulted in jobs at non-profit agencies for about 
350 disadvantaged youths in major metropolitan 
areas with sizeable youth unemployment. 
Support continued for centers that train 
socially and economically disadvantaged 
people for careers in fields such as computer 
operations and word processing. IBM provides 
equipment and technical support at 47 centers 
in the U. S. 
Through the IBM Child Care Referral 
Service, grants were made to 200 community-


===== PAGE 21 =====
based child care and referral agencies to increase 
the quality of local child care providers. IBM 
Personal Computers and supporting software 
were donated to 33 agencies. 
IBM played an active role in recognizing 
the achievements of disabled athletes through 
its support of the 1984 International Games 
for the Disabled. The company provided 
a System736 computer to monitor the achieve-
ments of the 1,800 athletes from 45 nations 
who participated in the games. 
Some 125 IBM employees were granted 
leaves to work at non-profit organizations 
under the IBM Social Service Leave Program. 
More than 800 employees have been 
granted leaves since the program was estab-
lished in 1971. 
IBM served as the official personal 
computer and office systems sponsor of the 
1984 Summer Olympics, IBM provided support 
for the administrative operations of the 
Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee 
and the competitive events. 
Community involvement within IBM's 
World Trade organizations was directed toward 
a range of human and civic needs. In England, 
the expertise of IBM employees as well as a 
4341 computer, storage devices, displays and 
other products are being provided to the 
Oxford University Press to help produce a new 
edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. A 
blood cell processor was donated to a hospital 
in Greece for the study and treatment of 
thalassemia, a congenital blood disease 
affecting Greek children. The corporation also 
provided support to a project sponsored by the 
IBM is providing computers, software and the 
help of IBM specialists in a project to publish a new 
edition of the Oxford English Dictionary. 
At a major exposition to open in Tsukuba, Japan, 
in March 198^, the IBM pavilion mil stress the role 
of science in the development of civilization. 
Helen Keller International agency to treat 
blindness in the African nations of Tanzania 
and Malawi. 
IBM's Americas/Far East organization 
entered a partnership with the Government of 
Antigua and Barbuda to develop a com-
puterized storm warning system for the 
Caribbean islands. In Brazil, IBM scientists 
worked to apply ecologic systems to protect 
sugar cane from destructive insects. 
A number of exhibits were staged 
throughout the world to familiarize people 
with emerging information processing 
technologies and products. An exhibition of 
IBM products and technology—one of the 
most extensive ever assembled in Europe—has 
begun a three-year, 14-nation European tour. 
The exhibition attracted more than 180,000 
visitors in Paris, Milan and London in 1984. 
The exhibition is scheduled to be in Lyon, 
France; Copenhagen; Amsterdam; Oslo; 
Manchester, England; Stuttgart, Germany; 
West Berlin and Rome durmg 1985. 
IBM Japan will participate in a major 
science exposition scheduled to open in 
Tsukuba, Japan, in March 1985. 
IBM Brazil exhibited some of the 
company's most advanced technologies and 
product offerings at Brazil's international 
"Informatics" show, held in Rio de Janeiro in 
November. The show, one of the largest 
data processing trade shows in the world, 
attracted more than 150,000 attendees. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity 
of the financial information presented in this 
Annual Report rests with IBM management.The 
accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles, applying certain estimates 
and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of 
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, 
of organizational arrangements with clearly 
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of 
authority We believe this system provides reason-
able assurance that transactions are executed 
in accordance with management authorization, 
and that they are appropriately recorded, in 
order to permit preparation of financial state-
ments in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles and to adequately safeguard, 
verify and maintain accountability of assets. 
An important element of the system is an on-
going internal audit program. 
To assure the effective administration of 
internal control, we carefully select and train 
our employees, develop and disseminate written 
policies and procedures, provide appropriate 
communication channels, and foster an environ-
ment conducive to the effective functioning of 
controls. We continue to believe that it is 
essential for the company to conduct its business 
affairs in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, trans-
lated into numerous languages, are distributed 
to employees throughout the world, and 
reemphasized through internal programs to 
assure that they are understood and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accountants, 
are retained to examine IBM's financial state-
ments. Their accompanying report is based on an 
examination conducted in accordance with 
generally accepted auditing standards, including 
a review of internal accounting controls and tests 
of accounting procedures and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors is composed solely of outside directors, 
and is responsible for recommending to the 
Board the independent accounting firm to 
be retained for the coming year, subject to stock-
holder approval. The Audit Committee meets 
periodically and privately with the independent 
accountants, with our internal auditors, as 
well as with IBM management, to review account-
ing, auditing, internal accounting controls and 
financial reporting matters. 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Allen J. Krowe 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance & Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 26,28, 
30, and 33 through 43, present fairly the financial 
position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiary companies 
at December 31,1984, and 1983, and the results 
of their operations and changes in funds 
for each of the three years in the period ended 
December 31,1984, in conformity with gen-
erally accepted accounting principles consistently 
applied. Our examinations of these statements 
January 29, 1985 
were made in accordance with generally accepted 
auditing standards and accordingly included 
such tests of the accounting records and such other 
auditing procedures as we considered necessary 
in the circumstances. 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
New York, N.Y. 1002 z 


===== PAGE 23 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross Income: 
Sales 
Services 
Rentals 
Cost of sales 
Cost of services 
Cost of rentals 
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . 
Research, development and engineering expenses 
Interest expense 
Other income, principally interest 
Earnings before income taxes 
Provision for income taxes 
Net Earnings 
Per share 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1,426,324 
1984 
1983 
1983-606,769,848 
1982-596,688,501 
$ 29,753 
9,605 
6,579 
1 2 , 3 7 4 
4 , 3 4 7 
2 , 1 9 8 
1 1 , 5 8 7 
4,200 
408 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
3 5 , 1 1 4 
10,823 
800 
1 1 , 6 2 3 
5,041 
$ 
6,582 
$ 10.77 
23,274 
7,676 
9,230 
9,748 
3,506 
3 , 1 4 1 
1 0 , 6 1 4 
3,582 
390 
$40,1 80 
30,981 
9,199 
Z 4 1 
9,940 
4 , 4 5 5 
$ 
5,485 
$ 9.04 
1 6 , 8 1 5 
6,428 
I 1 , 1 2 1 
6,682 
3,047 
3 , 9 5 9 
9,286 
3,042 
4 5 1 
$34,364 
26,470 
7,894 
3^8 
8,222 
3 , 8 1 3 
$ 
4,409 
$ 7 - 3 9 


===== PAGE 24 =====
Results of Operations 
In 1984, the company posted a record 
financial performance. 
Worldwide gross income in 1984 totaled 
$45.9 billion, an increase of 14.3 percent. 
Worldwide net earnings increased by 20 percent 
to $6.6 billion. 
Gross income from U. S. operations 
increased by 18.3 percent to $27.3 billion, while 
non-U. S. gross income increased by 8.9 percent 
to $18.6 billion. 
The year was one of market growth driven 
by new product introductions, price elasticity 
and broadened use of marketing channels. 
The company increased worldwide customer ship-
ments substantially 
The financial performance of non-U. S. 
operations continued to be adversely affected by 
the strength of the U. S. dollar, a trend which 
began in 1980. Management believes the 
company's performance outside of the U. S. has 
been obscured as a result. To assist the reader 
in assessing results in non-U. S. markets, page 32 
includes graphs reflecting the U. S. and non-U. S. 
currency relationships. 
Total gross income from sales grew to 
$29.8 billion in 1984, an increase of 27.8 percent. 
As illustrated in the table below, sales gross 
income has been accelerating for several years and 
this trend is expected to persis,: as outright 
purchase continues to be our customers' preferred 
mode of acquisition. 
As a direct corollary, total gross income 
from rentals, primarily risk leases, declined by 
28.7 percent, a trend that has been apparent since 
1982. Management expects this trend to con-
tinue, though diminishing in proportion to total 
revenue. As revenues continue to shift toward 
sales, quarter-to-quarter performance compari-
sons may become more volatile, particularly 
as new products go through introductory cycles. 
Multi-year volume sales agreements, increased 
maintenance revenues, the rapid expansion of 
program products revenue and the growth in 
financing income should dampen this volatility 
over time. 
Services gross income reached $9.6 billion, 
an increase of 25.1 percent. This was largely 
the result of growth in program products gross 
income, which increased 38.9 percent to $3.2 
billion. Maintenance gross income increased 
15.1 percent. 
Gross Income by Industry Segments and 
Classes of Similar Products or Services (table on 
page 43) highlights several trends. Informa-
tion-handling, the predominant segment, has 
grown substantially over the past three years, with 
a compound growth rate of 15 percent. Within 
this segment. Office Systems/Workstations, 
Processors, Program Products and Maintenance 
contributed the major portion of the growth. 
Sales of Peripherals also experienced significant 
growth, and, as expected, peripherals rentals 
exhibited a decrease. Rentals declined as a 
percentage of gross income in each applicable 
product class. Although afiected by the strength 
of the U. S. dollar, non-U. S. trends were similar 
in most classes. 
Total gross profit increased by 13.6 percent 
to $27.0 billion. The total gross profit margin was 
down slightly As rental gross income, with 
its higher than average profit margin, becomes a 
smaller contributor to total gross profit, the 
overall gross profit margin will tend to be lower 
than in prior periods until the decline in rental 
gross income stabilizes. 
Gross profit from sales increased to 
$17.4 billion in 1984, an increase of 28.5 percent, 
while gross profit from rentals decreased by 
$1.7 billion, a decline of 28.0 percent. 
Services gross profit increased 26.1 per-
cent to $5.3 billion. Maintenance gross profit, the 
major component, increased 20.4 percent. 
This increase reflected the result of IBM'S world-
wide quality and productivity improvements. 
Program products gross income grew at a rate 
significantly greater than costs, yielding a signifi-
cant increase in gross profit. 
Management increased investments 
in research, development and engineering by 
$618 million from 1983 levels to a total of 
$4.2 billion, 9.1 percent of gross income. These 
investments are crucial to maintaining the 
company's leadership position. 
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
as a ratio to gross income improved as a result 
of volume sales agreements, the development and 
implementation of more efficient administra-
tive systems, a continuing focus on quality and 
the use of non-traditional distribution channels 
to market selected products. Gross income per IBM 
employee rose from approximately $77 thousand 
in 1980 to approximately $120 thousand in 1984. 
At the same time, the selling, general and 
administrative expense as a percent of gross 
income went from 30.9 percent to 25.2 percent. 
The company's goal to reduce selling, general 
and administrative expense as a percent of total 
gross income continues to be met. 
Other income, principally interest, 
increased by 8.0 percent over 1983. Other income 
also includes earnings of IBM's non-consolidated 
finance subsidiaries and I BM'S share of results 
from other equity investments. 
The effective tax rate declined during the 
current period by 1.4 percentage points com-
pared to 1983. This improvement results primarily 
from the resolution of tax matters related to 
prior years. 
Management remains optimistic about 
the long-term future of the industry and the com-
pany's performance. 
I B M Consolidated Gross Income: 
(In millions) 
$ 5 0 , 0 0 0 
45,000 
14% 
40,000 
23% 
35,000 
2 1 % 
30,000 
32% 
19% 
25,000 
H 4 > % 
37% 
19% 
20,000 
18% 
65% 
15,000 
4 9 % 
58% 
10,000 
^ H 
4 5 % 
5,000 
H | 
I Sales 
'82. 
'83 
H l i Services 
I Rentals 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
19831 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
$ 
600 
$ 
6 1 6 
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 
3,762 
4,920 
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 
7,393 
5 , 5 7 7 
Other accounts receivable 
718 
645 
Inventories 
6,598 
4,381 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
1 , 3 0 4 
1 , 1 9 1 
$20,375 
$ 1 7 , 3 3 0 
Rental Machines and Parts 
6,375 
9,201 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
3,425 
4 , 3 3 5 
2,950 
4,866 
Plant and Other Property 
23,048 
19,986 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
9,635 
8,710 
1 3 , 4 1 3 
1 1 , 2 7 6 
Investments and Other Assets 
6,070 
3 , 9 8 9 
$42,808 
3 > 3 7 , 4 6 1 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
$ 
2,668 
$ 
3,220 
Loans payable 
834 
532 
Accounts payable 
1,618 
1 , ^ 5 3 
Compensation and benefits 
2,223 
2,105 
Deferred income 
340 
382 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
1,957 
1,670 
$ 9,640 
( S 
9,162 
Long-Term Debt 
3,269 
2,674 
Other Liabilities 
1 , 3 5 3 
1 , 4 7 5 
Deferred Income Taxes 
2,057 
931 
Stockholders' Eqviity: 
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 
5,998 
5,800 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1984-613,076,500; 1983-610,724,641 
Retained earnings 
23,486 
19,489 
Translation adjustments 
(2,948) 
(2,070) 
26,536 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 
47 
— 
Shares: 1984-390,961 
26,489 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
$ 42,808 
$ 37,461 
t Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform with 1984 presentation. 
The notes on pages 34 through 43 
are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Financial Condition 
In 1984, IBM further strengthened its 
financial position, while investing $8.8 billion in 
research, development and engineering, and 
plant and other property. 
Expenditures for research, development 
and engineering amounted to $4.2 billion, repre-
senting 9.1 percent of gross income in 1984. 
These expenditures, which are expensed in the 
year incurred, have amounted to more than 
$ 15.5 billion over the past five years. The future 
growth of the company depends upon these 
investments. They are the foundation for 
a continuous stream of innovative products 
and services to meet customers' needs in an 
intensely competitive international environment. 
Management expects to sustain high levels of 
investment in technology and for future products 
and services. 
IBM invested $4.6 billion in plant and 
other property, an increase of 31.z percent over 
the prior year. These investments were made 
throughout the world to accommodate the 
company's growth and improve efficiency, and 
have amounted to more than $16.5 billion over the 
past five years. Management intends to continue 
to make substantial investments in plant and 
other property. 
One category of 1984 capital spending that 
did not increase was rental machines, which 
declined by $554 million from the prior year. This 
is consistent with recent trends of declining 
installations on risk leases. 
The company invested $803 million in 
program products production costs, an 
increase of 36.6 percent over 1983. These costs 
are capitalized. The growth in program 
product investments is consistent with our view 
of future potential in this business area. 
Other investments, amounting to $1.1 billion, 
were made in finance subsidiaries and sales-type 
leases. These investments reflect IBM'S growing 
participation in the financing of products 
purchased by our customers. Also included in 
investments and other assets is the goodwill 
related to the ROLM Corporation acquisition. 
The company's working capital increased by 
over $2.5 billion. The increase was caused by 
both the high level of business activity in 1984 as 
well as the changing business environment. 
Notes and accounts receivable increased by 
$1.8 billion and current inventories by $2.2 billion. 
The growth in receivables resulted primarily 
from the record revenues recorded in the fourth 
quarter. The increase in the level of current 
inventories was influenced by the demand for 
high-volume products, which are in large measure 
delivered from shelf stock. In addition, work in 
process inventories increased, reflecting 
anticipated demand. Cash and marketable secu-
rities decreased by $1.2 billion and current 
liabilities increased by $478 million. 
During the year, the company added 
$1,363 million to long-term debt, principally as a 
result of the issuance of $1,285 million of 
convertible debentures in connection with the 
ROLM Corporation acquisition, and reduced 
prior year long-term obligations by $768 million. 
This resulted in a net increase of $595 million in 
long-term debt. 
During 1984, shares were purchased 
in the open market to meet most requirements of 
IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans. 
Almost 90 percent of the total 1984 funds 
provided, or $12.8 billion, were from opera-
tions. Depreciation as a source of funds has dimin-
ished, reflecting decreased risk lease activity 
Operations are expected to provide sufficient funds 
to support the business needs in 1985. 
Management anticipates that IBM'S 
participation in financing of customers' purchases 
of IBM's products will be primarily through our 
finance subsidiaries. These subsidiaries will access 
the worldwide capital markets for funds as the 
need arises. 
Deferred income taxes increased by 
$1.1 billion during 1984. This is attributable to tax 
timing differences related to sales-type leases, 
installment sales and the deferral of investment 
tax credits. 
The accounting method for translating the 
majority of non-U. S. net assets into U. S. dollars 
requires such items to be translated at current 
exchange rates. The cumulative effect of this cur-
rency translation is included in the equity section 
of the Statement of Financial Position as 
'translation adjustments". The strengthening of 
the U. S. dollar since 1980 has resulted in the 
accumulation of $2,948 million in such adjust-
ments. Were the U. S. dollar to weaken 
in relation to other currencies, the translation 
adjustment would be reduced in proportion to 
the change in currency values and IBM's net asset 
position in the affected countries. It is manage-
ment's view that the translation adjustment 
has significance only in situations where liquidation 
of net assets may be anticipated; and even in such 
circumstances, the values assigned to the assets 
do not reflect the current market value. 
Management is mindful of the scope and 
quality of growing international competition 
and the risks inherent in the information process-
ing industry. Therefore, we continue to focus 
on prudent management of IBM resources. 
Each operating unit has activities which 
focus on key operational measurements and 
asset management. Units are assigned targets in 
areas such as quality performance, cash manage-
ment, collections and inventory turnover. 
In 1984, the company's return on assets was 
16.4 percent, compared to 15.7 percent in 1983. 
Return on stockholders' equity reached 
26.5 percent, an increase of i.i percentage points 
from the prior year's historic high. IBM's current 
ratio is 2.1 to i and the long-term debt to equity 
ratio is 12.3 percent. These returns and financial 
ratios are indications of the company's 
financial strength. 
IBM's performance continues to meet 
the company's stated goals. Demand for IBM'S 
products and services remains strong. We antici-
pate balanced financial growth that will provide 
the flexibility to fund future needs and meet 
our long-term goals. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
Consolidated Statement of Funds Flow 
for the year ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January I . . . . 
Provided from (used for) Operations: 
Sources: 
Net earnings 
Items not requiring the current use of funds: 
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 
. . . . 
Net book value of rental machines and 
other property retired or sold 
Amortization of program products 
Other (principally deferred income taxes) 
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized . 
Uses: 
Investment in rental machines 
Investment in plant and other property 
Investment in program products 
Increase (decrease) in investments and other assets 
Net change in working capital 
(excluding cash, marketable securities 
and loans payable) 
Translation effects 
Net provided from operations 
Provided from External Financing: 
Net change in long-term debt 
Net change in loans payable 
Net provided from external financing 
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December 3 j . . . 
11984 includes, on the appropriate lines, the amounts 
expended for the acquisition of the net assets of ROLM 
Corporation. 
Net change in long-term debt for 1984 includes $ 1,185 million 
face value of 7%% convertible subordinated debentures issued 
in connection with the acquisition of ROLM Corporation. 
^ Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform 
with 1984 presentation. 
I984t 
19831 
i982t 
$ 5,536 
6,582 
2,987 
1,483 
486 
1,004 
12,542 
228 
12,770 
858 
4,615 
5,473 
803 
1,764 
4,043 
12,083 
(324) 
595 
302 
363 
897 
73 
6,869 
2,507 
4,362 
$ 3,300 
' 5,485 
3,362 
2,108 
3 1 1 
7 4 9 
12,015 
I 2,280 
1 , 4 1 2 
4,930 
588 
1,887 
855 
8,260 
(147) 
(177) 
3 
3,873 
:i74) 
7,787 
2-,2.5 I 
$ i i l l 6 
$ 2,029 
4,409 
3,143 
1,642 
249 
9,52.7 
4x9 
9,946 
3 , ^ 9 3 
3,39^ 
6,685 
468 
(320) 
370 
7,2-03 
1 2 
182 
(Mi) 
^ , 7 7 3 
(62) 
5 , 3 5 3 
$ 3,300 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Items Not Requiring 
Current Use of Funds 
$5,864 
Working Capital $4,043 
$1,363 New Long-Term Debt 
$302 Loans Payable 
$73 Stock Plans 
Operations $i2,446t 
t Includes Effects of Translation 
Plant and Other Property $4,( 
$768 Reduction of LongTerm Debt 
$ 1,764 Investments and Other Assets 
$858 Rental Machines 
$803 Program Products 
$2,507 Cash Dividends 
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property 
Over the past five years, the company 
has invested over $ 16.5 billion in land, buildings, 
machinery and equipment, and internally 
installed IBM manufactured equipment required 
to meet customer demand, maintain tech-
nological leadership and improve productivity. 
These recent additions represent 73 percent 
of the gross asset value of plant and other 
property as of December 31, 1984. The addi-
tions for 1984 include assets acquired as a 
result of the purchase of iiOi.M Corporation. 
Since 1980, investments exceeded 
$2.5 billion in each year. Continuous upgrading 
of our facilities is essential to achieve our 
objectives. Large investments will continue to 
be required in future years. 
Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property 
(in millions) 
118,000 
Annual 
1984 
Cumulative for five-year period 


===== PAGE 29 =====
Percentage Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U. S. Dollar 
British pound 
Canadian dollar 
French franc 
German mark 
Italian lira 
Japanese yen 
— 13% 
—41% 
1982 
1983 
1984 
Base—as of January i, 1982 
1982 
1983 
1984 
In 1984, U S. gross income increased by 
18.3 percent, and non-U. S. gross income 
increased by 8.9 percent as reported in U. S. 
dollars. It is estimated that had currency rates 
remained constant with those of 1983, gross 
income would have been $1,675 million greater 
than that reported in 1984, and gross income 
from non-U. S. operations would have grown 
by 18.7 percent. 
As the dollar strengthens, net assets, 
revenue, costs and expenses, recorded in local 
currencies, translate to fewer U. S. dollars 
than they would have at the previous year's 
exchange rates. The graphs above illustrate the 
decline, in relation to the dollar, of the six 
major currencies in which ibm conducts most 
of its non-U S. business. 
1982 
1983 
1984 
J 
L 
1982 
1983 
IS 
The graph to the right depicts the aggre-
gate revenue growth from 1981 through 1984 for 
the same six countries, as reported in U. S. 
dollars. The graph also shows the local currency 
revenue growth rates calculated using 1981 
U. S. dollar exchange rates. Management 
believes that this composite growth rate, as 
measured in local currency, is illustrative of the 
health of IBM's non-U. S. business and reflects 
the strong worldwide demand for its products. 
To the degree that profits from these 
non-U. S. operations are not repatriated in the 
form of dividends or other payments, the 
currency effects are deferred to future periods, 
since these resources continue to be invested 
in the country. 
IBM manufactures products throughout 
the world, and there is little dependence 
on U. S. exports in most of the major non-U. S. 
operations. The company has been able to 
compete effectively and profitably outside the 
U. S. as well as in the U. S. 
J 
I 
1982 
1983 
IS 
J 
I 
1983 
1984 
Six Major Countries— 
Combined Gross Income by Year 
(Percent change over 1981) 
60% 
20% 
w im 
I' 
~ 
-
1982 '83 
'8 
1982 '83 
I Combined revenues 
as reported in U. S. dollars 
I Combined revenues 
as measured in local currency 


===== PAGE 30 =====
International Business Machines Corporation 
and Subsidiary Companies 
Consolidated Statement of Stockholders' Equity 
for the year ended December 31: 
Translation 
Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1982 
$4,389 
$ 13,909 
$ 
(622) 
$ 
— 
$ 17,676 
Net earnings 
4,409 
4,409 
Cash dividends declared 
(2.,053) 
(2-,053) 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholderplans (10,112,504 shares) . . . 
602 
602 
Treasury stock (391,743 shares) acquired 
and sold under employee plans 
(6) 
(6) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
17 
17 
Translation adjustments 
(685) 
(685) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1982 . . . 
5,008 
16,259 
(1,307) 
19,960 
Net earnings 
5,485 
5,485 
Cash dividends declared 
(^,2.51) 
(2.,2.5I) 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) 
. . . 
741 
7 4 1 
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired 
(4) 
and sold under employee plans 
(4) 
(4) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
51 
51 
Translation adjustments 
(763) 
(763) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 
. . . 
5,800 
19,489 
(2,070) 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
Net earnings 
6,582 
6,582 
Cash dividends declared 
( 2 , 5 0 7 ) 
( 2 , 5 0 7 ) 
Capital stock issued under employee 
plans (2,351,859 shares) 
154 
154 
Purchases (6,711,522 shares) and sales 
(6,320,561 shares) of treasury stock under 
(47) 
( 1 2 5 ) 
employee and stockholder plans—net 
. . 
(78) 
(47) 
( 1 2 5 ) 
Tax reductions applicable to stock 
related to employee plans 
44 
44 
Translation adjustments 
(878) 
(878) 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31, 1984 . . . 
$ 5,998 
$ 23,486 
$ ( 2 , 9 4 8 ) 
$ (47) 
$ 26,489 
The notes on pages 34 through 43 
are an integral part of this statement. 
1983 
1984 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of Consolidation: 
Translation of 
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
The consoHdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and 
its U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned IBM Credit Corporation, ROLM Credit 
Corporation and non-U. S. finance subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. Investments in joint ventures, 
and other companies in which IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method. 
Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted for by the cost method. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to 
U. S. dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevail-
ing during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly 
inflationary, inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing 
when acquired. All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to 
cost of sales and depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated 
at average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are 
included in earnings. 
Gross Income: 
Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon 
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services 
over the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain 
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period. 
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM's finance subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales. 
Program Products: 
Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and develop-
ment. Costs incurred subsequent to a design verification test to produce the finished product are generally capitalized 
as program products assets. The assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated revenue-producing 
lives, but not in excess of five years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed. 
Depreciation: 
Rental machines, plant and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives. 
Depreciation of assets acquired subsequent to December 31,1983 is computed using the straight-line method. 
Depreciation of assets acquired prior to January i, 1984 is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method for 
rental machines, and either accelerated methods or the straight-line method for plant and other property. 
Goodvill: 
The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and 
amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. Goodwill related to equity investments is included in the 
investment and amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. 
Retirement Plans and 
Other Postretirement Benefits: 
Selling Expenses: 
Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently Prior service costs resulting from improvements in 
the plans are amortized generally over 10 years. Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued 
when the employee retires. 
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing 
differences between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable 
earnings in other years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over 
the average useful life of the applicable classes of property. 
Inventories: 
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process are included at the lower of average 
cost or market. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Non-U. S. Operations 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
19831 
i98zt 
At end of year: 
For the year: 
t A m o u n t s have been reclassified, where applicable, 
to c o n f o r m w i t h 1984 presentation. 
Net assets employed 
Current assets 
$ 
8,583 
$ 
8 , 1 1 5 
$ 
6,299 
Current liabilities 
4,636 
4,,5 85 
4,226 
Working capital 
3,947 
3,530 
2,073 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
4,902 
5,622 
6,740 
Investments and other assets 
1,690 
1,062 
887 
1 0 , 5 3 9 
1 0 , 2 1 4 
9,700 
Long-term debt 
222 
466 
480 
Other liabilities 
1 , 1 2 5 
1,249 
1 , 2 1 2 
Deferred income taxes 
346 
27 
— 
1,693 
1,692 
Net assets employed 
$ 
8,846 
$ 
8,472 
$ 
8,008 
Number of employees 
156,042 
150,944 
150,444 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 
$ 
18,566 
$ 17,053 
$ 1 5 , 3 3 6 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 
4,640 
$ 
3,841 
$ 
3,226 
Provision for income taxes 
2,053 
1,677 
1,577 
Net earnings 
$ 
2,587 
$ 
2,164 
$ 
1,649 
Investment in rental machines 
$ 
549 
$ 
938 
$ 
1,630 
Investment in plant and other property 
1 , 2 5 8 
1,049 
1,052 
$ 
1,807 
$ 
1,987 
$ 
2,682 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local 
currency environment account for approximately 
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. 
The remaining 15% of the company's non-U. S. 
gross income is from subsidiaries and branches 
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic 
environment is highly inflationary 
For the years 1984, 1983 and 1982, non-
U. S. financial results have been impacted by the 
strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the 
currencies of many countries. As the dollar 
strengthens, net assets and net earnings recorded 
in local currencies translate into fewer U. S. 
dollars than they would have at the previous 
year's rates. The translation adjustments, resulting 
from the translation of net assets, amounted to 
$2,948 million at December 31,1984, $2,070 
million at December 31, 1983 and $1,307 million 
at December 31, 1982. The graphs on page 32 
illustrate the decline, in relation to the dollar, of 
the six major currencies in which IBM conducts 
most of its non-U. S. business. 
Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. subsid-
iaries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $9,837 million at December 31,1984, 
$8,510 million at December 31,1983 and $7,538 
million at December 31,1982. These earnings are 
indefinitely reinvested in non-U. S. operations. 
Accordingly, no provision has been made for taxes 
that might be payable upon remittance of such 
earnings. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Marketable Securities 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1984 
December 31,1983 
U. S. Government securities 
Time deposits and other bank obligations 
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 
Total 
Market value 
$ 
616 
$ 
1,745 
1,837 
^ , 3 1 4 
1,309 
861 
$ 
3,762 
$ 4,920 
$ 
3,774 
$ 4,929 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1984 
December 31,1983 
Current inventories: 
Finished goods 
Work in process 
Raw materials and operating supplies 
Total current inventories 
Work in process and field service parts included in: 
Rental machines and parts 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
. . . . 
Total inventories 
1,619 
4,676 
303 
6,598 
1,221 
746 
$ 
8,565 
872 
3,2.67 
4,381 
I, 
685 
S 6,915 
Plant and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1984 
December 31, i983t 
Land and land improvements . . . . 
Buildings 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Total 
823 
6,673 
15,552 
23,048 
9,635 
1 3 , 4 1 3 
$ 
698 
6,051 
13,^37 
19,986 
8,710 
$ 11,276 
tlnternally installed IBM manufactured equipment, previously included with Rental machines and parts, 
is now included in Plant, laboratory and office equipment. The 1983 amounts have been reclassified to 
conform with 1984 presentation. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Investments and Other Assets 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 4 
December 31, 1983 
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1984,51,491; 1983,51,045) . 
5 1,604 
5 1,287 
Investments in finance subsidiaries 
1 , 2 2 0 
5 4 7 
Net investment in sales-type leases 
594 
i 5 8 t 
U S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value: 1984,5510; ic >83,5502). 
. . 
503 
501 
Other investments and sundry assets 
2 , 1 4 9 
1,496 
Total 
$ 6,070 
53,989 
Included in other investments and sundry assets at December 31,1984 
is $882 million of goodwill (net of accumulated amortization of $4 million) 
arising from the acquisition of ROLM Corporation. 
Also included is $655 million representing the total investment in Intel Corporation, of which 
$404 million represents goodwill (net of accumulated amortization of $27 million). 
tThe 1983 amounts, previously included in Notes and accounts receivable-trade, have been reclassified 
to conform with 1984 presentation. 
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 4 
December 31, 1983 
U S . Operations: 
7%% convertible subordinated debentures due 2004^ 
9V2% notes due 1986 
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 
10.80% notes due 1985-1986 
Other, payable in: 
(Average interest rate at December 31,1984, in parentheses) 
U.S. dollars, due 1985-2012 (12.1%) 
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (4.3%) 
German marks, due 1985-1988 (8.8%) 
Non-U. S. Operations: 
Various obligations, payable in: 
(Average interest rate at December 31,1984, in parentheses) 
Japanese yen, due 1985-2014 (7.8%) 
U S . dollars, due 1985-1992 (11.7%) 
French francs, due 1985-1994 (12.6%) 
Other currencies, due 1985-1994 (22.3%) 
Less: Unamortized discount, related principally to the 7%% and 9%% debentures . 
Less: Current maturities 
Total 
1,285 
500 
450 
180 
486 
247 
210 
3,358 
125 
123 
62 
84 
394 
3 , 7 5 2 
^ 
3,742 
473 
$ 3,269 
500 
500 
240 
678 
249 
203 
^,370 
1 3 3 
249 
75 
98 
5 5 5 
2,925 
3 
2,922 
248 
$2,674 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on 
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1984, are as follows: 
1985,5473; 1986,5885; 1987,5270; 1988,577; 1989,555; 1990 and beyond, 51,992. 
tThe 7%% convertible subordinated debentures are unsecured subordinated obligations of IBM, which are 
convertible into IBM capital stock at a conversion price of $153.6563 per share. They will be redeemable, 
at the option of the company, starting in November 1988 at a price of 104.725% of the principal amount, 
and at decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund payments starting in 1994 are intended to retire 75% 
of the debentures prior to maturity 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
1983 
1982 
Earnings before income taxes: 
U S. operations 
$ 
6,983 
$ 6,099 
$4,996 
Non-U S. operations 
4,640 
3,841 
3,226 
$ 11,623 
$ 9,940 
$ 8,222 
Provision for income taxes: 
U. S. operations 
$ 
2,988 
$ 2,778 
$2,236 
Non-U S. operations 
2,053 
1,677 
1 , 5 7 7 
5,041 
4 , 4 5 5 
3 , 8 1 3 
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 
1,636 
1,450 
Total 
$ 
6,677 
$ 6,005 
$ 5,263 
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows: 
US. Federal: 
Current 
$ 
1,406 
$ 1,624 
$ 1,378 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
702 
188 
2 1 2 
Net deferred investment tax credits . . . . 
80 
4 7 
7 1 
2,188 
1 , 8 5 9 
1,661 
Non-US.: 
Current 
2,102 
2,250 
1,829 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
465 
3 1 
2,567 
2,282 
1,860 
U.S. State and local: 
Current 
187 
265 
288 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
99 
49 
4 
286 
3 1 4 
292 
Total provision 
$ 
5,041 
$4,455 
$ 3 , 8 1 3 
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 43.4% in 1984, 44.8% in 1983, and 
46.4% in 1982. The consolidated net tax effects of timing differences in 1984 
amounted to $i,z66 million, of which $6x3 million is related to sales-type leases and 
installment sales. Of the remaining timing differences, no individual item is material. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Acquisition of ROLM Corporation 
IBM entered into a merger agreement 
with ROLM Corporation on September 26,1984. 
ROLM develops, manufactures and markets 
advanced telecommunications systems such as 
private branch exchanges. Effective with the 
approval by the ROLM shareholders on November 
21,1984, ROLM Corporation became a wholly 
owned subsidiary of IBM. Prior to the merger, IBM 
owned approximately 23% of the outstanding 
common stock of ROLM Corporation. The 
18,358,189 remaining outstanding shares of ROLM 
common stock are being exchanged for $1,285 
million face value of 7%% convertible subordi-
nated debentures due 2004. 
The merger has been accounted for 
as a purchase, and the results of operations for 
ROLM have been included in the consolidated 
financial statements from the date of acquisition. 
IBM has agreed to divest itself of the Mil-Spec 
Computer Division of ROLM Corporation in 1985. 
Therefore, the portion of the acquisition cost 
applicable to the estimated fair value of this divi-
sion's net assets has been segregated and classified 
as a current asset, ROLM s other assets and 
liabilities have been recorded at their estimated 
fair values and the excess of the related acquisition 
cost over the estimated fair value (goodwill) 
was $886 million and is being amortized on a 
straight-line basis over 20 years. 
Had ROLM been acquired on January i, 
1983, the pro forma effect on the consoli-
dated results would not have been material for 
either 1983 or 1984. 
Finance Subsidiaries 
The company's wholly owned unconsol-
idated finance subsidiaries consist of IBM Credit 
Corporation, several non-U. S. finance subsid-
iaries and ROLM Credit Corporation. IBM Credit 
Corporation offers lease financing of selected 
IBM products, finances receivables resulting from 
installment sales by IBM of its products, and 
finances selected non-iBM equipment in the U. S. 
The non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer leases in 
several European countries, and in some cases 
finance installment receivables. ROLM Credit Cor-
poration offers lease financing related to sales by 
ROLM of its products in the U. S. IBM's investment 
in these subsidiaries is accounted for by the equity 
Financial position at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
.983 
Assets: 
Cash and marketable 
securities 
. 
$ 
1 1 2 
$ 
80 
Installment payment 
agreement 
receivables-net 
1,619 
1,189 
Net investment 
in leases 
1,577 
399 
Receivable from 
IBM and 
affiliates 
74 
39 
Other 
1 1 7 
14 
Total Assets 
$ 3,499 
$ 1,721 
method and earnings are included in other in-
come in IBM's consolidated statement of earnings. 
Summarized below is combined financial in-
formation for these finance subsidiaries, of which 
IBM Credit Corporation accounts for more than 
90% of the total activity IBM has agreed to cause 
the IBM Credit Corporation to have a positive net 
worth at all times. IBM Credit Corporation has 
$500 million of lines of credit available, in addition 
to $500 million shared with the IBM Corporation. 
Additional information is available in the 1984 
Annual Report of the IBM Credit Corporation. 
Copies may be obtained by writing to: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department, 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022. 
(Dollars in millions) 
Earnings for the years ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
1983 
1983 
Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity: 
Short-term debt 
$ 1,03 I 
$ 
560 
Deferred taxes and 
accruals 
209 
62 
Due to IBM 
and affiliates: 
Current 
293 
264 
Noncurrent 
502 
100 
Long-term debt 
965 
5 1 3 
Stockholder's 
499 
222 
Total Liabilities 
and Stockholder's 
Equity 
$ 3,499 
$ 1,721 
Finance and other income 
$ 
305 
$ 164 
$ I 18 
Interest and other expenses 
^30 
1 1 8 
84 
Provision for income taxes 
7 
4 
3 
Net earnings 
$ 
68 
$ 
42 
$ 
31 
Total purchases from IBM: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
IBM products for term lease customers 
$ j , 2 i z 
Installment payment receivables 
$ 1 , 1 4 3 
369 
8^2 
$ 
67 
$68z 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Accounting Change—Depreciation 
On January i, 1984, for financial reporting 
purposes, the company adopted the straight-Hne 
method of depreciation for rental machines, plant 
and other property capitalized subsequent to 
December 31,1983. Rental machines capitalized 
prior to January i, 1984, continue to be depreci-
ated using the sum-of-the-years digits method. 
Plant and other property capitalized prior to 
January i, 1984, continue to be depreciated using 
either accelerated methods or the straight-line 
method. In the opinion of management, this 
change will result in a more appropriate matching 
of costs with revenue for these new assets as a 
result of evolving changes in our operations, main-
tenance costs, and technology. The new method 
conforms to prevailing practice in industry 
This change did not have a material effect 
on 1984 earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering 
Research, development and engineering 
expenses amounted to $4,200 million in 1984, 
$3,582 million in 1983 and $3,042 million in 1982. 
Included in these amounts were expenditures 
of $3,148 million in 1984, $2,514 million in 1983 
and $2,053 million in 1982 for a broad program 
of research and development covering basic 
scientific research in a variety of fields and the 
application of scientific advances to the develop-
ment of new and improved products and their 
uses. In addition, expenditures for product 
related engineering amounted to $1,052 million, 
$ 1,068 million and $989 million for the same 
three years. 
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 
Rental expense amounted to $713 million in 
1984, $567 million in 1983 and $490 million in 
1982. Minimum rental commitments, in millions 
of dollars, under noncancelable leases for 1985 
and thereafter are as follows: 1985, $758; 1986, 
$642; 1987, $508; 1988, $386; 1989, $276; and after 
1989, $i,37i.These leases are principally for the 
rental of office premises. 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its subsidiaries have retire-
ment plans covering substantially all employees. 
The total cost of all plans for 1984,1983 and 1982 
was $1,096 million, $1,180 million and $1,187 
million, respectively 
U. S. regular and part-time employees, 
except employees of the recently acquired ROLM 
Corporation, are covered by noncontributory 
plans which are funded by company contribu-
tions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is 
held for the sole benefit of employees. Monthly 
retirement benefits generally represent the 
greater of a fixed amount per year of service, or 
a percent of career compensation. For plan 
purposes, annual compensation for each year of 
service before January i, 1984, is defined as the 
average annual compensation paid for the years 
1974 through 1983. Actual compensation is 
used thereafter. Benefits become vested upon 
completion of ten years of service. 
The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter-
mined using an actuarial cost method known 
as the Frozen Initial Liability method. Under this 
method, annual pension cost comprises both 
current cost and the amortization of prior service 
costs which generally result from plan amend-
ments. Current cost is determined by relating the 
present value of future benefits (excluding benefits 
related to prior service costs), less fund assets, 
to the present value of future compensation and 
applying the resulting percentage to current 
compensation. Prior service costs are determined 
and frozen at the time of a plan amendment, and 
amortized over ten years in equal annual amounts. 
The principal actuarial assumptions used 
to determine cost are: rate of return on fund assets 
(7.5% through 1993 and 5.5% thereafter), future 
compensation levels, retirement ages, employee 
turnover and mortality rates. Variances between 
actual and assumed plan experience (actuarial 
gains or losses) are amortized over the remaining 
employee service period and are included in the 
determination of current cost. 
It is the company's policy to fund costs in 
the year accrued, to the extent such costs are tax 
deductible in that year. Pertinent cost and 
contribution data for U. S. retirement plans is 
presented below: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
1983 
1982 
Pension cost: 
Current cost 
$ 490 
$ 5 5 ' 
$ 
5 0 4 
Amortization of prior 
service costs 
1 6 0 
197 
Total cost 
$ 
6 5 0 
$ 7 0 2 
$ 
7 0 1 
Pension cost as a % of 
compensation 
8 . 2 % 
9 . 7 % 
1 0 . 9 % 
Unamortized prior service 
costs at December 31 . 
$ 4 1 3 
$ 53^ 
$ 733 
Contributions 
$ 
6 5 0 
$ 6 4 4 
$ 
6 1 9 
As noted above, pension costs are calculated 
based on a number of assumptions. In 1984, 
pension costs decreased primarily as a result of 
two major factors: changing the rate of return 
assumption from 5.5% to 7.5% for years through 
1993, and the amortization of higher than 
assumed investment gains on plan assets. These 
decreases were partially offset by the effect of 
increased compensation on pension cost calcula-
tions. In 1983, the effect of plan improvements 
was offset by refinements of actuarial techniques 
and the amortization of investment gains. 
The following table provides information 
on the status of the U. S. retirement plans. 
The actuarial present value of plan benefits 
provides an estimate of that portion of the total 
prospective benefit obligation applicable to 
employee service to date and assumes the same 


===== PAGE 38 =====
rate of return on fund assets as was used to 
determine pension cost. 
At December 31 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
Actuarial present value 
of plan benefits: 
Earned to date: 
Vested 
$ 
7 , 0 1 6 
$ 
7 , 1 5 4 
Nonvested 
280 
298 
$ 
7 , Z 9 6 
$ 
7 , 4 5 ^ 
including effect of pro-
jected future compen-
sation levels 
$ 10,296 
$ 10,008 
Plan net assets (estimated 
market value) 
$ I 1,444 
$ 10,388 
Number of individuals 
receiving benefits . . . . 
20,937 
17,064 
A comparison of plan net assets to these 
estimates provides an indication of the company's 
progress toward meeting its future commitment 
to pay benefits when due. However, it must 
be recognized that the market value of plan net 
assets available for benefits will fluctuate. 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries have plans under 
which funds are deposited under various fiduciary-
type arrangements, annuities are purchased 
under group contracts, or reserves are provided. 
At December 31,1984 and December 31,1983, 
it is estimated that the market value of fund 
assets and reserves of individual non-U. S. sub-
sidiaries exceeded or approximated the actuarial 
present value of plan benefits earned to date. 
Postretirement Benefits 
The company and its U S. subsidiaries have 
medical, dental and life insurance plans for 
retirees, the estimated costs of which are fully 
accrued and funded with an independent trustee 
at the time an employee retires. These costs 
amounted to $222 million, $129 million and $140 
million in 1984,1983 and 1982, respectively. 
Certain of the company's non-U. S. sub-
sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However, 
many retirees outside the U. S. are covered by gov-
ernment sponsored and administered programs. 
As a result, the costs of company sponsored 
programs outside the U. S. are not significant. 
Other Liabilities 
Other liabilities consist principally of 
indemnity and retirement plan reserves for non-
U. S. employees. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
enables employees who are not participants 
in a stock option plan to purchase IBM's capital 
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% 
of eligible compensation. The price an employee 
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. During 
1984, employees purchased 5,208,287 shares, 
including 4,918,983 treasury shares, for which 
$511 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, 
1984,18,595,135 reserved unissued shares 
remain available for purchase under the Plan. 
Shares of IBM capital stock will be substi-
tuted for ROLM common stock that may be 
purchased under the ROLM Stock Purchase Plan. 
This plan will expire on March 15,1985. At 
December 31,1984,75,000 shares of IBM capital 
stock were reserved for purchases under this 
plan. No shares of IBM capital stock were issued 
under this plan in 1984. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for granting 
oflicers and other key employees options to pur-
chase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the market 
price on the day of grant. Options have a max-
imum duration of ten years and may be exercised 
in up to four annual installments, commencing 
one year from date of grant. 
The plans are administered by the Executive 
Compensation Committee of the Board of 
Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, 
grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to holders 
of options. Such rights offer optionees the 
alternative of electing not to exercise the related 
stock option, but to receive instead an amount 
in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and stock 
equivalent to the difference between the option 
price and the average market price of IBM stock 
on the date of exercising the right. 
The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
tee approval, that payment by the optionee 
upon exercise of an option may be made using 
IBM stock as well as cash. 
Shares of IBM capital stock have been 
substituted for the shares of ROLM common 
stock covering the options granted under the 
ROLM Stock Option Plan. 
The following table summarizes stock 
option transactions during 1984: 
Number of Shares 
Available 
Under Option 
for Option 
Balance at 
January i, 1984 . . . . . 
13,186,859 
5,197,873 
ROLM options 
1,515,000 
— 
Options granted. . . . , 
1,796,800 
(1,796,800) 
Options terminated . , 
(66,528) 
53,862 
Options cancelled— 
SARs exercised . . . , 
(227,883) 
— 
Options exercised. . . , . 
(2,099,584) 
— 
Balance at 
December 31,1984 , . 
14,104,664 
3,454,935 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1984 , 
9,311,247 
The options exercised during 1984 were at 
an average option price of $58.82 per share. The 
14,104,664 shares under option at December 31, 
1984, are at option prices ranging from $30.71 to 
$132.41 per share. 
Litigation 
In December, 1980, the Commission of the 
European Communities (EC) filed a "Statement of 
Objections" seeking modification of certain IBM 
business practices in the Common Market area. 
On August 1,1984, IBM and the EC agreed to 
settle the EC's proceedings against the company. 
Under the terms of a voluntary undertaking, 
IBM will provide, within specified time limits, 
interfece information to permit the attachment of 
competitive products to new IBM System/370 
products, and technical information about IBM's 
Systems Network Architecture (SNA) to fecilitate 
the connection of competitive systems and net-
works to SNA networks. IBM will not release any 
proprietary product design details. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Segment Information 
IBM operates primarily in the single industry 
segment encompassing information-handling 
systems, equipment and services. This segment 
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross 
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. 
The schedule on the next page shows gross 
income by industry segment and by classes of 
similar products or services within the informa-
tion-handling segment. 
Financial information by geographic area 
for the years 1984,1983 and 1982 is summarized 
below to provide a better understanding of IBM's 
operations. Material interdependencies and 
overlaps exist among IBM'S operating units and, 
therefore, the information may not be indicative 
of the financial results of, or investments in, 
the reported areas were they independent 
organizations. 
Geographic Areas 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
19831 
1982 
United States 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers. . . 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . 
Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers . . . 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . 
Americas/Far East 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers . . . 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . 
Eliminations 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets 
Consolidated 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 . 
t Amounts have been reclassified, where applicable, to conform with 1984 presentation. 
Non-U S. subsidiaries which operate in a local cur-
rency environment account for approximately 85% 
of the company's non-U. S. gross income. The 
remaining 15% is from subsidiaries and branches, 
predominantly in the Americas/Ear East area, 
which operate in U S. dollars or whose economic 
environment is highly inflationary 
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, 
European operations accounted for approximately 
95% of gross income in 1984,1983 and 1982. 
Interarea transfers, consisting principally of 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate 
service charge, applied consistently throughout 
$ 2 7 , 3 7 1 
3 >074 
$ 30,445 
3,981 
2 8 , 3 9 4 
$ 1 1 , 9 9 6 
363 
$ 1 2 , 3 5 9 
1 , 8 7 3 
9,864 
$ 
6 , 5 7 0 
1 , 1 2 4 
$ 
7,694 
7 1 9 
5,600 
$ ( 4 , 5 6 1 ) 
9 
( 1 , 0 5 0 ) 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$ 
6,582 
$ 42,808 
$ 2 3 , 1 2 7 
2-,2-75 
$ 25,402 
3,296 
2 3 , 3 2 2 
$ 
1 1 , 3 2 . 4 
1,580 
9,958 
$ 
5,729 
Z ^ 
562 
5 , 1 4 ^ 
$ 
( 3 , 2 . 3 8 ) 
47 
(961) 
$ 40,180 
$ 
5,485 
$ 37,461 
$ 19,028 
1,875 
$ 20,903 
2,766 
19,028 
$ 10,260 
U l 
$ 10,597 
1.196 
9 . 1 9 7 
$ 
5,076 
450 
4,9^5 
$ (2,863) 
(3) 
(609) 
$ 34,364 
$ 
4,409 
$ 3^,541 
the world. The cost and service charges that relate 
to asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated 
or amortized by the importing area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of 
service charges, and the net change during the 
year in unamortized service charges have been 
eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services 
Consolidated 
U.S. Only 
(Dollars in millions) 
1984 
19831 
19821 
1984 
19831 
1982-
Information-Handling: 
Processors: 
Sales 
$ 10,923 
$ 
9,102 
$ 
7 , 7 1 4 
$ 
5 , 9 7 5 
$ 4,886 
$ 
4 , 1 7 2 
Rentals 
900 
1,680 
2,332 
3 5 3 
699 
1,083 
Peripherals: 
1 1 , 8 2 3 
10,782 
10,046 
6,328 
5 , 5 8 5 
5 , ^ 5 5 
Sales 
8,077 
6,350 
3 , 4 3 1 
4 , 9 7 7 
3,802 
1,801 
Rentals 
3,621 
4 , 7 4 3 
5,410 
1,940 
2 , 5 4 7 
^ , 9 3 5 
Oflice Systems/Workstations: 
1 1 , 6 9 8 
11,093 
8,841 
6 , 9 1 7 
6 , 3 4 9 
4 , 7 3 6 
Sales 
8,200 
5 , 5 3 5 
3 , 5 4 5 
5,361 
3 , 5 4 9 
2 , 2 1 2 
Rentals 
1 , 6 3 7 
2,221 
2,672 
884 
1,241 
1,418 
Program Products 
9,837 
3 , 1 9 7 
7 , 7 5 6 
2,302 
6,217 
1,693 
6,245 
1,708 
4 , 7 9 0 
1,288 
3,630 
9 3 5 
Maintenance Services 
Other: 
5,266 
4 , 5 7 7 
3 , 9 4 0 
3,106 
2,633 
2,230 
Sales 
1 , 3 6 2 
1 , 1 9 7 
1 , 3 1 0 
9 4 5 
7 8 5 
781 
Services 
620 
648 
689 
167 
1 3 5 
1 1 0 
Rentals 
421 
586 
707 
250 
330 
4 3 7 
2,403 
2,431 
2,706 
1 , 3 6 2 
1,250 
1,328 
Federal Systems: 
4 4 , 2 2 4 
58,941 
3 3 , 4 4 3 
25,666 
21,895 
1 8 , 1 1 4 
Sales 
1 , 1 2 3 
1,028 
7 5 3 
• 
1 , 1 2 3 
1,028 
7 5 3 
Services 
522 
148 
lOJ^ 
522 
148 
105 
Other Business: 
1,645 
1 , 1 7 6 
858 
1,645 
1,176 
858 
Sales 
68 
62 
6z 
60 
5 5 
5 5 
Services 
— 
I 
I 
— 
1 
I 
68 
6 3 
6 3 
60 
5 6 
5 6 
Total 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$40,1 80 
$34,364 
$ 2 7 , 3 7 1 
$ 2 3 , 1 2 7 
$19,028 
tReclassified to conform with 1984 presentation. 
While IBM operates primarily in a single industry 
segment and manages its worldwide business 
as such, gross income has been categorized into 
major classes of product. 
For purposes of classifying similar products 
of the Information-Handling industry segment, 
user programmable equipment having the 
capability of manipulating data arithmetically or 
logically and making calculations, in a manner 
directly addressable by the user through the 
operation of a stored program, has been classified 
as Processors, except that small business com-
puters and intelligent workstations are included 
under Office Systems/Workstations. Typewriters 
have also been classified under Office Systems/ 
Workstations. Peripherals include printers, 
copiers, storage and telecommunication devices. 
Peripheral functions embedded in processors are 
classified with Processors. Program Products 
include both applications and systems software. 
Maintenance Services consist of separately billed 
charges for maintenance. Other consists prin-
cipally of supplies and unit record equipment. 
Some products logically fit in more than 
one class and are assigned to a specific class based 
on a variety of factors. Over time, products tend 
to overlap, merge into or split from existing 
classes as a result of changing technologies, 
market perceptions, and /or customer use. For 
example, market demand may create require-
ments for technological enhancements to permit a 
peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be functionally in-
tegrated with a display, telecommunication device 
and a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
changeability and technological progress tend to 
make year to year comparisons less valid than they 
would be in an industry less subject to rapid change. 
Federal Systems consists of specialized infor-
mation-handling products and services primarily for 
the United States defense, space and other agencies. 
Other Business consists of training and 
testing materials and services for school, home and 
industrial use. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1 9 8 4 
19831 
i982t 
19811 
1980 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales. 
services and rentals 
$ 45,937 
$ 40,180 
$ 34,364 
$ 29,070 
$ 26,21 3 
Net earnings 
6,582 
5,485 
4,409 
3,610 
3,397 
Per share 
10.77 
9.04 
7-39 
6.14 
5.82 
Cash dividends paid 
2,507 
2,251 
^,053 
2,023 
2,008 
Per share 
4 . 1 0 
3.71 
3-44 
3-44 
3-44 
Investment in rental machines 
. . . . 
858 
1,412 
3,^93 
4,146 
3,975 
Investment in plant and other property. 
4,615 
3,518 
3,392. 
2,699 
2,617 
Return on stockholders' equity 
. . . 
26.5% 
25.4% 
23.4% 
2 1 . 1 % 
21.1' 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 42,808 
$ 37,461 
$ 32,541 
$ 29,107 
$ 26,83 I 
Net investment in rental machines . . 
2,950 
4,866 
7,599 
8,220 
7,470 
Net investment in plant and 
other property 
1 3 , 4 1 3 
11,276 
9,964 
8,577 
7,730 
Working capital 
10,735 
8,168 
5,080 
3,195 
3,409 
Long-term debt 
3,269 
2,674 
2,851 
2,669 
2,099 
Stockholders' equity 
26,489 
23,219 
19,960 
17,676 
16,578 
tAmounts have been reclassified, where applicable, 
to conform with 1984 presentation. 
Selected Quarterly Data 
Per Share 
Stock Prices 
Gross 
Gross 
Net 
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) 
Income 
Profit 
Earnings 
Earnings 
Dividends 
High 
Low 
1984 
First Quarter 
$ 
9,585 
$ 
5,630 
$ 1,202 
$ 
1.97 
$ 
.95 
$ 125.00 
$ 106.50 
Second Quarter 
1 1 , 1 9 9 
6,666 
1,623 
2.65 
.95 
1 1 7 . 2 5 
99.00 
Third Quarter 
10,657 
6 , 3 1 2 
1,585 
2.60 
1 . 1 0 
128.50 
104.00 
Fourth Quarter 
14,496 
8,410 
2 , 1 7 2 
3.55 
1 . 1 0 
127.75 
116.00 
Total 
$ 45,937 
$ 27,018 
$ 6,582 
$ 10.77 
$ 4 . 1 0 
1983 
First Quarter 
$ 
8,287 
$ 
5,018 
$ 
976 
$ 
1.62 
$ 
.86 
$ 104.88 
$ 92.25 
Second Quarter 
9,590 
5,776 
1,343 
2.22 
•95 
124.50 
lOI.I 3 
Third Quarter 
9,406 
5,502 
1,303 
2.14 
•95 
129.50 
1 1 5 . 2 5 
Fourth Quarter 
12,897 
7,489 
1,863 
3.06 
•95 
134.25 
1 1 7 . 1 3 
Total 
$ 40,180 
$ 23,785 
$5,485 
$ 
9.04 
$ 3.71 
There were 792,506 stockholders of record at 
December 31,1984. During 1984, stockholders 
received $2,507 million in cash dividends. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
March 9,1985, wiW be at the rate of $1.10 
per share. This dividend will be ibm's 280th 
consecutive quarterly cash dividend. 
The stock prices reflect the high and low 
prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York 
Stock Exchange composite tape for the last 
two years. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices 
Although inflation-adjusted information 
is an imprecise estimate, there are circumstances 
in which it can serve to emphasize the debilitating 
effects of inflation. It points out the importance 
of keeping inflation under control and 
sustaining public policy initiatives to encourage 
capital investment. 
Rates of inflation continued to moderate 
in the United States and in many other countries 
throughout 1984. Despite this current positive 
trend, the cumulative effect of inflation over the 
past several years has generally eroded industry's 
ability to fund the replacement and expansion of 
productive capacity. This has not been the case 
with IBM. 
The following supplemental information, 
which has been prepared in accordance with stan-
dards established by the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board, is intended to assist users of 
financial statements in understanding the impact 
of changing prices on the company's operations. 
The data presented below reflect the effects 
on earnings and stockholders' equity resulting 
from using estimated changes in specific 
prices to restate the value of inventories and other 
properties at currently prevailing prices 
(current cost). 
The estimates are based upon latest 
production costs, published price indexes, current 
suppliers' prices and appraised valuations. Cost 
of sales and depreciation expense are restated to 
reflect the change in the related asset values. 
Discussion of Financial Results 
IBM's 1984 financial results, when adjusted 
for changing prices, show a reduction of $297 
million from reported net earnings and an 
increase in stockholders' equity of $2,710 million. 
The decrease in earnings results principally from 
increased depreciation expense of $263 million on 
plant, rental machines and other property that 
have been valued at $ 19,146 million to approximate 
current cost. Inventories have been valued at 
$6,574 million on a current cost basis. 
Companies which retain monetary assets 
or liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains and 
losses in purchasing power during periods 
of inflation. IBM's net monetary asset position 
resulted in a purchasing power loss of $ 126 
million in 1984. 
The effects of translation on the changes in 
specific prices of IBM's net assets have been 
estimated without any attempt to adjust the data 
for general rate of inflation differences among 
various countries. The translation adjustments 
reflect the decline in the valuation of assets 
denominated in currencies other than the U. S. 
dollar, caused by the continued strength of the 
dollar in the world economy. 
In dollars of average 1984 purchasing power, 
the increase in current costs that might have 
been expected from general inflation exceeded 
IBM's specific price level changes by $683 million. 
Management views this positively, in that tech-
nology and productivity improvements substan-
tially offset inflation. Similar patterns are 
reflected in the prior years. 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 
As Reported in 
Financial Statements 
In Average 1984 Dollars 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1984 
1984 
1983 
1982 
1981 
1980 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 
. . 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$ 4 1 , 8 9 0 
$ 36,979 
$ 33,199 
$ 33,043 
Cost of sales, services and rentals 
18,919 
19,081 
1 7 , 2 9 9 
1 4 , 8 2 6 
1 3 , 6 6 3 
1 3 , 0 7 6 
Expenses and other income 
15,395 
15,530 
14,597 
13,554 
12.,553 
1 2 , 8 9 1 
Provision for income taxes 
5,041 
5,041 
4,645 
4 , 1 0 5 
3,^55 
3,107 
Net earnings 
$ 
6,582 
$ 
6,285 
$ 
5,349 
$ 
4 , 4 9 4 
$ 
3 , 7 2 8 
$ 
3 , 9 6 9 
Loss from decline in purchasing power of 
net monetary assets 
$ 
126 
$ 
8 0 
$ 
I 
$ 
7 1 
$ 
343 
Translation adjustments 
$ 
(878) 
$ ( 1 , 0 3 8 ) 
$ 
( 9 4 2 ) 
$ 
( 8 3 6 ) 
$ 
( 1 , 1 3 7 ) 
$ 
( 2 8 7 ) 
Change in specific prices—net of general inflation. 
$ 
(683) 
$ 
(75) 
$ 
( 3 3 0 ) 
$ 
( 1 , 3 2 6 ) 
$ 
( 1 , 8 1 1 ) 
Stockholders' equity (net assets) at December 31 
. 
$ 26,489 
$ 29,199 
$ 2 7 , 1 8 6 
$ 2 4 , 4 0 1 
$ 2 2 , 5 5 5 
$ 2 3 , 0 6 1 
Per share information: 
Earnings per share 
$ 
10.77 
$ 
10.28 
$ 
8 . 8 2 
$ 
7-54 
$ 
6 . 3 4 
$ 
6 . 8 0 
Cash dividends per share 
$ 
4 . 1 0 
$ 
4 . 1 0 
$ 
3-87 
$ 
3 . 7 0 
$ 
3-93 
$ 
4-34 
Market price at December 31 
$ 1 2 3 . 1 3 
$ 1 2 7 . 1 9 
$ 1 0 3 . 5 8 
$ 
6 4 . 9 6 
$ 
8 5 . 5 6 
Average CPi-U 
3 1 1 . 1 
2 9 8 . 4 
2 8 9 . 1 
2 7 2 . 4 
2 4 6 . 8 
The actual market price of IBM stock at December 31, 
for years 1980 to 1984 was $67.88, $56.88, $96.15, 
$ 122.00 and $ 123.13, respectively. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
IBM Corporation 
*John F. Akers 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM 
Board of Directors: 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Calif.-engineering and construction 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Harold Brown 
Chairman, Foreign Policy Institute, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J.-health care products 
Frank T. Gary 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM 
William T. Coleman,Jr. 
Partner, O'Melveny 8c Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif, and Paris, France-
attorneys at law 
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Hospital Corporation of America, Nashville, Tenn. 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
Professor of Law, George Washington University,Washington, D.C. 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles, Calif.-
attorneys at law 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.-
glass products 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President & General Counsel, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N. Y. 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N. Y. 
J. Richard Munro 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Time, Inc., New York, N.Y.-publishing 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Dean P Phypers 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William W. Scranton 
FormerU.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom-attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance 
Committee, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.-chemical products 
Cyrus R.Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
*Chief Executive Officer, effective 2/1785 
Board Committees: 
Executive 
Frank T. Gary, Chairman 
John F. Akers 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
William H.Moore 
John R.Opel 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Retirement Plans 
Dean P. Phypers, Chairman 
George B. Beitzel 
Harold Brown 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Compensation 
Cyrus R. Vance, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
Patricia Roberts Harris 
William W. Scranton 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Audit 
Richard W. Lyman, Chairman 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
J. Richard Munro 
Advisory Board: 
John M. Fox 
G. Keith Funston 
George L. Hinman 
John N. Irwin II 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Grayson Kirk 
T. Vincent Learson 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
William McChesney Martin, Jr. 
Dean R. McKay 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Retired Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
Partner, Hinman, Howard &c Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Of Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N . Y 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Chief Executive Officer, A. P. Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark- owners of the Maersk Fleet 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
Officers: 
John F. Akers 
President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
John R. Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice Chairman of the Board 
C. Michael Armstrong 
Senior Vice President 
8c Group Executive 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President 
Kaspar V Cassani 
Senior Vice President 
*Ralph E. Gomory 
Senior Vice President 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President 
8c General Counsel 
Allen J. Krowe 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance 8c Planning 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Senior Vice President 
8c Group Executive 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr. 
Senior Vice President 
Dean P. Phypers 
Senior Vice President 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. 
Senior Vice President 
8c Group Executive 
George H. Conrades 
Vice President 
8c Group Executive 
Frank A. Metz, Jr. 
Vice President 
8c Group Executive 
John E. Bertram 
Vice President 
Charles P Biggar 
Vice President 
James A. Bitonti 
Vice President 
Charles E. Branscomb . . . Vice President 
Lewis M. Branscomb.... Vice President 
Walton E. Burdick 
Vice President 
Ronald F. Casella 
Vice President 
Carl J.Conti 
Vice President 
Vincent N. Cook 
Vice President 
Edward M. Davis 
Vice President 
Wallace C. Doud 
Vice President 
Robert B. Dunlop 
Vice President 
William W. Eggleston— Vice President 
Philip D.Estridge 
Vice President 
Donato A. Evangelista . . . Vice President 
P. Martin Foley 
Vice President 
James J. Forese 
Vice President 
8c Controller 
Richard T. Gerstner 
Vice President 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Vice President 
William O. Grabe 
Vice President 
Lewis W. Gray 
Vice President 
Paul J. Kofmehl 
Vice President 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
Vice President 
Thomas M. Liptak 
Vice President 
Paul R. Low 
Vice President 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President 
Victor R. Macdonald 
Vice President 
*Marvin L. Mann 
Vice President 
James F. Manning 
Vice President 
David E. McKinney 
Vice President 
Charles E.McKittrick,Jr. . .Vice President 
M. Kenneth Oshman 
Vice President 
Theodore C. Papes, Jr 
Vice President 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
Vice President 
Patrick A. Toole 
Vice President 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. 
Vice President 
John F. Williams 
Vice President 
John H.Grady 
Secretary 
Jon WRotenstreich 
Treasurer 
Robert E. Bonchick 
Assistant Controller 
J. William Scruggs 
Assistant Controller 
John H. Stewart 
Assistant Controller 
Thomas C. Irwin 
Assistant Secretary 
Sidney Handler 
Assistant Treasurer 
Bruce E. Langton 
Assistant Treasurer 
* Effective 1/29/85 


===== PAGE 44 =====
Division aiid Subsidiary 
Chief Executives: 
John E.Bertram.. 
Charles P. Biggar . 
James A. Bitonti.. 
KasparV Cassani 
Carl j. Conti 
Vincent N.Cook.. 
Philip D. Estridge . 
David A. Finley . . . 
Victor J. Goldberg. 
Ralph E. Gomory . 
Lewis W. Gray . . . . 
John E. Guthjr. .. 
President, General Products Division 
President, National Service Division 
President, Communication Products Division 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ 
Middle East/Africa Corporation 
President, Data Systems Division 
President, Federal Systems Division 
President, Entry Systems Division 
President, IBM Credit Corporation 
, President, National Distribution Division 
, Director of Research 
, President, National Marketing Division 
, President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
Paul R. Low 
President, General Technology Division 
Edward E. Lucente 
President, Information Products Division 
M. Kenneth Oshman 
President, ROLM Corporation 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer,Jr. 
Chairman, IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East Corporation, and 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation 
Michael J. Quinlan 
President, National Accounts Division 
Patrick A.Toole 
President, Systems Technology Division 
Everett H. Van Hoesen 
President, Industrial Systems 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr. 
President, System Products Division 
John F. Williams 
President, Real Estate and 
Construction Division 
Robert A. Young 
President, IBM Instruments, Inc. 
IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East 
Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Thomas J. Bata 
George H. Conrades. 
Jill K. Conway 
Morton Ehrlich 
Ralph E. Gomory . . . 
Thomas Moving 
Ryoichi Kawai 
Donald R. Keough .. 
David E.McKinney.. 
Raymond G. O'Neill 
Ralph A.Pfeiffer,Jr... 
Clarence B.Rogers,Jr., 
Takeo Shiina 
Stephen T. Vehslage .., 
Paulo D.Villares 
Gustavo J. Vollmer... 
Chief Executive, Bata Shoe Organization,Toronto, Canada 
Group Executive, Asia/Pacific Group, and Vice President, IBM 
President, Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
Senior Vice President, Eastern Airlines, Inc., Miami, Fla. 
Director of Research and Senior Vice President, IBM 
President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N. Y , and Editor-in-Chief, The 
Connoisseur 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan 
President,The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga. 
President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation, and Vice President, IBM 
Retired Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/ Far East Corporation 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation; 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
President, IBM Japan, Limited 
Vice President, Management Services, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
President, Central El Palmar, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela 
IBM World Trade 
Europe /Middle East / 
Africa Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Carl-Hugo Bluhme . . . 
Lewis M. Branscomb. 
Tore Browaldh 
Kaspar V. Cassani . . . . 
William W.Eggleston. 
Pierre L. Gousseland.. 
Gilbert E.Jones 
PaulJ.Kofmehl 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Umberto Nordio 
Georges Savy 
Sir Philip Shelbourne . . . 
Otto Sturzenegger 
Kurt Werner 
Country General Manager, IBM Sweden 
Vice President and Chief Scientist, IBM 
Vice Chairman, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden 
Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation; President, IBM Europe; 
President, IBM World Trade Corporation, and Senior Vice President, IBM 
Vice President, IBM 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Amax, Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation; Directeur General, IBM Europe, 
and Vice President, IBM 
Senior Vice President & Group Executive, IBM 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p.A., Rome, Italy 
Vice President, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation 
Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N. Y. 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBELCmbH, Darmstadt, Germany 
Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
Board of Directors: 
Joseph M. Allen 
George B. Beitzel 
Patricia Albjerg Graham 
John E.Guth,Jr 
Wayne M. Holtzman.... 
Retired Group President and Director, McGraw-Hill, Inc. 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Dean, Harvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass. 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
President,The Hogg Foundation for Mental Health, Austin,Tex. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
IBM is organized into the following groups, divisions and wholly owned subsidiaries: 
Information Systems 
and Communications Group 
Communication Products Division —Has world-
wide development and U. S. manufacturing respon-
sibility for telecommunications systems, display 
products, distribution industry systems and 
related programming. The division serves as the 
worldwide architectural and systems focal point 
for Systems Network Architecture activities. 
Entry Systems Division —Has worldwide devel-
opment and product management, and U. S. man-
ufacturing responsibility for IBM's general pur-
pose, low-cost, personal-use computer systems 
and related software. 
Information Systems and Products Group 
Information Products Division —Has worldwide 
development and related programming and U. S. 
manufacturing responsibility for typewriters, 
copiers and systems for the banking industry, and 
for peripheral equipment, including printers, 
copier systems, diskettes and associated supplies. 
System Products Division—Has worldwide devel-
opment and U. S. manufacturing responsibility 
for small and intermediate-sized general purpose 
systems and related programming, as well as for 
low-end direct access storage devices. 
Information Systems and Technology Group 
Data Systems Division —Has worldwide develop-
ment and associated programming responsibility 
for large, complex systems, with primary empha-
sis on high-performance products, plus U. S. 
manufacturing responsibility for those systems. 
General Products Division —Has worldwide 
development and U. S. manufacturing responsi-
bility for storage systems, including tape units, 
disk products and mass storage systems, program 
products and product-related programming. 
General Technology Division—Has worldwide 
development and product assurance and U. S. 
manufacturing responsibility for logic, memory 
and special semiconductor devices and multi-layer 
ceramics. The division also procures components 
for the IBM World Trade Americas/Far East 
Corporation and U. S. operating units. 
Systems Technology Division —Has worldwide 
development and product assurance and U. S. 
manufacturing responsibility for circuit pack-
aging used in IBM computing systems. Also devel-
ops and manufactures intermediate processors 
and printers and develops programming systems. 
Information Systems Group 
National Accounts Division —Has marketing 
and field administration responsibility within the 
U. S. and its territories for the full standard line 
of IBM products. Its assigned customers are 
selected large accounts with complex informa-
tion processing needs. 
National Distribution Division —Has marketing 
responsibility within the U. S. for selected systems 
and high-volume products delivered through 
alternate channels of distribution such as IBM 
Product Centers, value added remarketers and 
authorized dealers. In addition, the division has 
responsibility for marketing IBM supplies and 
accessories within the U. S. 
National Marketing Division—Has marketing 
and field administration responsibility within the 
U. S. and its territories for the full standard line 
of IBM products. Its assigned customers are large 
and medium accounts. 
National Service Division—Provides service for 
assigned products; manages service business 
within the U. S. and its territories; and supports 
IBM's marketing efforts. 
Other Divisions 
Federal Systems Division—Provides specialized 
information-handling and control systems to the 
Federal government for seaborne, spaceborne, 
airborne and ground-based environments. Also 
participates in applied research and exploratory 
development. 
Real Estate and Construction Division —Manages 
the selection and acquisition of sites, the design 
and construction of buildings and the purchase 
or lease of facilities for all IBM operations in the 
U. S. The division has responsibility for assessing 
real estate projects outside the U. S., as well as 
for IBM's worldwide energy and environmental 
programs. It also provides facility services to 
selected headquarters locations. 
Research Division —Brings scientific under-
standing to bear on areas of company interest 
through basic research and development of tech-
nologies of potential long-range importance. 
Subsidiaries 
IBM Credit Corporation —Ofiers lease financing 
of IBM products, either directly or through part-
nerships, and finances installment receivables 
resulting from sales by IBM of its information 
processing systems and equipment to customers 
in the U. S. Provides consumer financing of 
IBM products through IBM credit card. It also 
finances non-IBM equipment. 
IBM Instruments, Inc —Has responsibility for 
IBM's efforts in the analytical instruments field, 
including marketing and servicing selected 
products in the U. S. 
ROLM Corporation —Has worldwide develop-
ment, manufacturing and marketing responsibility 
for fully integrated computerized business 
communications systems including private branch 
exchanges, voice messaging systems, circuit-
switched data systems, desktop products, and 
related applications. 
Science Research Associates, Inc. —Has worldwide 
development, publication and/or marketing 
responsibility for a wide range of educational and 
testing materials and services, including micro-
computer software designed for use in schools, 
colleges, businesses and the home. 
IBM World Trade Americas / Far East Corporation — 
With a territory extending across four continents, 
this subsidiary is responsible for IBM operations 
in 46 countries, including Australia, Brazil, 
Canada, China and Japan. 
IBM World Trade Europe / Middle East! Africa 
Corporation—Through its subsidiary, IBM Europe, 
located in Paris, it is responsible for IBM 
operations in 83 countries. 
IBM World Trade Corporation—Provides designated 
support to IBM World Trade organizational units. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
The folloxmng information is provided as a convenient reference for IBM stockholders: 
The 1985 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held in the Atlanta 
Civic Auditorium, Atlanta, Ga., on Monday, 
April 29th, at 10 a.m. 
Notice of Annual Meeting, Proxy Statement 
and Proxy Voting Card are mailed to each 
stockholder in March. The Proxy Statement 
describes the items of business to be voted on 
at the Annual Meeting and provides biographies 
of the Board's nominees for director and their 
principal affiliations with other companies 
or organizations, as well as other information 
about the company 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes 
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including 
a report on the company, questions and answers 
of general interest, and the results of voting on 
items of business. 
IBM Stock Transfer 
is handled by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department, 590 Madison Avenue, New York, 
N.Y. 10022.The department maintains stock-
holder records and can answer questions 
regarding stockholders' accounts. Stockholders 
wishing to transfer stock or to change the 
name on a stock certificate should contact the 
department for instructions. 
Stock certificates are valuable and should 
be safeguarded, since replacement takes time 
and requires payment of a surety bond premium 
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost, 
stolen or destroyed. Stockholder Relations 
should be notified. Registered mail should be 
used whenever stock is mailed. 
IBM Stock is Traded 
on the New York Stock Exchange, other 
exchanges in the United States and exchanges 
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, 
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and 
the Netherlands. 
Stock Transfer Offices: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
590 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
One IBM Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60611 
Co-Transfer Agents: 
Trust General du Canada 
HOC University Street, Montreal, Quebec, 
Canada H3B 2G7 
The National Victoria and Grey Trust Company 
21 King Street East, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5C 1B3 
Registrars: 
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York 
30 West Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10007 
The First National Bank of Chicago 
One First National Plaza, Chicago, 111. 60670 
Montreal Trust Company 
One Place Ville Marie, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3B 3L6 
15 King Street West, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M5H 1B4 
The folloxving information may be obtained xvithout 
charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations Depart-
ment, _5po Madison Avenue, New York, N. Y. 10022: 
The Form lo-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
provides further details on IBM's business, includ-
ing a list of subsidiaries, summarized in the 
Annual Report. Form lo-K is available in April. 
The Form lo-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting 
An IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of 
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
IBM Technology Landmarks 
are reviewed in a THINK magazine reprint: "How 
one company's zest for technological innovation 
helped build an industry." 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles that 
the company sets for the conduct of its business. 
IBM Equal Opportunity Programs 
in the United States are outlined in a document 
that describes programs for women, minorities 
and handicapped persons, and also reviews IBM's 
Affirmative Action efforts in the community 
IBM Company Citizenship 
booklet describes support programs for edu-
cation, community service, hospitals, the arts 
and other areas. 
IBM Operations in South Africa 
are summarized in a report of the company's 
business in that country.This report describes 
the personnel principles and practices to which 
IBM adheres in doing business in South Africa. 
IBM Annual Report Translations and Recordings 
are available. The report is translated into 
French, German and Japanese. An audio cassette 
recording in English is available for the blind. 
A Service for Deaf Stockholders 
provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department enables deaf stockholders who have 
access to a teletypewriter to communicate with 
the department's New York City office. 
Stockholders who wish to use the service 
should call (212) 407-4552. 
For Information: 
Regarding stockholders' accounts, call 
(212) 407-4000. 
General questions about IBM, call 
(800)426-3333. 
Outside the continental U S., call 
(617) 895-2874. 
International Business Machines Corporation 
Corporate Headquarters 
Armonk, N.Y. 10504 
G505-1984.00 
PRINTED IN USA 


===== PAGE 47 =====
o 
o 
> 
n 
w 
^ 
S 
o 
c 
;4 
^ 
^ 
n) 
l i i I 
Z f i 
^ 
S: ~ 
3 rb 
s 
C 
w 
c 
n 
HH 
0 
C/O 
0 
C/l W 
r-t 
i-t 
W 
n 
0 >-t 
fl 
CO 
r-t 
0 ' 
3 
