

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: 
1 Financial Highlights 
2 Letter to Stockholders 
5 Partnerships: 
"Each party contributes; each benefits." 
i6 1985 in Review 
25 Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent 
Accountants 
Earnings 
Management Discussion—Results of Operations 
Financial 
Position 
Management Discussion—Financial 
Condition 
Funds Flow 
Stockholders' Equity 
Notes to Financial 
Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial 
Data 
Supplemental Financial 
Information 
46 Directors and Officers 
48 IBM Organization 
Stockholder Information 
I-
IBM's operations: 
IBM's operations are primarily in the 
field of information-handling systems, 
equipment and services to solve the 
increasingly complex problems of business, 
government, science, space exploration, 
defense, education, medicine and many 
other areas of human activity. IBM's 
products include information processing 
products and systems, program products, 
telecommunications systems, office 
systems, typewriters, copiers, educational 
and testing materials, and related supplies 
and services. Most products are both 
leased and sold through IBM's worldwide 
marketing organizations. Selected products 
are marketed and distributed through 
authorized dealers and remarketers. 
- 
i 
A., - . i' VJ 
Cover: 
The IBM ^126 Technician Terminal, pictured 
here, is a key element of General Motors' 
Computerized Automotive Maintenance System 
(GM-CAMS), a joint development effort of the 
Buick Motor Division, other units of General 
Motors, including Electronic Data Systems 
(EDS), and IBM. The terminal, which consists of 
an IBM Personal Computer, touch-sensitive 
screen and GM and IBM-developed software, is 
designed to quickly and accurately diagnose 
and isolate electronic problems in GM vehicles. 
When linked to GM's centralized system, 
maintained by EDS, the terminal will receive 
current diagnostic software and repair 
information and provide GM with valuable 
feedback on repair activities. Buick will begin 
marketing GM-CAMS to its dealers this year. The 
project with GM, a long-standing IBM customer, 
represents the diversity of IBM's associations 
with others in activities from research and 
development to manufacturing and marketing. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 31,1985 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Highlights of the year: 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 
Earnings before income taxes 
Income taxes 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Return on stockholders' equity 
198s 
1984 
50,056 
1 1 , 6 1 9 
5,064 
6 , 5 5 5 
$10.67 
2 , 7 0 3 
$ 4.40 
6 , 4 3 0 
22.4% 
4 5 , 9 3 7 
1 1 , 6 2 3 
5 , 0 4 1 
6 , 5 8 2 
$ 1 0 . 7 7 
2 , 5 0 7 
$ 
4 . 1 0 
5 , 4 7 3 
2 6 . 5 % 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 
52,634 
$ 
4 2 , 8 0 8 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property. . 
$ 
19,680 
$ 
1 6 , 3 6 3 
Working capital 
$ 
14,637 
$ 
1 0 , 7 3 5 
Long-term debt 
$ 
3 , 9 5 5 
$ 
3 , 2 6 9 
Stockholders' equity 
$ 
3 1 , 9 9 0 
$ 
2 6 , 4 8 9 
Number of employees 
4 0 5 , 5 3 5 
3 9 4 , 9 3 0 
Number of stockholders 
7 9 8 , 1 5 2 
7 9 2 , 5 0 6 
Gross Income 
(Millions ofdollars) 
50.056 
Net Earnings/Dividends 
(Millions of dollars) 
45-937 
40,180 
34.364 
29,070 
1981 
"82 
'83 
'84 
'85 
1981 
• Dividends 
6,582 
6.555 
2,507 
2,703 
i Net Earnings 


===== PAGE 4 =====
To the Stockholders 
IBM's worldwide business health is strong 
despite a difficult year for the computer industry. 
An uncertain North American economy, 
currency fluctuations, sluggish capital spending 
by our customers, and an early 1985 pause in 
high-end processor installations had an adverse 
impact on IBM's performance for the full-year 
1985. However, our quarterly results improved 
each quarter during 1985. 
Woridwide net earnings for the year ended 
December 31,1985, were $6,555 million, down 
0.4 percent from 1984's earnings of $ 6,582 mil-
lion. Net earnings were $10.67 per share in 
1985, compared with $10.77 per share for the same 
period in 1984. The after-tax margin was 13.1 
percent in 1985, compared with 14.3 percent in 
1984. Average shares outstanding were 614.1 
million in 1985 and 611.4 million in 1984. 
Earnings before income taxes were $11,619 
million in 1985 and $11,623 million in 1984. 
Before-tax margins were 23.2 percent in 1985 and 
25.3 percent in 1984. 
Worldwide gross income was $50,056 
million in 1985, up 9.0 percent from the prior 
year's $45,937 million. Even though currency 
rates had a favorable effect in the second half of 
1985, the full-year impact was still negative 
compared with 1984. It is estimated that if cur-
rency rates had remained the same as in 1984, 
gross income would have been $400 million 
higher in 1985, yielding a revenue growth rate of 
9.8 percent, while net earnings would have 
been $40 million higher, yielding an increase 
of 0.2 percent. 
Gross income from non-U. S. operations in 
1985, included in consolidated results, was 
$21,545 million, up 16.0 percent from $18,566 
million in 1984. Non-U. S. net earnings of $3,078 
million in 1985 showed an increase of 19.0 
percent over r984's earnings of $2,587 million. 
As IBM anticipated, the quarter ended 
December 31,1985, was particularly strong with net 
earnings of $2,681 million, up 23.4 percent over 
1984's fourth-quarter earnings of $2,172 million. 
Per share earnings were $4.36, compared with 
$3.55 for the 1984 period. Gross income for the 
fourth quarter of 1985 was $17,155 million, com-
pared with $14,496 million for the fourth quarter 
of 1984, an increase of 18.4 percent. 
Total orders for 1985 showed good growth 
over the prior year. Worldwide shipments for the 
full year were higher than in 1984, with substan-
tially all of the growth continuing to be in the 
non-U. S. portions of the business. Fourth-quar-
ter shipment growth was due mostly to the 
strength of the 3090 processors and high-end 
storage devices, along with growth in type-
writers, printers and personal computers. 
There is an absence of convincing evidence 
the North American economy is showing sus-
tained improvement, and we are approaching 
1986 with caution. We are managing our costs, 
expenses and other resources carefully. Product 
costs and expenses in 1985 reflect increases 
in productivity over the prior year, and we expect 
this direction to continue throughout 1986. 
We remain optimistic about the future of ibm and 
the overall computer industry. Our continuing 
investments in research, development and 
facilities have positioned us for future growth. 
Resilient Performance 
IBM's results gained strength steadily during 
the course of 1985, reaching a peak in the fourth 
quarter. In a trying year for our industry, as well 
PaulJ. Rizzo, vice chairman, John R. Opel, chamnan of the board, and John F.Akers, president and chief executive officer 


===== PAGE 5 =====
as for our company, i b m ' s resilient performance 
stands out and reaffirms the fundamental 
soundness of our business. There is reason for 
continued optimism about i b m ' s long-term pros-
pects in the underlying and growing need to 
manage information and improve productivity 
in virtually every aspect of human activity. 
Strong Product Line 
In part, our confidence is built on 
i b m ' s 
product line—already strong, and growing 
stronger as a result of continuing investments in 
research, development and engineering. During 
1985, about half of our shipments came from 
products newly introduced or significantly 
improved within the past 24 months. This ex-
tends a record of sustained innovation that is 
notable for any company, and essential in our 
highly competitive industry. 
For customers with large-scale computing 
requirements, for example, new 3090 processors 
ofter improved price/performance and excep-
tional fiexibility.They can perform significantly 
faster than i bm's previous top-of-the-line sys-
tems, while an optional extension can operate 
specialized programs for engineers and 
scientists at even greater speeds. 
IBM pioneered and continues to lead in 
technology and quality with the industry's most 
advanced high-capacity disk storage devices. 
Models introduced last year offer up to 5 billion 
characters of storage, twice as much as before. 
New software introduced last year spans the 
range from programming that improves the per-
formance of multiple operating systems to a 
product for use by researchers in the developing 
field of artificial intelligence. 
During 1985, we added to our desktop com-
puting options. Lower-cost and higher-capacity 
models joined the industry's broadest line of 
compatible personal computers. In addition, PC 
capability was extended to new models of our 
System/36 and Series/1 processors, providing 
customers with even greater flexibility in meet-
ing their office computing needs. We added new 
functions to our Selectric System/2000 line of 
typewriters and introduced economical desktop 
printers for use with IBM and other popular 
personal computers. 
In their first year as merged companies, 
R O L M Corporation and I B M continued to 
strengthen the relationships between their 
products. R O L M added to the capabilities and 
enlarged the capacity of its PhoneMail voice 
messaging system; it is now being marketed by 
both organizations. A new r
o
l
m product ex-
tends advanced voice and data communications 
to IBM's most powerful personal computer mod-
els and can provide PC users with high-speed 
access to ibm office systems programs stored in 
central computers. 
To assist customers in linking their oper-
ations—within an office, a building or an entire 
organization—the company added new commu-
nications capabilities. The i bm Token-Ring Net-
work is a local area network with the potential of 
attaching large numbers of personal computers 
and devices from i b m , 
r
o
l
m or others. It is 
a key building block in our continuing commit-
ment to telecommunications and to helping 
customers to integrate their office systems. 
Areas of Growth 
As the North American economy softened 
during 1985, much of IBM's growth came in our 
operations in Europe, the Asia/Pacific area and 
Latin America, where our business was up sub-
stantially from the previous year. 
Installations of large-scale processors in-
creased sharply in the latter part of 1985, as a 
result of our ability to improve shipment sched-
ules for new 3090 systems. This achievement is a 
credit to the many men and women of ibm 
who developed and then delivered—well ahead 
of original schedules—a system of exceptional 
quality. 
Shipments of high-capacity disk storage 
devices also showed strong growth. While 
demand for ibm Personal Computers did not 
climb as steeply as in the past several years, 
deliveries still increased during 1985. Typewriter 
sales were also vigorous, reflecting acceptance of 
the company's Selectric System/2000 line. 
Revenues from software continued as one 
of the fastest-growing areas of our business, with 
strong growth in operating systems and general-
purpose and application programs. 
Improved Efficiency, Productivity 
During 1985, we took actions to improve 
IBM's efficiency and reduce expenses, while 
we continued making the investments that are 
essential to capitalize on the opportunities 
before the company. 
The skills, experience and loyalty of IBM 
employees are among the company's most im-
portant assets. While improving efficiency, we 
maintained our long record of full employment 
in 1985, through a combination of workload 
balancing, retraining and prudent controls on 
hiring. We expect to continue these actions in 
1986. Early in 1985, we also put stringent expense 
controls in place. As a result, we were able to 
reduce spending in many categories of expense 
well below the rates of the prior year. 
To improve service to customers and 
increase efficiency, IBM reorganized its U. S. 
marketing operations in 1985. Responsibility for 
managing the distribution of IBM products 
through authorized dealers and remarketers was 
consolidated within a single division. And, 
effective January i, 1986, two restructured 
marketing units began offering the full line of 
IBM products to customers within their 
respective geographic areas. 
As a result of our history of continuing 
investments in more efficient plant and equip-
ment, unit manufacturing costs reached an 
all-time low last year. Although we selectively 
reduced planned expenditures during 1985, ibm 
invested an additional $10.8 billion in research, 
development and engineering, and plant, 
property and equipment. We expect these invest-
ments, and the improved productivity that is 
their direct result, to continue in 1986. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
MCI to Acquire SBS 
During the year, IBM, Aetna Life & 
Casualty and MCI Communications Corporation 
reached agreements in principle under which 
MCI would acquire substantially all the assets 
and operations of Satellite Business Systems (SBS). 
Under the agreements, IBM has purchased 
Aetna's interests in SBS. MCI will issue approxi-
mately 47 million shares of common stock 
to IBM in exchange for the SBS assets and oper-
ations. Completion of the merger is subject to the 
approval of the FCC and review under the pro-
visions of the Hart/Scott/Rodino Act. 
IBM has a continuing interest in the tele-
communications services industry. We believe 
that combining the operations of SBS and 
MCI will strengthen both organizations, as well 
as competition in the industry, and tele-
communications customers will benefit. 
Prospects for the Future 
Varying rates of economic growth and capi-
tal investment, changes in international trade 
and tax policies and currency fluctuations may 
continue to affect near-term growth for our in-
dustry. However, we continue to be optimistic 
about IBM's long-range prospects. 
We believe demand for our products and 
services has always been driven by scientific and 
technological progress; by continuous improve-
ments in price/performance and quality; by 
development of new products that help make our 
customers more efficient in everything they do; 
and by the steady emergence of new problems 
to be solved to better the lives of people 
around the world. 
We see no changes in any of those long-
range fundamentals, however uneven rates of 
growth may be in the short term. 
Deficit Reduction 
While we are optimistic about the future, 
our experience in 1985 makes it clear that much 
depends on the United States setting its eco-
nomic house in order, beginning with reduction 
of the federal deficit. 
Debt service on the deficit depletes re-
sources that could be more productively applied 
to strengthening our economy and our society. 
Because it has kept interest rates higher than 
they would otherwise have been, the deficit also 
has been a significant factor in the overly strong 
U. S. dollar, relative to other currencies. The 
effect on the economy and on many of our cus-
tomers is double-edged: a flood tide of imports 
into the United States, with profound conse-
quences for our industrial sector; and a significant 
disadvantage for U. S. companies which depend 
on export business, as the strong dollar makes 
their products less competitive in other countries. 
The dollar's strength has recently mod-
erated, and the Congress' renewed interest in 
deficit reduction is a positive first step. We all will 
have a stake in the difficuh choices that must be 
made over the next several years to achieve 
meaningful and lasting change. 
Continuing Partnerships 
Just as no country is an island in today's 
global marketplace, an international company 
like IBM continues to rely on many interdepen-
dent resources and relationships as we partic -
ipate in the growth of this remarkable industry. 
Our associations may be with customers, 
suppliers, remarketers or university researchers. 
The results may be innovative products and 
services to meet new opportunities, advances in 
science and technology, or ways of demonstrat-
ing that we are a responsible and responsive 
citizen of the countries and communities around 
the world in which we do business. Each party 
contributes; each benefits. 
The following pages describe the range of 
these relationships. Some are traditional and 
long-standing, while others are distinctly new. 
All of them point the way to our future. 
People are Key 
In large measure, IBM'S prospects rest with 
our people, who have confirmed once again that 
they are remarkably energetic, resourceful and 
dedicated, whether in adverse circumstances or 
expansive ones. We are deeply grateful for their 
continued support and mindful that they are 
the best assurance of the company's continued 
prosperity. 
January 28,1986, by order of the Board of Directors 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
John F Akers 
President and 
Chief Executive Officer 


===== PAGE 7 =====
Partnerships: 
'Each party contributes; each benefits.' 
W
ith worldwide revenue projected to surpass 
one trillion dollars in the 1990s, 
the information-handling industry may 
become the world's largest. Within that opportunity, 
there are countless needs to be met and solutions 
to be found—for business, government and individuals. 
To participate fully in all aspects of this growth, 
IBM is expanding existing relationships, and forming 
new ones, with others whose skills, resources 
and interests complement our own. The results are 
already evident across the range of the company's 
activities, and in the ways information technology is 
being expanded to respond to economic and 
social needs around the world. 
At the National Institute for Deaf Children in Paris, children learn to speak 
more clearly with the aid of a speech training system developed at the 
IBM France Scientific Center Here, a child working with a therapist matches 
his speech to a prototype pattern displayed on an IBM Personal 
Computer 
screeii. Visual feedback allows the child to adjust his pitch until he makes the 
correct sound. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
An Oakland, 
(mH/., shipping 
coiirern, operating 
in 
the Asia-Parifir 
basin, uses modern ships and 
eqinpineiil, 
as luell as IBM and HOLMpiodurls, 
lo cut 
days o/f normal shipping schednles. The company's 
most recent acquisition, 
an IBM ^^oijo processor, 
further 
expands 
its information-handling 
capabilities. 
F
^or many customers, IBM is 
a partner of long-standing. 
As the management and 
communication of information 
become even more deeply integrated 
into their operations, the need for 
customers and IBM people to work 
closely together grows as well. While 
products and programs, service 
and support continue to take new 
forms, the objective remains the 
same—improved productivity at 
an affordable cost. 
Buyers from a department store chain based in Los 
Angeles learn to use systeins that improve 
operations 
such as inventory management. 
The company links its 
six department store divisions 
and four 
specialty 
store chains through a centralized data 
processing 
center The netiuork includes 
iy,ooo terminals in 300 
locations luith access to centralized data bases. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
P
artnerships with industry provide the insight 
into new opportunities and the products 
and services to respond to them. The goal may 
be participating in the growth of telecommunications 
in Japan, or creating a product that helps preserve the 
vitality of a centuries-old Italian industry. From 
joint ventures to cooperative development projects, 
IBM works with organizations in ways that can 
be both entrepreneurial and international in scope. 
IBM Japan and Nippon Telegraph and 
Telephone 
Corporation 
(NTT) announced a joint 
venture 
to provide telecommunications 
services and other 
products. The worldwide 
telecommunications 
market 
is expected to triple over the next lo years. 
Representatives 
of the Italian textile industry 
and 
IBM programmers developed a program that allows 
manufacturers 
to view simulated woven cloth patterns 
on a color display screen. This eliminates the need 
for costly preproduction 
samples and allows a more 
rapid response to customer 
requirements. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
T 
lo help meet customers' needs, IBM relies on more than 
100,000 suppliers worldwide. From widely used components 
to specialized software products, their contributions 
become part of a comprehensive IBM solution for requirements 
in banking, retailing and other industries. 
At the same time, IBM reaches more customers in more places 
in partnership with a worldwide network of companies that 
remarket its products. They include retail dealers in typewriters 
and personal computers; firms which tailor IBM products 
to perform specialized tasks by adding their own hardware 
or software or a combination of both; and even existing customers, 
who remarket IBM products to their own agents, dealers 
or affiliates. 
IBM engineers and product support people visited more 
than 2,200 dealers last year to demonstrate the 
capabilities 
of the company's new Personal 
Ccmiputer 
printers. Authorized 
dealers such as this one in Atlanta 
reach millions of potential customers for IBM products. 
An athletic shoe manufacturer 
uses CADAM® a 
program for computer augmented design 
and 
manufacturing 
developed by CADAM, Inc. and 
licensed 
by IBM, to efficiently design footiuear (lADAM is one 
example of the many products, programs 
and 
services integrated luith IBM ofjerings to fmwide 
.mlutions to customers'sfjecialized 
needs. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
IBM Germany is involved in a joint effort with the 
University of Karlsruhe 
to develop a prototype 
university network and to explore new approaches to 
university education. The network, which 
includes 
equipment loaned by IBM, will link a variety 
of computer systems from differeiit 
manufacturers. 
T 
Xniversity research into the 
I 
technologies that underpin 
^ ^ ^ our industry is one aspect of 
IBM's partnerships with the academic 
and scientific communities. Others 
include support of a supercomputer 
research facility and the study of 
manufacturing systems. 
The company participates in 
research that both adds to the world's 
basic store of knowledge and solves 
real and urgent human problems. 
Results may shed new light on the 
nature of matter or improve satellite 
image processing for agricultural 
and environmental purposes in 
Latin America, Spain and Africa. 
Dk Kenneth Wilson, Nobel Laureate and head of 
the Center for Theory and Simulation 
in Science and 
Engineering 
at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y., 
directs efforts to establish a supercomputer facility 
there. 
One ofpve such projects sponsored by the National 
Science Foundation 
(NSF) in the U.S., the effort at 
Cornell also involves Neiu York State, Floating 
Point 
Systems and IBM. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
Stiulinil.s (it the I 'lixni League Job Tniiuiug ('.enter in 
San Diego, C.al if., prepare for jobs i)i areas such as 
word proeessing anrl data e)itry. It is one of 
major 
renters loeated throughout the United States, to 
which IBM has provided 
equipinetd, traiiiing 
materials 
(Did loaned instructors. The coders have trained 
nunc than i^.ooo people si)ice i<-j68. 
I
BM strives to meet local needs 
as a responsible corporate citizen 
in the 132 countries and many 
communities around the world in 
which it does business. Frequently, 
the company joins in partnerships 
with government, education, 
community-service and cultural 
organizations, IBM also encourages 
and assists employees in their 
individual efforts by contributing 
funds, equipment—and sometimes 
the full-time services of employees 
themselves. As the community 
benefits, so do IBM, its customers 
and its people. 
,4// actress is made up for her part in one of a series 
of contemporary CJiine.se dramas being spon.sored by 
IBM in Ho)ig Kong 


===== PAGE 13 =====
1985 in Review 
Large systems and powerful desktop computers 
and workstations were among a stream of 
innovative information-handling products that 
strengthened IBM's product line in 1985. 
Advanced technologies extended the speed 
and capacity of mid-range systems and storage 
devices, while automated manufacturing tech-
niques produced high-quality, price-competitive 
displays, printers and typewriters. New products 
designed to meet the specialized needs of the 
scientific and engineering communities also 
were announced during the year. 
The IBM Token-Ring Network and other 
telecommunications products made it easier for 
customers to tie together an array of informa-
tion products. 
IBM continued to invest considerable 
resources in research and development efforts 
under way at its research centers and labora-
tories to ensure a continuing flow of products. 
The company expanded its commitment 
to community programs as well, strengthening 
partnerships in such areas as education and 
job training. 
Large computer systems 
Introduction of two new high-end proc-
essors and enhancements to the IBM 308X 
computer series extended the power and price/ 
performance options available to customers 
with large and rapidly growing information proc-
essing requirements. 
The IBM 3090 model 200 processor, 
announced in February, contains two central 
processors and up to 64 million characters of 
central storage. The system can execute instruc-
tions almost twice as fast as a comparable 
IBM 3081 processor in commercial applications 
and about three times faster in scientific and 
engineering applications. The model 400 
processor, with four central processors and up 
to 128 million characters of central storage, 
can process information almost twice as fast as 
the model 200. 
Both 3090 models can be equipped with an 
expanded storage that allows automatic transfer 
of data to and from central storage at speeds 
significantly faster than those available with con-
ventional input/output devices. 
A vector processing facility for the new 
high-end computers also was introduced in 1985. 
The enhancement enables the processors to 
run many engineering and scientific programs 
up to three times faster than a 3090 processor 
without the feature. 
The 3090 also features a unique service-
ability facility that continually monitors the sys-
tem's functions. Should a problem develop, 
the facility informs the user, then with the user's 
authorization, automatically reports the 
detected problem to an IBM support center. 
Improvements to two of the operating 
systems for large computers extended their 
function across a range of business, scientific 
The IBM 3090 ynodel 200 processor features emitter-
coupled logic circuit technology that contributes to the 
improved performance of the new system. 
and engineering applications. Enhancements 
included: a system assist that gives customers 
improved performance when using multiple 
operating systems; a software facility that 
increases the availability of certain data base 
and data communications programs; and a 
multitasking facility that enables customers to 
run scientific and engineering applications more 
efficiently. Also introduced was a fiber optic 
channel-extender link that enables computer 
peripherals to be installed further from the 
central computer. 
In August, the first 3090 model 200 was 
shipped to a customer, nearly three months 
ahead of schedule. Planned first shipment of the 
model 400 processor was advanced to the fourth 
quarter of 1986. 
Storage devices 
Two new models in the IBM 3380 family of 
disk storage devices featured disk technology 
and recording head improvements. The 
extended capability models offer users of large 
computers nearly a 15 percent performance 
improvement when compared with earlier 
models. The larger unit has twice the maximum 
storage capacity of previous models. 
Up to four of the extended capacity models 
can be tied together, enabling a data processing 
operation to double its storage capacity without 
requiring additional floor space, power or air 
conditioning. 
Also announced were expanded cache 
memories for the IBM 3880 models 21 and 23 
storage control units. Cache storage is an inter-
mediate storage area that speeds the flow of data 
between storage devices and the computer. 
Mid-range systems 
IBM extended the computing options 
available to customers with medium-size infor-
mation processing requirements, introducing 
desktop versions of its System/36 and Series/1 
computers. Numerous enhancements to other 
mid-range systems also were announced. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
A leadvig cosmetics manufacturer 
in Japan 
has 
installed an IBM 3^80 disk storage device to facilitate 
order tracking and 
billing. 
The IBM System/36 PC, a powerful desktop 
computer directed at the data processing needs 
of departments within a large organization, 
combines a compact System/36 processor and a 
directly attached IBM Personal Computer, PC XT® 
or Personal Computer AT®. The system enables 
customers to use programs and data from 
both the System/36 and PC families, and to com-
municate with other System/36 or host com-
puters. The computer also can support up to four 
locally attached workstations. 
Two desktop versions of the Series/1 com-
puter enable customers to employ existing 
Series/l applications or extend Series/1 networks 
to smaller operations within their organizations. 
Based on the 1 BM Personal Computer AT and a 
modified model of the IBM PC XT, the low-end 
Series/1 models make use of a central processing 
unit fabricated on a single integrated logic chip. 
Customers with larger System/36 proc-
essors can increase the power and flexibility of 
their systems by adding optional memory cards. 
Increased use of high-speed bipolar tech-
nology and a high-density logic module has 
resulted in a more cost-efficient mid-range ver-
sion of the System/38 processor. The new model 
18 delivers 10 percent better performance at a 
12 percent lower price. 
Programs that enable the System/38 to 
function in office networks, and equipment 
enhancements that allow users to double the 
number of workstations they can locally attach 
to their systems also were introduced. 
An innovative programming package— 
VM/SP-Entry—extends the power and flexibility 
of IBM's VM operating system to customers 
with IBM 4361 processors for about half the cost 
of earlier VM products. 
In addition, special channel attachment 
devices and supporting programming make it 
possible for Series/1 customers with networks of 
I BM Personal Computers to use their Series/1 
processors as "gateways'" to communicate with 
other PC networks or host computers. 
Personal computers 
Low-cost models of the IBM PC XT 
and powerful PC workstations were among the 
personal computer products introduced. 
Two new versions of the IBM PC XT 
give customers additional choices in selecting 
a personal computer to fit their needs. One 
configuration is equipped with a single diskette 
drive; the other features two diskette drives. 
Both models can be upgraded to include a fixed-
disk drive. 
A new model of the IBM Personal Com-
puter AT features a fixed-disk drive that can 
accommodate 50 percent more information than 
was possible with eariier IBM PCs. The new AT 
can be equipped with a second fixed-disk drive, 
giving the computer a maximum capacity 
of more than 60 million characters of storage. 
For users with more sophisticated informa-
tion-handling requirements, the IBM 3270 
Personal Computer AT doubles the processing 
power of the eariier 3270 PC workstation. Two 
other 3270 Personal Computer AT workstations 
A major (ierman auto manufacturer 
uses IBM 
Series/1 
computers tied to two IBM 4^61 processors 
for assembly line control ami communication 
of 
last- minute order changes. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
can use data from System/370 host computers to 
create and display color charts, diagrams and 
drawings as well as text. 
IBM Japan expanded the IBM Multistation 
computer family, announcing the IBM 5540 
and 5560 Multistations and new models of the 
IBM 5550 Multistation, offering enhanced color 
graphics and increased fixed-disk capacity. 
An English-language version of the IBM 
Personal Computer j x also became available 
in several Far East countries. 
PC program products 
IBM extended the capabilities of its Personal 
Decision series with the announcement in 1985 
of several enhancements. These enhancements 
provide the business/professional user with 
greater flexibility in a wide range of data process-
ing applications. Four new products that extend 
the capabilities of the IBM Assistant series 
also were introduced. 
The company expanded its offering 
of educational application programs, making 
available 34 new software products for use with 
IBM PCs.The new offerings include a i6-program 
biology and a four-program physics series, 
along with additions to IBM's Earth Science and 
Private Tutor series. 
Displays 
A new color display station and two low-
cost terminal products extended the data entry 
options available to customers in 1985. 
The IBM 3179 model G display, the first 3179 
display with color graphics capabilities, is designed 
for use with IBM System/370 host computers. 
The IBM 3161 and 3163 display stations 
are inexpensive, compact workstations featuring 
built-in capability to emulate both non-IBM 
terminals and IBM display stations. 
Telecommunications products 
A token-ring network and several 
other telecommunications products introduced 
in the past year make it easier for customers 
with decentralized information systems to 
transmit text, data and graphics information 
among their offices and operations. 
The IBM Token-Ring Network is a high-
speed local area network designed initially to 
connect IBM PCs within a building or in a cam-
pus environment. The network facilitates a user's 
ability to share information, printers and 
devices and files with other users. 
To meet the need for efficient, quality 
service in the rapidly growing field of information 
processing networks, a new network support 
center was established in Atlanta. 
IBM Japan introduced a nationwide infor-
mation network service for customers who are 
establishing enhanced information networks for 
specific industries. The Network Management 
Service also can benefit companies offering data 
bank and remote computing services. 
The IBM 3708 network conversion unit 
enables terminals, PCs and workstations to com-
municate more easily with host computers using 
IBM's Systems Network Architecture. Customers 
with IBM 3710 network controllers can take 
advantage of the same conversion function with a 
new communications adapter. 
A new terminal multiplexer allows 
IBM 3270 PC terminals to be connected directly 
to control units up to 6,000 feet away using 
the IBM Cabling System. Modems designed for 
use with PCS, display stations and non-IBM 
terminals also were introduced. 
Typewriters and printers 
Four new models in the IBM Selectric® 
System/2000 typewriter family provide added 
flexibility in keying, editing and storing docu-
ments for customers with large text processing 
requirements.The IBM Wheelwriter® Systems/20 
and 40 and the IBM Quietwriter® Systems/20 
and 40 feature detached keyboards with cursor 
controls that facilitate text editing. They also 
include a display that shows both text and 
A fashionable 
restaurant in Paris uses a terminal 
banking application 
offered by a major French bank to 
handle its daily transactions. The 
videobank 
application 
operates on an IBM videotex 
system. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
A special keyboard for the Chinese-language 
version 
of the IJiM 5550 Multistation 
enables customers to 
enter CJiinese characters into the system. 
operator prompts, and a battery back-up that 
protects the memory if power is disrupted. 
Both System/40 models provide additional func-
tions through pluggable application program 
cartridges. Removable storage cartridges 
offer users added storage capacity. 
A graphics model of the ibm Quietwriter 
printer was introduced in 1985. It offers cus-
tomers high-resolution graphics that match the 
sharpness and clarity of the unit's text printing. 
A low-cost, compact version of the IBM 
Wheelprinter also was announced. 
An economical new electronic typewriter 
provides customers with much of the advanced 
function available with eariier models of the 
Selectric System/2000 typewriter family. The 
IBM Actionwriter 1 typewriter features a built-in 
microprocessor to assist typists with many 
commonly used functions. The typewriter also 
has a correction memory that facilitates 
minor copy editing. 
Two low-cost, desktop printers that can 
produce high-quality text and graphics for per-
sonal computer users were announced. The 
IBM Proprinter attaches to both IBM and other 
widely used personal computers. It features 
complete graphics capabilities and a special 
paper-feed mechanism that allows the use of 
single-sheet paper, multipart forms or envelopes 
without removing continuous forms already 
in the printer. 
The IBM Color Jetprinter is a seven-color 
inkjet printer that can print on 8'/2-by-ii-inch 
transparencies, some coated papers and most 
standard bond papers. Designed for the graphics 
requirements of the business professional, 
the Jetprinter can produce color charts, graphs, 
spreadsheets and text. 
The I BM 3812 Pageprinter, a tabletop printer 
for PCs and larger ibm computers, uses electro-
photographic technology to print up to 12 pages 
a minute. The printer can be shared by as many 
as eight PC users in an office or department or by 
users on an ibm local area network. 
Using IBM's Advanced Function Printing 
software, the i bm 3820 laser printer can provide 
distributed printing of text, graphics, forms and 
digitized images on both sides of a sheet of 
standard bond paper. The unit can be connected 
to medium and large processors. 
Engineering and scientific products 
Sophisticated analytical equipment and 
expert system program products were among 
the offerings announced last year for the 
engineering and scientific communities. 
The iR/38, an advanced, benchtop 
spectrometer developed and marketed by IBM 
Instruments, Inc., is a high-performance 
instrument for repetitive chemical analyses. The 
IBM 9630 gas chromatograph is a powerful 
analytical tool designed for use in the chemical, 
pharmaceutical and food industries. 
In August, IBM announced two program 
products that can help a variety of computer 
users, including engineers and scientists, 
create expert systems for tasks ranging from oil 
exploration to banking. Expert systems are 
a new type of computer application that 
makes use of large stores of information to find 
solutions to problems beyond the scope of 
conventional computer programming. Expert 
System Environment/VM is a develop-
ment tool for constructing and using knowl-
edge bases, vm Programming in Logic can 
be used for artificial intelligence research 
and development. 
Consumer/Financial systems 
The IBM 4700 Personal Computer work-
station combines the productivity benefits 
of PC applications with products and programs 
designed specifically for the financial services 
industry. The 4700 PC enables bank employees 
at a remote office to extract information from data 
bases in the firm's main computer, and modify 
the information locally using PC applications. 
The IBM 4702 processor expands the ability 
of remote offices to carry out many typical bank-
ing transactions while on-line with the institu-
tion's main computers. 
A fault-tolerant system, the IBM System/88 
is designed to ensure continuous system 
availability for customers with critical on-line 
transaction processing requirements. The 
System/88 uses redundant components and spe-
cial programming to provide uninterrupted 
The IBM Proprinter, 
introduced 
in 198^, offers 
personal computer users the option of printing 
single 
sheets of paper and envelopes without 
re^noving 
computer paper already in the printer. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
systems support to workstation-intensive indus-
tries such as banking, transportation and re-
tailing. The new system includes processors and 
programming developed and manufactured by 
Stratus Computer, Inc., under an agreement that 
provides IBM non-exclusive remarketing rights 
for selected Stratus products. 
Manufacturing systems 
Automated manufacturing processes re-
ceived added attention in the last year as several 
new industrial computers and manufacturing 
software products were introduced. 
An entry-level model of the IBM 5531 indus-
trial computer enables small manufacturers to 
run many of their information-handling applica-
tions on the manufacturing floor. Designed for 
extended operation in areas prone to harsh con-
ditions, the new unit can serve as an equipment 
controller, a tracking terminal for work in 
progress or a supervisory workstation. 
Two more powerful industrial computers 
extend the performance available to customers 
of IBM's industrial computer products. The 
IBM 7531 and 7532 computers can be used for 
tasks ranging from machine monitoring to 
distributed numerical control processing and 
production control. 
Also announced were an industrial color 
graphics display designed for use in manu-
facturing environments, and program products 
that facilitate maintenance scheduling and 
communications with programmable controllers 
and other plant applications. 
Federal Systems Division 
The Federal Aviation Administration 
(FAA) awarded the company's Federal Systems 
Division (FSD) a contract to upgrade the com-
puter systems at the agency's 20 air traffic control 
centers around the U. S. Part of an FAA effort to 
modernize the air traffic system, the processors 
will aid flight controllers monitoring and 
directing aircraft flying between U. S. airports. 
FSD also received two major contracts 
involving the National Aeronautics and Space 
Air traffic controllers wulergo trahiing at the 
Federal Aviation Administration 
Technical Clenter 
near Atlantic City, N.J. IBM has been awarded 
a major co7itract to upgrade the computers suf>f)orti'ng 
the system. 
Administration (NASA) in 1985. One contract 
covers the definition and preliminary design of 
the data management system for the first 
permanently manned U. S. space station. The 
second calls for IBM to upgrade the computer 
system in the Mission Control Center at NASA'S 
Johnson Space Center in Houston. 
ROLM Corporation 
ROLM Corporation has been awarded a 
NASA contract valued at nearly $15 million to 
install a new business communications system at 
the Johnson Space Center. The contract calls 
for ROLM to install an advanced communications 
control system, digital telephones and desktop 
telecommunications devices, and a supporting 
cable and fiber optics distribution system. 
ROLM introduced an enhanced version of 
its Central Attendant Service that enables 
customers to provide better telephone service to 
callers at a lower cost. Enhancements to the 
ROLM PhoneMail voice messaging system that 
increase its capacity, reliability and flexibility 
also were announced. 
ROLM'S Juniper II, a voice/data com-
munications product which complements IBM 
Personal Computers, offers users voice and data 
features, including terminal emulation, one-
touch log-on for data calls, two-way speakerphone 
and powerful digital telephone functions. 
Juniper II also allows PC users to transfer infor-
mation to and from an IBM host computer 
or another PC at rates significantly higher than a 
standard modem. 
The divestiture of ROLM'S Mil-Spec Com-
puter Division was completed in June. The 
division was acquired by the Loral Corporation 
of New York City. Sale of the unit fulfills the 
terms of the consent decree that ROLM and IBM 
entered into with the U. S. Department of Justice 
as a precondition of the companies' merger. 
Research and development 
A new one-million-bit computer memory 
chip that operates twice as fast as the company's 
previously announced one-million-bit chip 


===== PAGE 18 =====
has been fabricated by engineers at IBM'S 
Burlington, Vt., laboratory. The experimental 
chip occupies two-thirds the space of the prior 
memory chip. Sample chips have been fabricated 
on existing production lines and operated 
at speeds that make them among the fastest 
megabit memory chips ever reported. 
Researchers at IBM'S Yorktown, N.Y., 
research center have fabricated the densest 
integrated circuits yet reported on two types of 
experimental integrated circuit chips. The novel 
fabrication process allows scientists to shrink 
electronic circuits into an area i6 times smaller 
than possible with current semiconductor 
manufacturing technology. The technique is an 
important step toward the fabrication of indi-
vidual chips capable of storing up to i6 million 
bits of in formation. 
A new technique that provides a lo-fold 
improvement in the accuracy of testing circuit 
delays on very-large-scale integration (VLSI) 
chips has been developed by an engineer at 
IBM's East Fishkill, N.Y., laboratory. Circuit 
delays are the time intervals that it takes to turn 
on and off a particular circuit on an integrated 
circuit chip. The new technique enables 
engineers to measure within trillionths of a 
second the speeds of integrated circuits. 
A compact scanning tunneling microscope 
developed by scientists at IBM'S Zurich research 
laboratory in Switzerland lets researchers view 
individual atoms on the surface of a sample 
material. The unit creates a profile of the surface 
under study by measuring and adjusting to 
variations in a current being passed between the 
sample and a probe traveling just above its sur-
face. The latest development in a microscopy 
technique originally invented by the IBM scien-
tists in 1981, the compact tunneling microscope 
has an added advantage in that it can be aimed 
at particular segments of a sample with the 
aid of a conventional microscope. 
Yorktown researchers are working with 
scientists from New York University's Courant 
Institute of Mathematical Science in New York 
City to design an experimental, highly parallel 
computer to serve as a research tool for advanced 
computer studies.The experimental machine, 
known as RP3, will consist of up to 512 proc-
essors, linked in parallel and connected to as 
many as two billion characters of main memory. 
Initial focus of the project is the viability of using 
large-scale parallelism—many processors 
working on a single task—to address a variety of 
complex problems, including computer-aided 
design, expert systems and other advanced 
artificial intelligence projects. 
Over the next five years, IBM will provide 
more than $30 million in products and support 
to a supercomputer facility established at Cornell 
This form is a fractal representation of a mathe-
matical object called a Mandelbrot set. IBM mathemati-
cian Benoit Mandelbrot recently was recognized for 
originating the theory of fractal geometry. 
University in Ithaca, N.Y Supercomputers are 
specially configured systems used to investigate 
complex problems that could take years to 
complete using conventional methods. Jointly 
sponsored by the university, the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), New York State, 
Floating Point Systems and IBM, the Cornell 
project is one of five supercomputer efforts 
initiated by the NSF to ensure that the American 
research community has access to advanced 
scientific computer technology. 
Benoit Mandelbrot, IBM Fellow and 
originator of fractal geometry, was awarded the 
Barnard Medal of Meritorious Service to Science 
by Columbia University. The award is presented 
once every five years on the recommendation 
of the National Academy of Sciences. A major 
development in 20th-century science, fractal 
Scientists of the CERN European Laboratory for 
Particle Physics in Sioitzerland are installing an 
IBM Token-Ring Netioork to control accelerators 
used in atomic particle studies. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
Automated manufacturing 
equipment 
is helping 
IBM's Boigny, France, plant reduce the cost and 
improve 
the quality of print ribbons produced at the plant. 
geometry is based on the principle that natural 
forms tend to repeat themselves. It is being 
applied across a spectrum of scientific disciplines. 
Joint ventures 
IBM Japan and Nippon Telegraph and 
Telephone Corporation, Japan's domestic tele-
phone company, established a joint venture 
company in Japan to market telecommunica-
tions products and services. The firm has been 
named Nippon Information and Communica-
tion Corporation. Among planned products is a 
telecommunications system that will provide 
customers access to remotely located computers 
via telephone lines for exchange of text, graphics 
and computerized images. 
In June, IBM, Aetna Life & Casualty and 
MCI Communications Corporation announced 
an agreement under which MCI would acquire 
substantially all the assets and operations of 
Satellite Business Systems, SBS had been owned 
jointly by IBM and Aetna Life & Casualty. 
In September, IBM Italy and the ELSAG-Stet 
Group completed the formation of a joint venture 
company called S E I A F . The joint venture will 
market products for flexible and integrated auto-
mation of manufacturing processes. The joint 
venture firm also will address approaches 
for connecting and integrating various areas 
of factory automation. 
European Networking Center 
IBM Europe has established a European 
Networking Center in Heidelberg, Germany, to 
carry out advanced systems communications 
projects. The center will permit I BM engineers, 
working with other European scientists, to 
perform studies in telecommunications and 
networking with particular focus on Open Sys-
tems Interconnection (OSI) applications. 
Based on a reference model for computers 
developed by the International Organization of 
Standardization, OSI is designed to permit sys-
tems operating under different architectures to 
exchange data. IBM has been a major contributor 
to the development of OSI and has implemented 
OSI standards in several recent product offerings. 
Reorganization 
IBM announced a major reorganization of 
its U.S. marketing divisions during the fall of 
1985. The new structure, which began operations 
on January i, 1986, is designed to provide 
customers quality support and service while 
making efficient use of the company's resources. 
Under the realignment, divisions that mar-
keted IBM's products to traditional customer 
accounts were reorganized into two geographic 
marketing divisions that will market the com-
pany's product line to customers within their 
respective geographic areas. 
Field service operations were realigned to 
be symmetrical with the new marketing 
organizations. The division which directs the 
company's marketing efforts through alternate 
channels realigned its value-added remarketing 
and authorized dealer operations into a single 
sales organization. 
The company continued its efforts to 
decentralize decision-making and improve 
efficiency, realigning one of its major business 
groups into two new groups. One is responsible 
for developing and manufacturing large 
processors, storage systems and associated pro-
gramming; the other, logic, memory and 
other semiconductor devices and packaging. 
New facilities 
In line with IBM's goals of growing with 
the industry and being the low-cost producer, 
the company continued to invest in new 
manufacturing and development facilities. 
One of the newest facilities, a state-of-the-
art production plant in Charlotte, N.C., is designed 
specifically for volume production of high-quality, 
low-cost products. The facility, which recently 
began manufacturing the IBM Proprinter, makes 
use of automation throughout its manufacturing 
operations. A series of special control programs 
directs the production process, which was 
Staff at IBM s European Networking 
Center in 
Heidelberg 
(iermatiy, revieius early results of an 
experimental 
netiuorking 
study. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
designed to eliminate the need to maintain a 
parts inventory. 
During the year, IBM invested $ 6.i bilhon in 
new plant, property and equipment. More than 
5 million square feet of additional plant and lab-
oratory space were completed. Another 4.8 mil-
lion square feet of space were under construction. 
Projects completed during 1985 included a 
semiconductor manufacturing building in 
East Fishkill, N.Y.; manufacturing buildings in 
Kingston, N.Y., and Rochester, Minn.; a 
laboratory facility in Yamato, Japan; and expan-
sions of the Greenock, Scotland, plant and 
the Zurich Research Laboratory. 
Employee suggestions 
The IBM Suggestion Plan again had a posi-
tive impact on the company's productivity in 
1985 as cost-saving ideas submitted under the 
plan yielded savings of more than $125 million. 
Approximately 30,000 employees whose ideas 
were implemented under the Suggestion Plan 
also shared the benefits, earning more than 
$18 million in cash awards. 
Affirmative action 
IBM continued its commitment to 
affirmative action in employment and advance-
ment in 1985. Of the more than 10,250 new 
employees hired in the U. S. last year, over 45 
percent were women and over 22 percent were 
minorities. About 5,200 women and 3,600 
minority employees held management positions 
at year end, and of these almost 500 women 
and 500 minorities were in the top 20 percent 
of U.S. management jobs. 
The company also continued its support to 
minority-owned businesses, purchasing more 
than $125 million in products and services from 
some 850 minority-owned firms in 1985. IBM 
also made purchases totaling over $70 million 
from more than 700 firms owned primarily by 
women, and over $17 million from more than 70 
companies employing handicapped workers. 
Education 
IBM increased its support for education, and 
particularly for programs designed to help uni-
versities keep pace with evolving technologies. 
The company also increased its support to 
educational institutions with large minority and 
disadvantaged enrollments, and to efforts aimed 
at increasing computer literacy among school-
children. 
Donations of cash and equipment were 
awarded to 13 universities in the U. S. for 
programs to enhance graduate-level education 
in the management of information systems. 
Under the program, each university will receive 
a cash grant and IBM equipment and software to 
Cameras magnify print samples at IBM's typewriter 
andpriyiter 
manufacturing 
plant in Lexington, 
Ky. 
Character images are compared with those stored 
in a computer system., ensuring the detection 
of flaws in print 
quality. 
support curricula, faculty development and 
research into methods for making more efficient 
use of information systems in industry. 
Planning grants were awarded to another 36 
U. S. universities to assist them in developing pro-
posals for research and graduate-level curricula 
in the materials and processing sciences. This 
spring, up to 12 schools will be selected to receive 
grants of cash and i BM equipment to support their 
proposed research and instructional programs. 
More than 100 IBM employees were granted 
Faculty Loan leaves last fall to teach or give 
full-time administrative assistance to colleges, 
universities and high schools with large minority, 
handicapped or disadvantaged enrollments, 
A school in Hong Kong uses a Personal 
Computer 
cluster network provided 
by IBM to enable 
students 
and teachers to share instruction programs 
and 
equipment. The networking software supporting 
the 
cluster luas developed by the University of Waterloo 
in 
Canada. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
or with programs geared to those students. 
In the 14 years since the Faculty Loan Program 
was initiated, more than 600 employees have 
been granted leaves to serve institutions request-
ing assistance. 
IBM Europe has established a new scientific 
computing facility at the company's scientific 
IBM Australia, contributed computer equipment 
and softiuare to the University of Queensland 
in Brishaiie, Australia, for teaching and research in 
advanced control systems. Here, a lecturer instructs 
students using one of the university's process 
control installations. 
center in Rome. The center provides the 
European academic and scientific communities 
the free use of advanced computing tools for 
experimental work in computation-intensive 
science and engineering research. 
A major grant from IBM Canada and 
supporting funding from the government of 
Alberta are enabling the University of Alberta 
to establish a new educational computer network 
serving students and teachers in Edmonton, 
Calgary and Lethbridge. Under the agreement, 
IBM is providing software and equipment, in-
cluding more than 160 IBM Personal Computers. 
IBM Australia has contributed equipment, 
software and training to the Department 
of Chemical Engineering at the University of 
Queensland in Brisbane in support of university 
programs and research in the field of advanced 
control systems. 
IBM Europe awarded its first IBM Europe 
Science and Technology Prize to Professor 
Fritz Schaefer of the Max Planck Institute for 
Biophysical Chemistry in Goettingen, Germany 
for his pioneering work in laser research. The 
prize is designed to recognize an individual 
outside the company for significant and inno-
vative contributions to science and technology 
in Europe. 
IBM and the community 
IBM's commitment to responsible corporate 
citizenship resulted in the strengthening of pro-
grams benefiting people around the globe. In all, 
the company's contributions of cash, equip-
ment and other resources to social, cultural and 
educational programs worldwide amounted to 
more than $188 million in 1985. 
IBM continued its efforts in support ofjob 
training centers, adding 10 new centers 
in the U.S. Since IBM began its affiliation with 
community job training centers in 1968, more 
than 14,000 people have gained information 
processing and office skills through 57 ibm-
supported centers. Similar programs through-
out Europe have proven equally successful. 
An IBM-initiated program helped create 
jobs for about 400 disadvantaged youths in 
several U. S. metropolitan areas last summer. 
The Summer Youth Employment Program 
provided grants to 20 community-based 
organizations in 18 cities with sizable youth 
unemployment to help develop jobs for high 
school students. In addition to the employment 
experience, the program offered an educational 
component designed to encourage partici-
pants to complete their high-school education. 
When Mexico City was rocked by two 
devastating earthquakes in September, 
IBM personnel assisted in providing disaster 
relief IBM Mexico concentrated its efforts on 
locating and assisting employees affected by the 
quakes and providing support to customers 
whose information processing operations had 
been disrupted. With assistance from ibm 
stafTin the U.S., ibm Mexico also helped coordi-
nate two airlifts of medical supplies and rescue 
equipment. 
IBM announced it will help underwrite a 
new television mathematics series being devel-
oped by the Children's Television Workshop, 
creators of the highly acclaimed "Sesame Street." 
The series, aimed at 8 to 12 year-olds, is 
designed to promote interest in mathematics. 
It is scheduled to debut in January 1987. 
The company also was corporate under-
writer for a major science series that premiered 
on the Public Broadcasting Service in January. 
The program, "Planet Earth," is a seven-
part series on geophysics. IBM distributed 
related materials to schools across the U.S. to 
enable students to benefit from the series' 
educational content. 
Visitors view a major Renoir retrospective at the 
Boston Museum of Fine Art. Sponsored by IBM, the 
exhibit luas also shown in Paris and London. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity 
of the financial information presented in this 
Annual Report rests with IBM management. 
The accompanying financial statements have 
been prepared in conformity with generally 
accepted accounting principles, applying cer-
tain estimates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of 
internal accounting control. It consists, in part, 
of organizational arrangements with clearly 
defined lines of responsibility and delegation of 
authority. We believe this system provides reason-
able assurance that transactions are executed in 
accordance with management authorization, 
and that they are appropriately recorded, in 
order to permit preparation of financial state-
ments in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles and to adequately safe-
guard, verify and maintain accountability 
of assets. An important element of the system 
is an ongoing internal audit program. 
To assure the effective administration 
of internal control, we carefully select and train 
our employees, develop and disseminate writ-
ten policies and procedures, provide appro-
priate communication channels, and foster an 
environment conducive to the effective func-
tioning of controls. We continue to believe that 
it is essential for the company to conduct 
its business affairs in accordance with the 
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines.These guide-
lines, translated into numerous languages, are 
distributed to employees throughout the world, 
and reemphasized through internal programs to 
assure that they are understood and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accoun-
tants, are retained to examine IBM's financial 
statements. Their accompanying report is based 
on an examination conducted in accordance 
with generally accepted auditing standards, in-
cluding a review of internal accounting controls 
and tests of accounting procedures and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of 
Directors is composed solely of outside direc-
tors, and is responsible for recommending to the 
Board the independent accounting firm to 
be retained for the coming year, subject to stock-
holder approval. The Audit Committee meets 
periodically and privately with the independent 
accountants, with our internal auditors, as well 
as with IBM management, to review accounting, 
auditing, internal accounting controls and finan-
cial reporting matters. 
John E Akers 
President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
Allen J. Krowe 
Senior Vice President, 
Einance & Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 26, 
28, 30, and 33 through 43, present fairly the 
financial position of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its subsidiary com-
panies at December 31,1985, and 1984, and the 
results of their operations and changes in funds 
for each of the three years in the period ended 
December 31,1985, in conformity with generally 
accepted accounting principles consistently 
applied. Our examinations of these statements 
January 28,1986 
were made in accordance with generally 
accepted auditing standards and accordingly in-
cluded such tests of the accounting records and 
such other auditing procedures as we considered 
necessary in the circumstances. 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
New York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 23 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Gross Income: 
Sales 
Services 
Rentals 
Cost of sales 
Cost of services 
Cost of rentals 
Selling, general and administrative expenses . . 
Research, development and engineering expenses 
Interest expense 
Other income, principally interest 
Earnings before income taxes 
Provision for income taxes 
Net Earnings 
Per share 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1985—614,084,568 
1984—611,426,324 
1983—606,769,848 
1985 
1984 
$34,404 
1 1 , 5 3 6 
4 , 1 1 6 
1 4 , 9 1 1 
4 , 6 8 9 
1 , 5 0 3 
13,000 
4 , 7 2 3 
443 
$50,056 
3 9 , 2 6 9 
10,787 
8 3 2 
1 1 , 6 1 9 
5,064 
$ 6,555 
iio.67 
2 9 , 7 5 3 
9,605 
6,579 
12,374 
4,347 
2,198 
1 1 , 5 8 7 
4,200 
$ 45,937 
35,114 
10,823 
800 
11,623 
5 , 0 4 1 
$ 
6,582 
10.77 
2 3 , 2 7 4 
7,676 
9 , 2 3 0 
9,748 
3 , 5 0 6 
3 , 1 4 1 
10,614 
3 , 5 8 2 
3 9 0 
$ 40,180 
30,981 
9 , 1 9 9 
7 4 1 
9,940 
4 , 4 5 5 
5 , 4 8 5 
$ 9.04 


===== PAGE 24 =====
Results of Operations 
The past year was a difficult one for the infor-
mation-handUng industry in North America. An 
uncertain economy and sluggish capital spend-
ing by our customers in the U. S. caused an 
adverse impact on IBM's performance for the full 
year 1985. Despite this, IBM achieved record 
worldwide shipments, introduced major new 
products and, in addition, had excellent financial 
results from its operations outside the U.S. 
Worldwide gross income in 1985 totaled 
$50.1 billion, an increase of 9.0 percent over 1984. 
Non-U. S. operations showed strong business 
growth, with gross income increasing by 16.0 per-
cent to $21.5 billion. Revenue growth for U.S. 
operations was a modest 4.2 percent, with 1985 
gross income reaching $28.5 billion. 
Early in 1985 our customers paused to 
evaluate the advisability of installing IBM 308X 
processors or waiting for the availability of the 
new IBM 3090 processors. Volume shipments of 
the 3090 model 200 began in the third quarter. 
The high quality of this product, brought 
about by engineering and manufacturing excel-
lence, contributed to the company's ability to 
deliver it earlier than expected. 
Moderation in the strength of the dollar 
began to be reflected in the company's financial 
results in the last two quarters of the year. 
Although full-year results were still affected 
unfavorably by currency fluctuations, the effect 
in the second half of the year was positive. 
Worldwide net earnings were essentially ffat 
year-to-year, reflecting the company's resilient 
response to the adverse North American 
economic conditions. Worldwide net earnings 
of $6,555 million were 0.4 percent below the 
1984 record of $6,582 million. 
Gross income from sales was $34.4 billion, 
an increase of 15.6 percent over 1984. Sales gross 
income includes sales to customers who have 
exercised their option to purchase installed rental 
equipment. Sales gross income, excluding sales of 
installed equipment, increased 24.6 percent 
over 1984, reflecting the purchase of products 
shipped to our customers during 1985. 
Conversely, gross income from rentals 
declined 37.4 percent to $4.1 billion. Rental gross 
income was 8.2 percent of total gross income in 
1985, down from 14.3 percent a year ago. 
Gross income from services continued to 
grow in 1985 and increased as a percentage 
of total gross income. Revenue from services 
reached $11.5 billion in 1985, a 20.1 percent increase 
over the preceding year. The major increase 
came from program products which increased 
30.3 percent to $4.2 billion. Maintenance services 
increased 15.9 percent over 1984 to $6.1 billion. 
Information on industry segments and 
classes of similar products or services is 
presented on page 43. Sales of peripheral equip-
ment showed a significant improvement over 
1984, increasing 28.0 percent. This improvement, 
evident in both the U. S. and non-U. S. oper-
ations, was primarily the result of strong growth 
in shipments of magnetic tape subsystems and 
direct access storage devices. Total processor 
sales showed only modest worldwide growth and 
declined in the U.S. Sales of office systems/ 
workstations increased by 15.1 percent, mostly in 
non-US. operations. 
Worldwide gross profit was $29.0 billion, an 
increase of 7.2 percent over 1984. 
Efficiencies derived from the major 
investments over the past several years in plant 
capacity and new machinery and equipment 
continue to result in improved manufacturing 
cost. Despite this continuing improvement 
in productivity, gross profit margins declined 
i.o percentage point to 578 percent. There 
are two basic reasons for this decline. 
Gross profit margins on low-priced, 
high-volume products are less than on high-end 
processors. As relatively more of our revenues 
are derived from sales of these low-priced, 
high-volume products, the total gross profit 
margin is reduced. 
In addition, gross profit margins from 
rentals and from installed rental equipment con-
verted to purchase are higher than gross profit 
margins on sales of new equipment. Conse-
quently, as IBM's business shifts more to outright 
sales and away from rental and conversion 
income, a second downward pressure is brought 
to bear on gross profit margins. This transition 
is largely behind us now, and the downward 
pressure on the margin from this will be less 
severe in the future. 
In 1985 gross profit from services increased 
30.2 percent to $6.8 billion. Program products 
were the primary contributor to this increase. 
Selling, general and administrative expense 
as a ratio to gross income increased slightly 
in 1985 to 26.0 percent from 25.2 percent in 1984. 
Rigorous expense and resource controls were 
implemented throughout the business in 1985; 
these will continue in 1986 as the company 
maintains a focus on efficiency and productivity. 
Investments in research, development and 
engineering have resulted in a strong and com-
petitive product line. This investment amounted 
to $4.7 billion in 1985, an increase of 12.5 percent 
over 1984. 
Other income, which is principally interest, 
increased 4.0 percent to $832 million. 
IBM's overall business health is sound, and 
the company is well positioned to share in the 
continued growth of the information-handling 
industry. 
I B M Consolidated Gross Income: 
$55,000 
(In millions) 
Rentals 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31; 
(Dollarsin millions) 
1985 
1984 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
$ 
896 
$ 
6 0 0 
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 
4,726 
3 , 7 6 2 
Notes and accounts receivable-trade, net of allowances 
9,757 
7,393 
Other accounts receivable 
809 
7 1 8 
Inventories 
8,579 
6 , 5 9 8 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
1,303 
1,304 
« 
;26,070 
$ 2 0 , 3 7 5 
Rental Machines and Parts 
4,637 
6,375 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
2,804 
3,425 
1,833 
2 , 9 5 0 
Plant and Other Property 
29,846 
2 3 , 0 4 8 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
11,999 
9,635 
17,847 
13,413 
Investments and Other Assets 
6,884 
6 , 0 7 0 
$ ; 52,634 
$ 4 2 , 8 0 8 
Liabilities and Stockholders' 
Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
$ 
3,089 
$ 
2 , 6 6 8 
Loans payable 
1,293 
834 
Accounts payable 
1,823 
1 , 6 1 8 
Compensation and benefits 
2,460 
2 , 2 2 3 
Deferred income 
391 
340 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
2,377 
1,957 
1 i 11,433 
1 
9 , 6 4 0 
Long-Term Debt 
3,955 
3 , 2 6 9 
Other Liabilities 
1,606 
1,353 
Deferred Income Taxes 
3,650 
2 , 0 5 7 
Stockholders' Equity: 
Capital stock, par value $ 1.25 per share 
6,267 
5,998 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1985—615,741,687; 1984—613,076,500 
Retained earnings 
27,234 
2 3 , 4 8 6 
Translation adjustments 
(1,466) 
( 2 , 9 4 8 ) 
32,035 
2 6 , 5 3 6 
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 
45 
47 
Shares: 1985—323,425; 1984—390,961 
31,990 
2 6 , 4 8 9 
t 52,634 
$ 4 2 , 8 0 8 
The notes on pages 34 through 43 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Financial Condition 
During 1985, IBM maintained its strong financial 
position while continuing to make significant 
investments in research, development and 
engineering, and plant and other property. Over 
the last five years, these investments totaled 
$38.3 billion. 
In 1985, $4.7 billion were directed to 
research, development and engineering. These 
expenditures sustained IBM'S efforts to maintain 
its technical leadership, ensured a continuing 
flow of competitive products to the marketplace, 
and provided the company with the ability to 
pursue new growth opportunities. 
Investments in plant and other property in 
1985 amounted to $6.1 billion, an increase of 32.5 
percent over 1984. These investments were made 
to ensure that IBM continues to reduce unit 
manufacturing costs, maintains industry leader-
ship in quality and achieves its goal of being the 
industry's low-cost producer. A significant 
part of that investment includes IBM products 
used internally that have helped the company to 
improve productivity and efficiency in all areas 
of its business. Manufacturing capacity has 
also been added and modernized to provide 
efficient facilities for producing the growing ship-
ment volumes of IBM's expanding product line. 
In addition, IBM has continued its 
investment in program products. Part of this 
investment, $785 million in 1985, was capitalized 
and will be amortized over the revenue produc-
ing lives of the products. 
IBM's investment in finance subsidiaries and 
sales-type leases reflects the company's growing 
participation in financing products purchased by 
its customers. In 1985, customers financed 
approximately $5 billion in purchase value of IBM 
equipment through the IBM Credit Corporation 
and similar IBM activities around the world. 
Two additional actions were taken in 1985 
that affected IBM's investments and other assets. 
The company sold its $503 million of U. S. 
fixed-income securities, and increased its invest-
ment in Satellite Business Systems (SBS). 
Investments were also made in joint ven-
tures such as International MarketNet,Trintex 
and Nippon Information and Communication 
Corporation. Each of these joint ventures is 
designed to help capitalize on specific market 
opportunities. 
As part of the ROLM Corporation acquisi-
tion, ROLM's Mil-Spec division was sold on June 
28,1985, to Loral Corporation. 
IBM's working capital increased by $3.9 
billion during the year. This increase was caused 
by a $2.4 billion growth in notes and accounts 
receivable, $2.0 billion in inventories, and $1.3 
billion in cash and marketable securities. These 
increases were offset by a rise in current liabili-
ties of $ 1.8 billion. The growth in accounts 
receivable was primarily caused by the substan-
tial increase in shipments to customers during 
the fourth quarter. Inventory growth occurred in 
work in process, as continued stocking was 
required to satisfy demand for volume increases 
throughout the product line. In addition, shelf 
stock for high-volume products was increased as 
demand and the distribution system for these 
products expanded. 
During 1985, $12.8 billion, or 82 percent of 
total funds provided, were generated from oper-
ations. These funds, coupled with an increase in 
long-term debt, were used to finance IBM's 
investments in the future. The company added 
$1,614 million to long-term debt from various 
new issues during 1985. Long-term obligations 
from prior years were reduced by $928 million, 
resulting in a net increase of $686 million 
in long-term debt, IBM'S credit rating remains 
strong, and its long-term debt-to-equity ratio is 
12.4 percent. 
In 1985, the company continued open-
market acquisition of shares to meet most 
requirements of i BM'S stockholder and 
employee stock plans. 
Deferred income taxes increased by $1.6 
billion during 1985. This is attributable to tax 
timing differences related to sales-type leases, 
installment sales, depreciation, and the deferral 
of investment tax credits. In addition, one-time 
events that occurred in 1985 in conjunction with 
the acquisition of ROLM and SBS also served to 
reduce the company's current tax liability. 
The accounting method for translating the 
majority of non-U. S. net assets into U. S. dollars 
requires such items to be translated at current 
exchange rates. The cumulative effect of this cur-
rency translation is included in the equity section 
of the consolidated statement of financial 
position as "translation adjustments." 
The moderation in the strength of the U.S. 
dollar during 1985 caused a significant reduction 
in the "translation adjustments," from $2,948 
million at year-end 1984 to $1,466 million at 
year-end 1985. This year-to-year change of $ 1,482 
million is the result of valuing non-US. net 
assets at the relatively higher foreign currency 
exchange rates at year-end 1985, and is not a 
result of the operational performance of the 
company. The effect of the year-to-year change 
is to increase stockholders' equity. 
Dividends of $2,703 million were paid 
during the year, up $ 196 million from 1984, or 
78 percent. 
During the year, management stressed 
improvements in all key areas of operations as 
well as asset management, while investing in 
areas promising the best possible growth for the 
future. Competition continues to be keen in all 
areas of the information-handling industry. 
Remaining competitive in product cost requires 
investment in new equipment and modern 
facilities as well as a low-cost, high-quality 
manufacturing process. Sustaining a broad, 
competitive product line requires expenditures 
in research, development and engineering, 
along with proper management controls 
to ensure an adequate return. These factors have 
been stressed in all IBM operating units with 
positive results. 
IBM continues to manage its costs, 
expenses and other resources carefully. Product 
costs and expenses in 1985 reflect increases in 
productivity over the prior year, and this direction 
is expected to continue throughout 1986. Manage-
ment remains optimistic about the future of IBM 
and the overall computer industry. The company's 
continuing investments in its business, coupled 
with the skills and loyalty of its employees, have 
positioned it for future growth. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
1984 
1983 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at January 
i 
$ 4,362 
$5,536 
$ 3,300 
Provided from (used for) Operations: 
Sources: 
Net earnings 
$ 6,555 
$ 
6,582 
$ 5,485 
Items not requiring the current use of funds: 
Depreciation charged to costs and expenses 
2,894 
2,987 
3,362 
Net book value of rental machines and 
other property retired or sold 
867 
1,483 
2 , 1 0 8 
Amortization of program products 
425 
486 
311 
Other (principally deferred income taxes) 
1,880 
1,004 
749 
12,621 
12,542 
12,01 5 
Depreciation of manufacturing facilities capitalized 
. . . 
157 
228 
265 
12,778 
12,770 
12,280 
Uses: 
Investment in rental machines 
313 
858 
1,41 2 
Investment in plant and other property 
6,117 
4,615 
3,518 
6,430 
5,473 
4,930 
Investment in program products 
785 
803 
588 
Increase in investments and other assets 
454 
1,764 
1,887 
Net change in working capital 
(excluding cash, marketable securities 
and loans payable) 
3,101 
4,043 
855 
10,770 
12,083 
8,260 
Translation effects 
677 
(324) 
(147) 
Net provided from operations 
2,685 
363 
3,873 
Provided from External Financing: 
Net change in long-term debt 
686 
595 
( 1 7 7 ) 
Net change in loans payable 
459 
3 0 2 
3 
Net provided from external financing 
1,145 
897 
(174) 
Provided from Employee and Stockholder Plans 
133 
73 
788 
8,325 
6,869 
7,787 
Less: Cash Dividends Paid 
2,703 
2,507 
2 , 2 5 1 
Funds (Cash and Marketable Securities) at December ji 
$ 5,622 
$4,362 
$5,536 
The notes on pages 34 through 43 are an integral part of this statement. 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Summary of Sources of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Summary of Uses of Funds (Dollars in millions) 
Working Capital $3,101 
Operations $i3,455t 
tincludes Translation Effects of $677 
,614 New Long-Term Debt 
$459 Loans Payable 
$ 133 Stock Plans 
Plant and Other Property $6,117 
Reduction of Long-Term Debt 
$454 Investments and Other Assets 
$313 Rental Machines 
$785 Program Products 
$2,703 Cash Dividends 
Expenditures for Plant and Other Property 
Over the past five years, the company 
has invested over $20 billion in land, buildings, 
machinery and equipment, and internally 
installed IBM manufactured equipment 
required to meet customer demand, maintain 
technological leadership and improve pro-
ductivity. These recent additions represent 
68 percent of the gross asset value of plant and 
other property as of December 31,1985. 
Continuous upgrading of our facilities is 
essential to achieve our objectives. Large 
investments will continue to be required in 
future years. 
Investment (Additions) in Plant and Other Property 
$22,000 
(In millions) 
1981 ^ 
'82 
'83 
'84 
1985 
Annual • • Cumulative for five-year period 


===== PAGE 29 =====
Percentage Change in Value of Foreign Currencies Compared to U.S. Dollar 
British pound 
Canadian dollar 
French franc 
German mark 
Italian lira 
Japanese yen 
+ 17% 
- l 8 % 
-355?-
1983 
1984 
1985 
Base—as of January i, 1983 
1983 
1984 
1985 
In 1985, U. S. gross income increased by 
4.2 percent, and non-U. S. gross income 
increased by 16.0 percent as reported in U. S. 
dollars. It is estimated that had currency rates 
remained constant with those of 1984, gross 
income would have been $400 million greater 
than that reported in 1985, and gross income 
from non-U. S. operations would have grown by 
18.2 percent. 
As the dollar strengthens, net assets, 
revenue, costs and expenses, recorded in local 
currencies, are translated to fewer U. S. dollars 
than they would have been at the previous 
year's exchange rates. The graphs above illustrate 
the movement, in relation to the dollar, of the 
six major currencies in which IBM conducts most 
of its non-U S. business. 
The dollar, which had continued to 
strengthen during 1983 and 1984, began to 
weaken in 1985. However, for the full year 1985, 
IBM's gross income was still adversely affected 
by currency rates. 
1983 
1984 
1985 
J 
L 
1983 
1984 
1985 
The graph to the right depicts the aggregate 
revenue growth from 1982 through 1985 for the 
same six countries, as reported in U. S. dollars. 
The graph also shows the local currency 
revenue growth rates calculated using 1982 U S. 
dollar exchange rates. Management believes 
that this composite growth rate, as measured in 
local currency, is illustrative of the health of 
IBM's non-U. S. business and reflects the strong 
worldwide demand for its products. 
To the degree that profits from these non-
U. S. operations are not repatriated in the form 
of dividends or other payments, the currency 
effects are deferred to future periods, since these 
resources continue to be invested in the country. 
IBM manufactures products throughout the 
world, and there is little dependence on U. S. 
exports in most of the major non-U. S. operations. 
The company has been able to compete 
effectively and profitably outside the U.S. as well 
as in the U. S. 
1983 
1984 
1985 
1983 
1984 
1985 
Six Major Countries— 
Combined Gross Income by Year 
100% (Percent change over 1982) 
90% 
80%. 
1 1 
10% 
1 1 
1 1 
0% 
1983 
'84 
'85 
I Combined 
revenues 
as reported 
in U.S. dollars 
1983 
84 
85 
I Combined 
revenues 
as measured 
in local currency 


===== PAGE 30 =====
(Dollarsin millions) 
Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1983 
. . . 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee and 
stockholder plans (8,318,513 shares) 
. . 
Treasury stock (221,508 shares) acquired 
and sold under employee plans . . . . 
Tax reductions—employee plans 
. . . . 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1983 . . 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee 
plans (2,351,859 shares) 
Purchases (6,711,522 shares) and sales 
(6,320,561 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder plans—net . 
Tax reductions—employee plans 
. . . . 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1984 . . 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee 
plans (2,664,869 shares) 
Purchases (6,346,223 shares) and sales 
(6,413,759 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder plans—net . 
Other (principally tax reductions-
employee plans) 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1985 . . 
Capital Stock 
Retained Earnings 
Translation 
Adjustments 
Treasury Stock 
Total 
1983 
1984 
1985 
$ 5,008 
7 4 1 
51 
5,800 
1 5 4 
44 
5,' 
1 7 3 
96 
$ 6,267 
$ 16,259 
5,485 
(2,251) 
(4) 
19,489 
6,582 
(2,507) 
(78) 
23,486 
6 , 5 5 5 
( 2 , 7 0 3 ) 
(104) 
2 7 , 2 3 4 
$ ( 1 , 3 0 7 ) 
( 7 6 3 ) 
(2,070) 
(878) 
(2,948) 
1 , 4 8 2 
$ ( 1 , 4 6 6 ) 
(47) 
( 4 7 ) 
$ ( 4 5 ) 
19,960 
5,485 
(2,251) 
7 4 1 
(4) 
51 
(763) 
23,219 
6,582 
(2,507) 
1 5 4 
(125) 
44 
(878) 
26,489 
6 , 5 5 5 
(2,703) 
1 7 3 
(102) 
9 6 
1,482 
3 1 , 9 9 0 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements: 
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of Consolidation: 
Translation of 
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
Gross Income: 
The consolidated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and its 
U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies, other than the wholly owned i BM Credit Corporation and non-U. S. finance 
subsidiaries, for which the equity method is used. I nvestments in joint ventures, and other companies in which i BM has a 
20 to 50 percent ownership, are accounted for by the equity method. Investments of less than 20 percent are accounted 
for by the cost method. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to 
U. S. dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevaiHng 
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S. 
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, 
inventories and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. 
All other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and 
depreciation are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of 
exchange prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which resuh from remeasurement are included in earnings. 
Gross income is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, or in certain cases upon 
customer acceptance, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and from services over 
the contractual period or as the services are performed. Rental plans include maintenance service and contain 
discontinuance and purchase option provisions. Rental terms are predominantly monthly or for a two-year period. 
IBM equipment offered under term leases by IBM'S finance subsidiaries is accounted for by IBM as outright sales. 
Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development. 
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally 
capitalized as program products assets. The assets are amortized based on the estimated revenue distribution over their 
revenue-producing lives, but not in excess of six years. Ongoing costs to support or service licensed programs are expensed. 
Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives. 
Depreciation of assets acquired subsequent to December 31,1983 is computed using the straight-line method. Depreciation 
of assets acquired prior to January i, 1984 is computed using the sum-of-the-years digits method for rental machines, 
and either accelerated methods or the straight-line method for plant and other property. 
Goodwill: 
The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and 
amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. Goodwill related to equity investments is included in the investment 
and amortized on a straight-line basis over 20 years. 
Program Products: 
Depreciation: 
Retirement Plans and 
Other Postretirement Benefits: 
Selling Expenses: 
Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements 
in the plans are amortized generally over 15 years. Postretirement heahh care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued 
when the employee retires. 
Selling expenses are charged against income as they are incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Inventories: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. It thus includes the effects of timing differences 
between reported and taxable earnings that arise because certain transactions are included in taxable earnings in other 
years. Investment tax credits are deferred and amortized as a reduction of income tax expense over the average useful 
life of the applicable classes of property. 
Raw materials, operating supplies, finished goods and work in process are included at the lower of average cost or market. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
At end of year: 
Net assets employed 
Current assets 
$ 
12,395 
$ 
8,583 
$ 
8,115 
Current liabilities 
6,629 
4,636 
4,585 
Working capital 
5,766 
3,947 
3,530 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
6,451 
4,902 
5,622 
I nvestments and other assets 
2,569 
1,690 
1,062 
14,786 
10,539 
10,214 
Long-term debt 
645 
222 
466 
Other liabilities 
1,448 
1,125 
1,249 
Deferred income taxes 
805 
346 
27 
2,898 
1,693 
1,742 
Net assets employed 
$ 
11,888 
$ 
8,846 
$ 
8,472 
Number of employees 
163,294 
156,042 
150,944 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals 
$ 
2 1 , 5 4 5 
$ 
18,566 
$ 
17,053 
Earnings before income taxes 
$ 
5,546 
$ 
4,640 
$ 
3,841 
Provision for income taxes 
2,468 
2,053 
1,677 
Net earnings 
$ 
3,078 
$ 
2,587 
$ 
2,164 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
$ 
2 , 3 3 3 
$ 
1,807 
$ 
1,987 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local 
currency environment account for approxi-
mately 85% of the company's non-U. S. gross in-
come. The remaining 15% of the company's non-
U. S. gross income is from subsidiaries and 
branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose 
economic environment is highly inflationary. 
For the years 1985,1984 and 1983, non-U. S. 
financial results have been impacted by the 
strength of the U. S. dollar relative to the curren-
cies of many countries. As the dollar strengthens, 
net assets and net earnings recorded in local 
currencies translate into fewer U. S. dollars than 
they would have at the previous year's rates. 
The dollar, which had continued to strengthen 
during 1983 and 1984, began to weaken in 1985. 
However, for the full year 1985, IBM's gross 
income and net earnings were still adversely 
affected by currency rates. The translation 
adjustments, resuhing from the translation of net 
assets, amounted to $1,466 million at December 
31,1985, $2,948 million at December 31,1984, 
and $2,070 million at December 31,1983. The 
reduction of the translation adjustments since 
the end of 1984 is a reflection of the weakening of 
the dollar during 1985. The graphs on page 32 
illustrate the movement, in relation to the dollar, 
of the six major currencies in which IBM con-
ducts most of its non-U. S. business. 
Undistributed earnings of non-U. S. sub-
sidiaries included in consolidated retained earn-
ings amounted to $ 11,147 million at December 
31,1985, $9,837 million at December 31,1984 and 
$8,510 million at December 31,1983. These 
earnings, which reflect full provision for non-
U. S. income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in 
non-U. S. operations. Accordingly, no provision 
has been made for taxes that might be payable 
upon remittance of such earnings. 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Marketable Securities 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1985 
December 31,1984 
U.S. Government securities 
Time deposits and other bank obligations 
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations. 
Total 
Market value. 
$ 
917 
$ 
616 
2 , 1 8 3 
1,837 
1,626 
1,309 
$ 
4 , 7 2 6 
$ 
3,762 
$ 
4 , 7 2 9 
1 
3,774 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1985 
December 31,1984 
Current inventories: 
Finished goods 
Work in process 
Raw materials and operating supplies 
Total current inventories 
Work in process and field service parts included in: 
Rental machines and parts 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
. . . . 
Total inventories 
2 , 5 7 6 
5 , 7 1 4 
289 
8,579 
720 
1 , 0 3 7 
$ 
10,336 
$ 
1,619 
4,676 
303 
6,598 
1 , 2 2 I 
746 
$ 
8,565 
Plant and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1985 
December 31, 1984 
Land and land improvements 
. . . . 
Buildings 
Plant, laboratory and office equipment 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Total 
1,049 
8,474 
2 0 , 3 2 3 
29.846 
11,999 
1 7 . 8 4 7 
823 
6,673 
15,552 
23,048 
9,635 
1 3 , 4 1 3 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Investments and Other Assets 
(Dollars in millions) December 31, 1985 
December 31,1984 
Program products, less accumulated amortization (1985, $1,765; 1984, $1,491) 
Investments in finance subsidiaries 
Goodwill, less accumulated amortization (1985, $49; 1984, $4) 
Investment in Intel Corporation! 
Net investment in sales-type leases 
U. S. fixed income securities, at cost (market value: 1984, $510) 
Other investments and sundry assets 
1,160 
Total 
$ 6,884 
$6,070 
1 , 9 6 4 
1 , 0 9 s 
852 
6 4 1 
1 , 1 7 2 
$ 1,604 
1,220 
882 
6 5 5 
594 
5 0 3 
612 
tlndudesgoodwill of $375 million at December 31,1985 and $404 million at December 31,1984 
(net of accumulated amortization of $48 million and $27 million, respectively). 
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) December 31, 1985 December 31,1984 
U. S. Operations: 
fh% convertible subordinated debentures due 2004$ 
io'/2% debentures due 2015 (with sinking fund payments 1996-2014) 
io'/4% notes due 1995 
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 
9'/2% notes due 1986 
Other, payable in: 
(Average interest rate at December 31,1985, in parentheses) 
U S. dollars, due 1986-2012 (11.6%) 
Swiss francs, due 1986-1987 (4.3%) 
German marks, due 1986-1988 (8.7%) 
European currency units, due 1990 (8.25%) 
Non-U S. Operations: 
Various obligations, payable in: 
(Average interest rate at December 31,1985, in parentheses) 
French francs, due 1986-1997 (11.3%) 
Japanese yen, due 1986-2015 (70%) 
U. S. dollars, due 1986-1992 (8.5%) 
Other currencies, due 1986-1999 (15.7%) 
Less: Net unamortized discount, related principally to the 
9%% and \oVi% debentures 
Less: Current maturities 
Total 
1,285 
500 
500 
442 
3 7 2 
243 
187 
1 3 3 
3,662 
246 
202 
171 
lA 
695 
4,357 
^ 
4,345 
390 
$ 3,955 
$ 1,285 
450 
500 
666 
247 
210 
3 , 3 5 8 
62 
1 2 5 
123 
84 
394 
3 , 7 5 2 
i_o 
3 , 7 4 2 
473 
$3,269 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on 
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1985, are as follows: 
1986, $390; 1987, $274; 1988, $239; 1989, $53; 1990, $332; 1991 and beyond, $3,069. 
tThe 7%% convertible subordinated debentures are unsecured subordinated obligations of IBM, which 
are convertible into 1 BM capital stock at a conversion price of $ 153.6563 per share. They will be redeemable, 
at the option of the company, starting in November 1988 at a price of 104.725% of the principal amount, 
and at decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund payments starting in 1994 are intended to retire 
75% of the debentures prior to maturity. During 1985, conversions of debentures resulted in the issuance 
of 318 shares of IBM capital stock. 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Earnings before income taxes: 
U.S. operations 
$ 
6,073 
$ 
6,983 
$ 6,099 
Non-US. operations 
5,546 
4,640 
3,841 
$ 1 1 , 6 1 9 
$ I 1,623 
$ 9,940 
Provision for income taxes: 
U. S. operations 
$ 
2,596 
$ 
2,988 
$2,778 
Non-U. S. operations 
2,468 
2,053 
1,677 
5,064 
5,041 
4,455 
Social Security, real estate, personal property and other taxes 
1,753 
1,636 
1,550 
Total 
$ 
6,817 
$ 
6,677 
$ 6,005 
The components of the provision for income taxes are as follows: 
U.S. Federal: 
Current 
$ 
594 
$ 
1,406 
$ 1,624 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
957 
702 
188 
Net deferred investment tax credits 
144 
80 
47 
1,695 
2,188 
1,859 
Non-US.: 
Current 
2,886 
2,102 
2,250 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
246 
465 
32 
3 , 1 3 2 
2,567 
2,282 
U.S. Stateand local: 
Current 
128 
187 
265 
Net tax effects of timing differences 
109 
99 
49 
237 
286 
3 1 4 
Total provision 
$ 
5,064 
$ 
5,041 
$4,455 
The consolidated effective income tax rate was 43.6% in 1985,43.4% in 1984, 
and 44.8% in 1983. The consoHdated net tax effects of timing differences 
amounted to $1,312 milhon and $1,266 milhon in 1985 and 1984, respectively. 
Amounts relating to sales-type leases and installment sales were $ 643 
million in 1985 and $623 million in 1984. Depreciation timing differences 
accounted for an additional $358 million in 1985. Of the remaining timing 
differences, no individual item is material. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Accounting Change—Program Products 
On January i, 1985, the company changed 
the method of amortization of program product 
assets from the straight-line method to a method 
based on the estimated revenue distribution over 
the products' revenue-producing lives. This 
change was applied as of January i, 1985 to the 
remaining net book value of the existing assets, 
as well as to new assets. 
In the opinion of management, this change 
will result in a better matching of costs with 
revenue because it is reflective of the increasing 
diversity of product offerings and of their terms 
and conditions. This change did not have a 
material effect on 1985 earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering 
Research, development and engineering ex-
penses amounted to $4,723 million in 1985, 
S4,200 million in 1984 and $3,582 million in 1983. 
Included in these amounts were expendi-
tures of $3,457 million in 1985, $3,148 million in 
1984 and $2,514 million in 1983 for a broad pro-
gram of research and development covering 
basic scientific research in a variety of fields and 
the application of scientific advances to the 
development of new and improved products 
and their uses. In addition, expenditures 
for product related engineering amounted to 
$1,266 million, $1,052 million and $1,068 million 
for the same three years. 
Finance Subsidiaries 
The company's wholly owned unconsol-
idated finance subsidiaries consist of IBM Credit 
Corporation and several non-U. S. finance sub-
sidiaries. ROLM Credit Corporation was merged 
with IBM Credit Corporation in July 1985. 
IBM Credit Corporation offers lease financing of 
selected IBM products, finances receivables 
resulting from installment sales by IBM of 
its products, and finances selected non-IBM 
equipment in the U. S. The non-U. S. finance 
subsidiaries offer leases in several European 
countries, and in some cases finance installment 
receivables, IBM'S investment in these sub-
sidiaries is accounted for by the equity method 
and earnings are included in other income in 
Financial position at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
Assets: 
Cash and marketable 
securities 
$ 
306 
Installment payment 
agreement 
receivables - net... . 
1,868 
Net investment 
in leases 
3.101 
Receivable from IBM 
and affiliates 
347 
Other 
196 
Total Assets 
$5,818 
1984 
$ 
1 1 2 
1 , 6 1 9 
1 , 5 7 7 
74 
1 1 7 
$ 3,499 
IBM's consolidated statement of earnings. 
Summarized below is combined financial 
information for these finance subsidiaries, 
of which IBM Credit Corporation accounts for 
more than 90% of the net earnings, IBM has 
agreed to cause the IBM Credit Corporation to 
have a positive net worth at all times. IBM Credit 
Corporation has $750 million of lines of credit 
available, in addition to $500 million shared 
with the IBM Corporation. Additional informa-
tion is available in the 1985 Annual Report 
of the IBM Credit Corporation. Copies may be 
obtained by writing to: 
IBM Stockholder Relations Department 
590 Madison Avenue 
New York, N.Y. 10022 
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
Liabilities and Stockholder's Equity: 
Short-term debt 
$ 1,509 
Deferred taxes and 
accruals 
461 
Due to IBM 
and affiliates: 
Current 
538 
Noncurrent 
184 
Long-term debt 
2,406 
Stockholder's equity . . 
720 
Total Liabilities 
and Stockholder's 
Equity 
$5,818 
1 , 0 3 1 
209 
293 
502 
965 
499 
$ 3,499 
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 
Earnings for the years ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
1984 
1983 
Rental expense amounted to $963 million 
in 1985, $713 million in 1984 and $567 million 
Finance and other income 
Interest and other expenses 
$ 
539 
404 
$ 
305 
230 
$ 164 
1 1 8 
in 1983. Minimum rental commitments, in 
Provision for income taxes 
24 
7 
4 
millions of dollars, under noncancelable leases 
Net earnings 
$ 
III 
$ 
68 
$ 
42 
for 1986 and thereafter are as follows: 1986, 
Net earnings 
$886; 1987, $752; 1988, $545; 1989, $383; 1990, 
Total purchases from IBM: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
1984 
1983 
$303: and after 1990, $1,293. These leases are 
IBM products for term lease customers 
Installment payment receivables 
$ 1,723 
$ 
1 , 1 1 2 
$ 1 , 2 1 2 
$ 1,143 
$ 369 
$ 852 
principally for the rental of office premises. 
IBM products for term lease customers 
Installment payment receivables 
$ 1,723 
$ 
1 , 1 1 2 
$ 1 , 2 1 2 
$ 1,143 
$ 369 
$ 852 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Interest Cost 
Interest on borrowings of the company and 
its consolidated subsidiaries amounted to $532 
million in 1985, $456 million in 1984 and $429 
million in 1983. Of these amounts, $ 89 million in 
1985, $48 million in 1984 and $39 million in 1983 
were capitalized, resulting in interest expense 
of $443 million, $408 million and $390 million 
for the same three years. 
Satellite Business Systems 
MCI Communications Corporation and 
IBM have signed an agreement under which MCI 
will acquire substantially all of the assets and 
operations of Satellite Business Systems in 
exchange for approximately 47 million shares of 
MCI common stock, which IBM agrees to 
retain for a minimum of three years. At Decem-
ber 31,1985, the value of the SBS assets to be 
exchanged was $418 million. Completion of the 
transaction is subject to approval by the Federal 
Communications Commission and review 
under provisions of the Hart/Scott/Rodino Act. 
In addition, IBM has agreed that it will, under 
certain conditions, invest an additional $400 
million in MCI between September i, 1986 and 
December 31,1988. 
1BM and Aetna Life & Casualty had pre-
viously reached agreement for IBM to acquire 
Aetna's interest in SBS, effective June 30,1985. In 
addition to certain cash payments and other 
considerations, Aetna may receive a future pay-
ment from IBM which is dependent on the 
market value of MCI common stock at the time 
the MCI transaction is concluded, up to a max-
imum of $ 98.6 million. Had this transaction 
taken place on December 31,1985, the contingent 
payment would have been approximately 
$30 million. 
IBM's investment in SBS is accounted for by 
the equity method, and is included in invest-
ments and other assets in the consolidated state-
ment of financial position. 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its subsidiaries have 
retirement plans covering substantially all em-
ployees. The total cost of all plans for 1985,1984 
and 1983 was $868 million, $1,096 million and 
$1,180 million, respectively. 
U. S. regular and part-time employees 
are covered by noncontributory plans which are 
funded by company contributions to an irrevo-
cable trust fund, which is held for the sole 
benefit of employees. Monthly retirement bene-
fits generally represent the greater of a fixed 
amount per year of service, or a percent of career 
compensation. For plan purposes, annual 
compensation for each year of service before 
January i, 1984, is defined as the average annual 
compensation paid for the years 1974 through 
1983. Actual compensation is used thereafter. 
Benefits become vested upon completion of 10 
years of service. 
The annual cost of the U. S. plans is deter-
mined using an actuarial cost method known as 
the Frozen Initial Liability method. Under this 
method, annual pension cost comprises both 
current cost and the amortization of prior 
service costs which generally result from plan 
amendments. Current cost is determined by 
relating the present value of future benefits 
(excluding benefits related to prior service costs), 
less fund assets, to the present value of future 
compensation and applying the resulting per-
centage to current compensation. Prior 
service costs are determined and frozen at the 
time of a plan amendment, and amortized 
over 15 years in equal annual amounts. 
The principal actuarial assumptions used 
to determine cost are: rate of return on fund 
assets, future compensation levels, retirement 
ages, employee turnover and mortality rates. 
Variances between actual and assumed plan 
experience (actuarial gains or losses) are 
amortized over the remaining employee service 
period and are included in the determination 
of current cost. 
It is the company's policy to fund accrued 
costs to the extent such costs are tax deductible. 
Pertinent cost and contribution data for U. S. re-
tirement plans is presented below: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1985 
Pension cost: 
Current cost 
$ 391 
Amortization of prior 
service costs 
63 
Total cost 
$ 454 
Pension cost as a % of 
compensation 
5.0% 
Unamortized prior service 
costs at December 31. 
$ 3 81 
Contributions 
$ 5 2 0 
1984 
1983 
$490 
160 
$ 650 
8.2% 
4 1 3 
650 
$ 5 5 ' 
1 5 1 
$702 
9.7% 
$ 5 3 2 
$ 644 
The decrease in pension costs in both 1985 
and 1984 resulted principally from favorable 
returns on plan investments. Consistent with this 
experience, the rate of return assumption was 
increased in both years. Additionally, 1985 cost 
also decreased as a result of changing the 
prior service cost amortization period from 
10 to 15 years. 
The following table provides information 
on the status of the U. S. retirement plans. The 
actuarial present value of plan benefits provides 


===== PAGE 38 =====
an estimate of that portion of the total prospec-
tive benefit obligation applicable to employee 
service to date and assumes the same rates of 
return on fund assets as were used to determine 
pension cost. In 1985, these rates were 8.0% for 
benefits payable in the following 10 years, and 6.0% 
for benefits payable thereafter. In 1984, these 
rates were 7.5% and 5.5% for the respective periods. 
At December 31 
(Dollarsin millions) 
1985 
1984 
Actuarial present value 
of plan benefits: 
Earned to date: 
Vested 
$ 
7,064 
$ 
7,016 
Nonvested 
319 
280 
$ 
7,383 
$ 
7,296 
Including effect of pro-
jected future compen-
sation levels 
$ 10,463 
$ 10,296 
Plan net assets (estimated 
market value) 
$ 14,842 
$ 11,444 
Number of individuals 
receiving benefits . . . 
22,650 
20,937 
A comparison of plan net assets to these 
estimates provides an indication of the com-
pany's progress toward meeting its future com-
mitment to pay benefits when due. However, it 
must be recognized that the market value of plan 
net assets available for benefits will fluctuate. 
Non-U S. subsidiaries have plans under 
which funds are deposited under various 
fiduciary-type arrangements, annuities are pur-
chased under group contracts, or reserves are 
provided. At December 31,1985 and December 
31,1984, it is estimated that the market value of 
fund assets and reserves of individual non-US. 
subsidiaries exceeded or approximated the 
actuarial present value of plan benefits earned 
to date. 
Postretirement Benefits 
The company and its U. S. subsidiaries 
have medical, dental and life insurance plans 
for retirees, the estimated costs of which are 
fully accrued and funded with an independent 
trustee at the time an employee retires. These 
costs amounted to $12 million, $222 million 
and $129 million in 1985,1984 and 1983, respec-
tively. Costs in 1985 were lower than in 1984 
primarily because significantly fewer employees 
retired in 1985. Favorable investment fund 
performance also contributed to the reduction 
in costs. 
Certain of the company's non-U. S. 
subsidiaries have similar plans for retirees. 
However, many retirees outside the U. S. are 
covered by government sponsored and adminis-
tered programs. As a result, the costs of com-
pany sponsored programs outside the U. S. are 
not significant. 
Other Liabilities 
Other liabilities consist principally of 
indemnity and retirement plan reserves for non-
U S. employees. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The 1981 Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
enables employees who are not participants in a 
stock option plan to purchase IBM'S capital 
stock through payroll deductions of up to 10% 
of eligible compensation. The price an employee 
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. During 
1985, employees purchased 5,095,810 shares, 
all of which were treasury shares, for which 
$560 million was paid to IBM. At December 31, 
1985,13,566,470 reserved unissued shares 
remain available for purchase under the Plan. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for grant-
ing officers and other key employees options to 
purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the 
market price on the day of grant. Options have 
a maximum duration of 10 years and may 
be exercised in up to four annual installments, 
commencing one year from date of grant. 
The plans are administered by the Execu-
tive Compensation Committee of the Board of 
Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, 
grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARS) to hold-
ers of options. Such rights offer optionees the 
alternative of electing not to exercise the related 
stock option, but to receive instead an amount 
in cash, stock, or a combination of cash and 
stock equivalent to the difference between the 
option price and the average market price of 
IBM stock on the date of exercising the right. 
The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
tee approval, that payment by the optionee 
upon exercise of an option may be made using 
IBM stock as well as cash. 
The following table summarizes stock 
option transactions during 1985: 
Number of Shares 
Under Option 
Balance at 
January i, 1985.... 
Options granted . . . . 
Options terminated . 
Options cancelled— 
SARs exercised .. . 
Options exercised . . . 
Balance at 
December 31,1985. 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1985. 
14,104,664 
2,970,001 
(149,569) 
(329,405) 
(2,680,043) 
1 3 , 9 1 5 , 6 4 8 
8,758,604 
Available 
for Option 
3,454,935 
(2,970,001) 
99,318 
584,252 
The options exercised during 1985 were at 
an average option price of $ 63.13 per share. 
The 13,915,648 shares under option at December 
31,1985, are at option prices ranging from $40.28 
to $130.82 per share. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Segment Information 
IBM operates primarily in the single industry 
segment encompassing information-handling 
systems, equipment and services. This segment 
represents more than 90% of consolidated gross 
income, operating profit and identifiable assets. 
The schedule on the next page shows gross 
income by industry segments and by classes of 
similar products or services within the informa-
tion-handling segment. 
Financial information by geographic area 
for the years 1985,1984 and 1983 is summarized 
below to provide a better understanding of IBM'S 
operations. Material interdependencies and 
overlaps exist among IBM's operating units and, 
therefore, the information may not be indica-
tive of the financial results of, or investments in, 
the reported areas were they independent 
organizations. 
Geographic Areas 
(Dollarsin millions) 
United States 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Europe/Middle East/Africa 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Americas/Far East 
Gross income-Customers 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
Eliminations 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets 
Consolidated 
Gross income 
Net earnings 
Assets at December 31 
1985 
1984 
1983 
$ 2 8 , 5 1 1 
3 , 4 8 7 
$ 3 1 , 9 9 8 
3,450 
31,886 
$ 14,065 
520 
$ 14,585 
2 , 1 0 4 
1 4 , 3 4 1 
$ 
7,480 
1 , 1 7 3 
$ 
8,653 
980 
7 , 3 9 2 
$ ( 5 , 1 8 0 ) 
21 
(985) 
$ 50,056 
$ 
6,555 
$ 52,634 
$ 27,371 
3 , 0 7 4 
$ 3 0 , 4 4 5 
3 , 9 8 1 
28,394 
$ 11,996 
3 6 3 
$ 12,359 
1,873 
9,864 
$ 
6,570 
1,124 
$ 
7,694 
719 
5,600 
$ (4,561) 
9 
(1,050) 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$ 
6,582 
$ 42,808 
$ 23,127 
2,275 
$ 25,402 
3,296 
23,322 
$ 11,324 
2 3 5 
$ 11,559 
1,580 
9,958 
$ 
5 , 7 2 9 
728 
$ 
6,457 
5 6 2 
5 , 1 4 2 
$ (3,238) 
47 
(961) 
$ 40,1 80 
$ 
5,485 
$ 37,461 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local 
currency environment account for approximately 
85% of the company's non-U. S. gross income. 
The remaining 15% is from subsidiaries and 
branches, predominantly in the Americas/Far 
East area, which operate in U. S. dollars or whose 
economic environment is highly inflationary. 
In the Europe/Middle East/Africa area, 
European operations accounted for approximately 
95% of gross income in 1985,1984 and 1983. 
Interarea transfers, consisting principally of 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
are generally priced at cost plus an appropriate 
service charge, applied consistently throughout the 
world. The cost and service charges that relate 
to asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated 
or amortized by the importing area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of 
service charges, and the net change during 
the year in unamortized service charges have 
been eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Gross Income by Industry Segments and Classes of Similar Products or Services 
Consolidated 
US. Only 
(Dollarsin millions) 
1985 
I984t 
i983t 
1985 
19841 
19831 
Information-Handling: 
Processors: 
Sales 
$ 11,647 
$ I 1 , 0 1 4 
$ 
9 , 0 0 2 
$ 
5,649 
$ 
6,066 
$ 
4 , 9 1 0 
Rentals 
488 
9 0 5 
1,651 
145 
3 4 6 
6 8 5 
Peripherals: 
1 2 , 1 3 5 
1 1 , 9 1 9 
1 0 , 6 5 3 
5,794 
6,41 2 
5 , 5 9 5 
Sales 
10,325 
8,068 
6 , 4 1 8 
6 , 1 1 0 
5 , 0 1 5 
3 , 8 4 1 
Rentals 
2 , 3 5 1 
3 , 5 8 4 
4 , 7 1 7 
1,227 
1 , 9 4 0 
2 , 5 4 7 
Office Systems/Workstations: 
12,676 
I 1,652 
1 1 , 1 3 5 
7 , 3 3 7 
6 , 9 5 5 
6 , 3 8 8 
Office Systems/Workstations: 
Sales 
9,557 
8 , 3 0 0 
5 , 6 5 9 
5,656 
5 , 4 1 5 
3 , 5 7 8 
Rentals 
976 
1 , 6 5 5 
2 , 2 5 6 
489 
889 
1 , 2 5 4 
10,533 
9 , 9 5 5 
7 , 9 1 5 
6,145 
6 , 3 0 4 
4 , 8 3 2 
Program Products 
4 , 1 6 5 
3 , 1 9 7 
2 , 3 0 2 
2 , 1 7 6 
1,708 
1,288 
Maintenance Services 
. . . . 
6,103 
5 , 2 6 6 
4 , 5 7 7 
3,666 
3 , 1 0 6 
2 , 6 3 3 
Other: 
Sales 
1,363 
1 , 1 8 0 
1 , 1 0 5 
895 
7 6 2 
6 9 3 
Services 
650 
6 2 0 
6 4 8 
198 
1 6 7 
135 
Rentals 
301 
4 3 5 
606 
178 
2 5 2 
3 3 1 
2 , 3 1 4 
2 , 2 3 5 
2 , 3 5 9 
1 , 2 7 1 
1 , 1 8 1 
1 , 1 5 9 
Federal Systems: 
47,926 
4 4 , 2 2 4 
3 8 , 9 4 1 
26,389 
2 5 , 6 6 6 
2 1 , 8 9 5 
Sales 
1,439 
1 , 1 2 3 
1 , 0 2 8 
1,439 
1 , 1 2 3 
1 , 0 2 8 
Services 
618 
5 2 2 
1 4 8 
618 
5 2 2 
1 4 8 
Other Business: 
2,057 
1 , 6 4 5 
1 , 1 7 6 
2,057 
1 , 6 4 5 
1 , 1 7 6 
Sales 
73 
68 
6 3 
65 
60 
56 
Total 
$ 50,056 
$ 4 5 , 9 3 7 
$ 4 0 , 1 8 0 
$ 2 8 , 5 1 1 
$ 2 7 , 3 7 1 
$ 2 3 , 1 2 7 
tReclassified to conform with 1985 presentation. 
While IBM operates primarily in a single 
industry segment and manages its worldwide 
business as such, gross income has been 
categorized into major classes of product. 
For purposes of classifying similar 
products of the Information-Handling industry 
segment, user programmable equipment having 
the capability of manipulating data arithmeti-
cally or logically and making calculations, in a 
manner directly addressable by the user through 
the operation of a stored program, has been 
classified as Processors, except that small busi-
ness computers and intelligent workstations are 
included under Office Systems/Workstations. 
Typewriters have also been classified under 
Office Systems/Workstations. Peripherals in-
clude printers, copiers, storage and telecommu-
nication devices. Peripheral functions embedded 
in processors are classified with Processors. 
Program Products include both applications and 
systems software. Maintenance Services consist 
of separately billed charges for maintenance. 
Other consists principally of supplies and unit 
record equipment. 
Some products logically fit in more than one 
class and are assigned to a specific class based on 
a variety of factors. Over time, products tend to 
overlap, merge into or split from existing classes 
as a result of changing technologies, market 
perceptions, and/or customer use. For example, 
market demand may create requirements for tech-
nological enhancements to permit a peripheral 
product (e.g., printer), to be functionally integrated 
with a display, telecommunication device and 
a processor to form an office system. Such inter-
changeability and technological progress tend to 
make year to year comparisons less valid than they 
would be in an industry less subject to rapid change. 
Federal Systems consists of specialized 
information-handling products and services pri-
marily for the United States defense, space and 
other agencies. 
Other Business consists of training 
and testing materials for school, home and 
industrial use. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1985 
1984 
1983 
1982 
1981 
For the year: 
Gross income from sales. 
services and rentals 
$ 50,056 
$45,937 
$ 4 0 , 1 8 0 
$34,364 
$ 2 9 , 0 7 0 
Net earnings 
6,555 
6 , 5 8 2 
5 , 4 8 5 
4,409 
3 , 6 1 0 
Per share 
10.67 
1 0 . 7 7 
9.04 
7-39 
6 . 1 4 
Cash dividends paid 
2,703 
2 , 5 0 7 
2 , 2 5 1 
2 , 0 5 3 
2 , 0 2 3 
Per share 
4.40 
4 . 1 0 
3-71 
3-44 
3-44 
Investment in rental machines 
313 
8 5 8 
1,412 
3,293 
4,146 
Investmentin plant and other property . . . 
6 , 1 1 7 
4,615 
3,518 
3,392 
2 , 6 9 9 
Return on stockholders' equity 
2 2 . 4 % 
2 6 . 5 % 
2 5 . 4 % 
2 3 . 4 % 
21, r 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 52,634 
$ 4 2 , 8 0 8 
$ 3 7 , 4 6 1 
$ 3 2 , 5 4 1 
$ 29,-107 
Net investment in rental machines 
. . . . 
1,833 
2,950 
4 , 8 6 6 
7,599 
8 , 2 2 0 
Net investment in plant and 
other property 
17,847 
13,413 
I 1 , 2 7 6 
9,964 
8,577 
Working capital 
14,637 
10,735 
8 , 1 6 8 
5 , 0 8 0 
3,195 
Long-term debt 
3,955 
3 , 2 6 9 
2 , 6 7 4 
2 , 8 5 1 
2 , 6 6 9 
Stockholders'equity 
31,990 
2 6 , 4 8 9 
2 3 , 2 1 9 
1 9 , 9 6 0 
1 7 , 6 7 6 
Selected Quarterly Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) 
Gross 
Income 
Gross 
Profit 
Net 
Earnings 
Per Share 
Earnings 
Dividends 
Stock Prices 
High 
Low 
1985 
First Quarter 
$ 
9,769 
$ 
5,591 
$ 
986 
$ 
1,61 
$1.10 
$ 1 3 8 . 2 5 
$ 1 1 9 . 0 0 
Second Quarter 
11,434 
6,497 
1,414 
2.30 
1.10 
133-25 
1 1 7 . 3 8 
Third Quarter 
11,698 
6,726 
1,474 
2.40 
1.10 
1 3 2 . 7 5 
120.00 
Fourth Quarter 
17,155 
1 0 , 1 3 9 
2,681 
4.36 
1.10 
1 5 8 . 7 5 
122.88 
Total 
$ 50,056 
$ 28,953 
$ 6,555 
$ 10.67 
$ 4 . 4 0 
1984 
First Quarter 
$ 
9,585 
$ 
5 , 6 3 0 
$ 
1 , 2 0 2 
$ 
1.97 
1 
-95 
$ 
1 2 5 . 0 0 
$ 
1 0 6 . 5 0 
Second Quarter 
11,199 
6,666 
1 , 6 2 3 
2.65 
•95 
117-25 
9 9 . 0 0 
Third Quarter 
1 0 , 6 5 7 
6,312 
1,585 
2 . 6 0 
I.IO 
1 2 8 . 5 0 
1 0 4 . 0 0 
Fourth Quarter 
14,496 
8 , 4 1 0 
2,172 
3-55 
I.IO 
127.75 
116.00 
Total 
$ 45,937 
$ 
2 7 , 0 1 8 
$ 
6 , 5 8 2 
$ 
1 0 . 7 7 
$ 4.10 
There were 798,152 stockholders of record at 
December 31,1985. During 1985, stockholders 
received $2,703 million in cash dividends. 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
March 10,1986, will be at the rate of $ i.io 
per share. This dividend will be IBM's 284th 
consecutive quarterly cash dividend. 
The stock prices reflect the high and low prices 
for I BM'S capital stock on the New York Stock 
Exchange composite tape for the last two years. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Information on the Effects of Changing Prices 
Although inflation-adjusted information is an 
imprecise estimate, there are circumstances in 
which it can serve to emphasize the debilitating 
effects of inflation. It points out the importance 
of keeping inflation under control and sustain-
ing public policy initiatives to encourage 
capital investment. 
Rates of inflation continued to moderate 
in the United States and in many other coun-
tries throughout 1985. Despite this current pos-
itive trend, the cumulative effect of inflation 
over the past several years has generally eroded 
industry's ability to fund the replacement 
and expansion of productive capacity. This has 
not been the case with IBM. 
The following supplemental information, 
which has been prepared in accordance with 
standards established by the Financial Account-
ing Standards Board, is intended to assist 
users of financial statements in understanding 
the impact of changing prices on the company's 
operations. 
The data presented below reflect the effects 
on earnings and stockholders' equity resulting 
from using estimated changes in specific 
prices to restate the value of inventories and 
other properties at currently prevailing 
prices (current cost). 
The estimates are based upon latest pro-
duction costs, published price indexes, current 
suppliers' prices and appraised valuations. Cost 
of sales and depreciation expense are restated 
to reflect the change in the related asset values. 
Discussion of Financial Results 
IBM's 1985 financial results, when adjusted 
for changing prices, show a reduction of 
$246 million from reported net earnings and 
an increase in stockholders' equity of $2,648 
million. The decrease in earnings results prin-
cipally from increased depreciation expense 
of $270 million on plant, rental machines and 
other property that have been valued at $22,487 
million to approximate current cost. Current 
inventories have been valued at $ 8,480 million 
on a current cost basis. 
Companies which retain monetary assets 
or liabilities, such as cash or debt, incur gains 
and losses in purchasing power during periods 
of inflation. IBM's net monetary asset position 
resulted in a purchasing power loss of $ 124 
million in 1985. 
The effects of translation on the changes 
in specific prices of IBM's net assets have been 
estimated without any attempt to adjust the 
data for general rate of inflation differences 
among various countries. The translation 
adjustments reflect changes in the valuation 
of assets denominated in currencies other 
than the U. S. dollar which result from exchange 
rate fluctuations. 
In dollars of average 1985 purchasing power, 
the increase in current costs that might have 
been expected from general inflation exceeded 
IBM's specific price level changes by $ 838 mil-
lion. Management views this positively, in that 
technology and productivity improvements 
substantially offset inflation. Similar patterns 
are reflected in the prior years. 
Comparison of Selected Financial Data Adjusted for Changes in Specific Prices (Current Cost) 
As Reported in 
Financial Statements 
In Average 1985 Dollars 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1985 
1985 
1984 
1983 
1982 
1981 
Gross income from sales, services and rentals. 
Cost of sales, services and rentals 
Expenses and other income 
Provision for income taxes 
$ 50,056 
2 1 , 1 0 3 
1 7 , 3 3 4 
5,064 
$ 50,056 
2 1 , 1 5 6 
1 7 , 5 2 7 
5,064 
$ 47,576 
19,762 
16,084 
5,221 
1 43,385 
17,916 
15,118 
4,811 
$ 38,298 
15,355 
14,038 
4,251 
$ 34,384 
1 4 , 1 5 1 
13,001 
3,371 
Net earnings 
$ 
6,555 
$ 
6,309 
$ 
6,509 
$ 
5,540 
1 
4,654 
$ 
3,861 
Loss from decline in purchasing power of 
net monetary assets 
$ 
124 
$ 
130 
$ 
83 
$ 
I 
$ 
74 
Translation adjustments 
$ 
1 , 4 8 2 
$ 
1 , 5 9 7 
$ (1,075) 
$ 
(976) 
$ 
(866) 
$ (1,178) 
Change in specific prices— 
1 
net of general inflation 
$ 
(838) 
$ 
(707) 
$ 
(78) 
1 
(342) 
$ (1,373) 
Stockholders' equity (net assets) at December 31 . 
$ 31,990 
$ 34,638 
$ 30,241 
$ 28,156 
$ 25,272 
$ 23,360 
Per share information: 
Earnings per share 
Cash dividends per share 
Market price at December 31 
$ 
10.67 
$ 
4 . 4 0 
$ 
10,27 
$ 
4-40 
$ 1 5 5 - 5 0 
$ 
10.65 
$ 
4-25 
$ 127.52 
$ 
9-13 
$ 
4.01 
$ 131-73 
$ 
7-8I 
$ 
3-83 
$ 107.28 
$ 
6.57 
$ 
4-07 
$ 
67.28 
Average Consumer Price Index for 
all Urban Consumers (1967=100.0) 
322.2 
3 1 1 . 1 
298.4 
289.1 
272.4 
The actual market price of i BM stock at December 31, for years 1981 
to 1985 was $56.88, $96.25, $ 122.00, $ 123.13 and $ 155.50, respectively. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
I B M Corporation 
John F. Akers 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM 
Board of Directors: 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, Cahf-engineering and construction 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Harold Brown 
Chairman, Foreign Pohcy Institute, The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N. J.- health care products 
Frank T. Cary 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM 
William T. Coleman, Jr 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Calif, and Paris, France-
attorneys at law 
Thomas F Frist, Jr 
Chairman of the Board, HCA, Nashville, Tenn.-health services 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Partner, Latham, Watkins & Hills, Washington, D.C., and Los Angeles. C a l i f -
attorneys at law 
Amory Houghton, Jr 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, Corning Glass Works, Corning, N.Y.-
glass products 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
*Jack D. Kuehler 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
President, Rockefeller Foundation, New York, N.Y. 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. 
J. Richard Munro 
President and Chief Executive Officer,Time, Inc., New York, N.Y- publishing 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Dean P. Phypers 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
William W. Scranton 
Former U. S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom- attorneys at law; Chairman of the Finance 
Committee, E. I.du Pont de Nemours & Company, Wilmington, Del.- chemical products 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N. Y-attorneys at law 
•Elected 1/28/86 
Board Committees: 
Executive 
FrankT. Cary, Chairman 
John F. Akers 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
William H. Moore 
John R.Opel 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Irving S.Shapiro 
Retirement Plans 
Dean P. Phypers, Chairman 
George B. Beitzel 
Harold Brown 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Carla Anderson Hills 
Compensation 
Cyrus R. Vance, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
William W. Scranton 
Irving S.Shapiro 
Audit 
Richard W. Lyman, Chairman 
Thomas F.Frist, Jr. 
Amory Houghton, Jr. 
J. Richard Munro 
Advisory Board: 
Officers: 
John M. Fox 
Retired Chairman of the Board, SCA Services, Inc., Boston, Mass.-waste disposal services 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
George L. Hinman 
Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y-attorneys at law 
JohnN.Irwin 11 
OfCounsel,Patterson,Belknap,Webb&Tyler,NewYork,N.Y-attorneysat law 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 
T.Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
WilliamMcChesney Martin, Jr. .Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dean R. McKay 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Chief Executive Officer, A. P. Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark- owners of the Maersk Fleet 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
John F Akers 
President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Board 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Vice Chairman of the Board 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Senior Vice President 
C. Michael Armstrong 
Senior Vice President 
& Group Executive 
George B. Beitzel 
Senior Vice President 
John E. Bertram 
Senior Vice President 
& Group Executive 
Kaspar V. Cassani 
Senior Vice President 
Ralph E. Gomory 
Senior Vice President 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Senior Vice President 
Allen J. Krowe 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance & Planning 
Frank A. Metz, Jr 
Senior Vice President 
& Group Executive 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr 
Senior Vice President 
Dean P. Phypers 
Senior Vice President 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr 
Senior Vice President 
& Group Executive 
George H.Conrades 
Vice President 
& Group Executive 
Carl J. Conti 
Vice President 
& Group Executive 
Charles P. Biggar 
Vice President 
James A. Bitonti 
Vice President 
Charles E. Branscomb 
Vice President 
Lewis M. Branscomb — Vice President 
Walton E. Burdick 
Vice President 
Ronald F Casella 
Vice President 
Vincent N.Cook 
Vice President 
Kenneth W. Dam 
Vice President 
Edward M. Davis 
Vice President 
William W. Eggleston 
Vice President 
Donato A. Evangelista 
Vice President 
& General Counsel 
Howard G. Figueroa 
Vice President 
P. Martin Foley 
Vice President 
James J. Forese 
Vice President 
& Controller 
Richard T. Gerstner 
Vice President 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Vice President 
William O. Grabe 
Vice President 
John H. Grady 
Vice President 
& Secretary 
Lewis W.Gray 
Vice President 
Ellen M. Hancock 
Vice President 
Paul J. Kofmehl 
Vice President 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
Vice President 
Thomas M. Liptak 
Vice President 
Paul R. Low 
Vice President 
* William C. Lowe 
Vice President 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President 
Victor R. Macdonald 
Vice President 
Marvin L. Mann 
Vice President 
James F Manning 
Vice President 
David E. McKinney 
Vice President 
Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. Vice President 
f M . Kenneth Oshman 
Vice President 
Theodore C. Papes, Jr. ... Vice President 
Jon W. Rotenstreich 
Vice President 
& Treasurer 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
Vice President 
Charles H.Swall 
Vice President 
Patrick A.Toole 
Vice President 
H. Mitchell Watson, Jr.... Vice President 
Earl F Wheeler 
Vice President 
Robert E. Bonchick 
Assistant Controller 
Harry L. Kavetas 
Assistant Controller 
Jonathan G. Powers 
Assistant Controller 
Edward F Rogers 
Assistant Controller 
Thomas C. Irwin 
Assistant Secretary 
Sidney Handler 
Assistant Treasurer 
Bruce E. Langton 
Assistant Treasurer 
John H. Stewart 
Assistant Treasurer 
•Elected 1/28/86 
fResigned 1/14/86 


===== PAGE 44 =====
Division and Subsidiary 
Chief Executives: 
Ray S. AbuZayyad 
Charles P. Biggar.. 
Kaspar V. Cassani. 
Vincent N . C o o k . . 
Edward M. Davis. 
David A. Finley ... 
Victor J. Goldberg. 
Ralph E.Gomory . 
Lewis W Gray 
JohnE.Guth.Jr. .. 
Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. 
President, General Products Division 
President, National Service Division 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/ 
Middle East/Africa Corporation 
President, Federal Systems Division 
President, Data Systems Division 
President, IBM Credit Corporation 
President, National Distribution Division 
Director of Research 
President, South-West Marketing Division 
President, Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
President, Real Estate and 
Construction Division 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
President, Communication Products 
Division 
Paul R. Low 
President, General Technology Division 
William C. Lowe 
President, Entry Systems Division 
Edward E. Lucente 
President, Information Products Division 
Dennis D. Paboojian 
President, ROLM Corporation 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr 
Chairman, IBM World Trade 
Americas/Far East Corporation, and 
Chairman, IBM World Trade Corporation 
Michael J. Quinlan 
President, North-Central Marketing 
Division 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
President, System Products Division 
Charles H. Swall 
President, Systems Technology Division 
Robert A.Young 
President, IBM Instruments, Inc. 
I B M World Trade 
Americas / F a r East 
Corporation 
Board of EHrectors: 
C. Michael Armstrong 
George H. Conrades .. 
Jill K.Conway 
Keith Crane 
Morton Ehrlich 
Ralph E . G o m o r y . . . 
Thomas Moving 
— 
Ryoichi Kawai 
Donald R. Keough .. 
David E . M c K i n n e y . 
Raymond G. O'Neill 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr.. 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr. 
TakeoShiina 
Stephen T. Vehslage ... 
Paulo D.Villares 
Gustavo J. Vollmer 
Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM 
Vice President and Group Executive, IBM 
Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., and former President, Smith College, 
Northampton, Mass. 
Chairman, Colgate-Palmolive Company, New York, N.Y 
Executive Vice President,Trans World Aidines, New York, N.Y. 
Senior Vice President and Director of Research, IBM 
President, Moving Associates, Inc., New York, N.Y, and Editor-in-Chief,T/!^ Cwirwisseur 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Komatsu, Limited,Tokyo, Japan 
President,The Coca-Cola Company, Atlanta, Ga. 
Vice President, IBM, and President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Retired Vice President, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Senior Vice President, IBM; Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Corporation; and Chairman 
of the Board, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan, Limited 
Vice President, Management Services, IBM World Trade Americas/Far East Corporation 
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S.A., Caracas, Venezuela 
I B M World Trade 
Europe / Middle East / 
Africa Corporation 
Board of Directors: 
Lewis M. Branscomb 
Tore Browaldh 
Kaspar V. Cassani 
Pierre L. Gousseland. 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Paul J. Kofmehl 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge. 
Frank A.Metz, Jr 
Umberto Nordio 
*M. Kenneth Oshman ... 
Frank G. Petersen 
Georges Savy 
Sir Philip Shelbourne ... 
Robert M. Stephenson .. 
OttoSturzenegger 
Kurt Werner 
•Elected 1/14/86 
Vice President and ChiefScientist, IBM 
Vice Chairman, Svenska Handelsbanken, Stockholm, Sweden, and Chairman of the Board, IBM Sweden 
Senior Vice President, IBM; President, IBM World Trade Corporation; President, IBM Europe; 
and Chairman of the Board, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation 
Chairman, A M A X , Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Vice President, IBM; Directeur General, IBM Europe; and President, IBM WorldTrade 
Europe/Middle East /Africa Corporation 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Senior Vice President and Group Executive, IBM 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy 
Former President, ROLM Corporation 
Country General Manager, IBM Denmark 
Vice President, IBM WorldTrade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation 
Chairman, Britoil pic, London, England 
Directeur General des Services Techniques et Fonctionnels, IBM Europe 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y. 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBELGmbH, Darmstadt,Germany 
Science Research 
Associates, Inc. 
Board of Directors: 
Joseph H. Allen 
George B. Beitzel 
Patricia AIbjerg Graham 
J o h n E . G u t h , J r 
Wayne M. Moltzman 
Retired Group President and Director, McGraw-Mill, Inc., New York, N.Y. 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Dean, Marvard Graduate School of Education, Cambridge, Mass. 
President, Science Research Associates, Inc. 
President,The Mogg Foundation for Mental Mealth, Austin,Tex. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
' 
ii 
* s 
r 
m 
J. •> 
