

===== PAGE 1 =====
i % 
mrni 
mm 
is 
i-
-mm 
1 
I I 
I III 
\ \ 


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: 
1 
Financial Highlights 
2 
Letter to Stockholders 
5 
The Competitive Edge 
16 
A Marketing Perspective 
19 
IBM's New Look 
32 
IBM in the Community 
33 
Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
Earnings 
Financial Position 
Cash Flows 
Stockholders' Equity 
Management Discussion 
Notes to Financial Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
54 
Directors and Officers 
56 
Stockholder Information 
IBM's operations: 
IBM is in the business of applying advanced 
information technology to solve the problems 
of business, government, science, space 
exploration, defense, education, medicine and 
other areas of human activity IBM offers 
customers solutions that incorporate informa-
tion processing systems, software, commu-
nications systems and other products and 
services to address specific needs. These solu-
tions are provided by IBM's worldwicie 
marketing organizations, as well as through 
the company's Business Partners, including 
authorized dealers and remarketers. 
Cover and left: Four-year-old Benjamin 
Ruffieux of Le Mont, Switzerland, probably 
doesn't know — or care — that IBM com-
puters helped him get that scrumptious cone 
filled with Nestles ice cream. Swiss-based 
Nestle, long famous for its chocolate, milk and 
coffee products, is today the world's largest 
food company, offering frozen foods, culinary, 
dietetic and other products. Nestle and 
IBM have worked together for many years in 
countries around the world to pursue the 
same goal: customer satisfaction. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 31, i< 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Highlights of the year: 
Revenue 
Earnings before income taxes 
Income taxes 
Net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change. 
Per share 
Cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxest 
Per share 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property . . 
Average number of shares outstanding (in millions) 
. . . . 
Return on stockholders' equity 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Working capital 
Long-term debt 
Stockholders' equity 
Number of employees 
Number of stockholders 
fRestated in accordance with SFAS 94, 
"Consolidation of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries." 
^Sce accounting change note on page 44. 
1988 
I 9 8 7 t t 
59,681 
9,033 
3,542 
5,491 
9.27 
3 1 5 
.53 
5,806 
9.80 
2,609 
4.40 
5,431 
592 
14.9% 
55,256 
8,630 
3,372 
5,258 
8.72 
5,258 
8.72 
2,654 
4.40 
4,312 
603 
14.5% 
73,037 
$ 
70,029 
23,426 
$ 
22,967 
17,956 
$ 
18,430 
8,518 
$ 
7,108 
39,509 
$ 
38,263 
387,112 
389,348 
833,785 
787,988 
Revenue 
46,309 
59,681 
55,256 
50,718 
52,160 
1984 
'85 
'86 
'87 
Net Earnings/Dividends 
6,582 
6,555 
2,507 
2,703 
5,806 
5,258 
4,789 
2,654 
2,609 
1984 
'85 
Dividends 
'87 
195 
Net Earnings 
Earnings Per Share 
10.77 
10.67 
781 
9.80 
8.72 
1984 
'85 
'86 
'87 


===== PAGE 4 =====
Letter to Stockholders 
For the fourth quarter —and for 1988 as a 
whole —IBM's shipments, revenue and earn-
ings surpassed 1987 levels. Our customers 
have responded positively to improved prod-
ucts in every segment of our business, 
and we have increased our etficiency signifi-
cantly. These actions have served to further 
strengthen IBM's competitive position. 
Worldwide net earnings for the year 
ended December 31,1988, were $5.8 billion, 
up 10.4 percent from IBM's 1987 earnings 
of $5.3 billion. Earnings per share were $9.80 
in 1988, compared with $8.72 per share for 
1987. The after-tax margin was 9.7 percent in 
1988, compared with 9.5 percent in 1987. 
Average shares outstanding were 
5 9 2 . 4 
million in 1988 and 603.0 million in 1987. 
Earnings before income taxes were $9.0 
billion in 1988 and $8.6 billion in 1987. 
Before-tax margins were 15. i percent in 1988 
and 15.6 percent in 1987. 
The results reflect IBM's implementation 
of Statement of Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Number 94 (SFAS 94),"Consolidation 
of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries." 
Previously released quarterly data for 1987 
and 1988 have been restated to reflect this 
accounting change, which aflects some line 
items but not net earnings. Net earnings for 
1988 include the effects of Statement of 
Financial Accounting Standards Number 96 
(SFAS 96), "Accounting for Income Taxes." 
Worldwide revenue was $59.7 billion in 
1988, up 8.0 percent from the prior year's 
$55.3 billion. Revenue from non-U.S. opera-
tions in 1988, included in consolidated 
results, was $34.4 billion, up 15.5 percent 
from $29.8 billion in 1987. Non-U.S. net 
earnings (before adjustment for the cumula-
tive effect of SFAS 96) were $4.1 billion in 
1988, an increase of 23.3 percent over com-
parable 1987 net earnings of $3.3 billion. 
For the quarter ended December 31, 
worldwide net earnings were $2.3 billion, 
compared with $2.1 billion for the same 
period last year, an increase of 12.4 percent. 
Earnings per share were $3.97, compared 
with $3.47 for the fourth quarter of 1987. 
Revenue was $20.0 billion, compared with 
$18.3 billion for the 1987 period. 
IBM's fourth-quarter results include an 
additional one-time charge resulting from 
greater-than-forecast personnel departures 
associated with successful manufacturing 
and headquarters consolidations. Approxi-
mately 6,500 employees have chosen to leave 
IBM. Fourth-quarter results also include the 
payment made by Fujitsu to IBM as a result of 
arbitration between the two companies. 
The IBM company is continuing to 
shov/ improvement in its product line, its 
relationships with customers and its 
financial performance. We are managing for 
the long term and, with the steps we 
are taking, we remain confident about the 
future of our business. 
Rapidly Changing Environment 
The worldwide information industry contin-
ues to be marked by rapid change: in 
expanding markets and new opportunities; 
in the pace of innovation; and in ever-
increasing competition. 
There is great opportunity in the growth 
of global information networks, in medium-
and smaller-sized businesses, and in the 
needs of operating departments and individ-
uals in larger organizations. Software and serv-
ices continue to lead the industry's growth. 
In technology, there are no limits 
in sight for improvements in performance, 
function and value, and the race is on to 
make computers simpler and easier to use. 
Emerging technologies such as image 
processing and artificial intelligence offer 
great promise for the future. 
Competition is more intense and diverse 
than ever before. Worldwide, the industry 
can count some 75,000 participants.They 
range from large, long-established hardware, 
software and service companies to suppliers 
of single components. New competitors 
appear every day, from all points of the com-
pass, many of them entrepreneurs focused 
on highly specialized market opportunities 
or niches. 
Most important, customers today expect 
more of their informatfon systems invest-
ments, and of the companies —and people-
competing for their business. 
For many customers, information tech-
nology is evoh'ing from a productivity tool 
to a strategic competiti\'e adxantage.They 
arc applying information systems across the 
range of their operations —to anticipate new 
markets, to speed product development, 
or to be first to the marketplace with entirely 
new services. 
As they choose a supplier, customers 
expect more than technical proficiency, 
quality and competitive cost. They look for 
consistency, simiplicity and ease of use, 
whether they are connecting a worldwide 
information network or running a small 
business. And they want solutions — 
hardware, software, support, financing — 
tailored to the specific needs of their indus-
try, their organization, or for individuals 
at a desktop. In short, customers want to do 
business with companies prepared to con-
tribute as a partner in helping to solve their 
business problems. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
John F. Akers, IBM Chairman of the Board, with Vice Chairmen Jack D. Kuehler (center) 
and Kaspar V. Cassani. 
IBM's Continuing Transformation 
Our objective is to be the customer's first 
choice as a partner. That is why, over the past 
three years and more, we have undertaken a 
comprehensive transformation of our com-
pany. In making these changes, we have 
three continuing objectives: to improve our 
responsiveness, sharpen our competitiveness 
and increase our efficiency. 
Moving more IBM resources close to cus-
tomers is a cornerstone of this transforma-
tion. To that end, in 1988 we undertook the 
most significant restructuring of our 
business in more than 30 years, estabhshing 
seven lines of business and a new organi-
zation—IBM United States. Each line 
of business is described more fully on pages 
19 to 30 of this year's report. 
We have delegated significant decision-
making and authority to these units, to our 
World Trade country organizations and to 
area managers in our marketing and services 
operations in the U.S. This new structure 
is enabling us to respond better to the mar-
ketplace, accelerate technological innovation 
anci compete more vigorously in every 
market we serve. 
Responsive to Customers 
Customers tell us they can see the differences 
in IBM: 
• In a three-year increase of 20 percent in 
the number of IBM people available to work 
with them in solving their problems; 
m In the investments we are making to 
support our people with industry solutions 
and applications knowledge, so they can 
bring significant value to a business relation-
ship with IBM; 
ii In simplified contracts, reduced paperwork 
and greater flexibility and responsiveness, 
from financing customers' purchases to help-
ing maintain their systems and networks. 
As we participate with customers in their 
operations, we are asking them to come 
to our development laboratories, review our 
plans and programs, and help us to be 
sure we are responding to their real needs 
and wants. In this, as in other actions we are 
taking, we want to be of genuine service. 
Focus on Solutions 
Understanding customers' needs in greater 
detail enables us to deliver the solutions they 
want, protect their investments and provide 
a clear path for growth. In 1988, we intro-
duced or delivered new offerings which give 
customers a clear reason for choosing solu-
tions from IBM. 
m We announced the Enterprise System/ 
3090 S series, the industry's most powerful 
general-purpose processor; our new 
Enterprise Systems Architecture/370 is the 
industry's most advanced. 
• Introduction of the midrange Application 
SystemZ-oo family was the result of a world-
wide eftbrt combining IBM teams working 
closely with customers and IBM Business 
Partners in marketing and software develop-
ment. By the time of the first shipment, 
more than 2,500 applications were available, 
along with unprecedented support, edu-
cation and follow-on products.The response 
from both current and new customers has 
been extremely positive. 
m We added new, higher-performance mod-
els to our Personal System/2 (PS/2) family of 
products and delivered enhancements 
to Operating System/2 software that allow 
customers to take advantage of the PS/2's 
Micro Channel Architecture. 
m New communications products improve 
customers' ability to connect IBM products 
and those of other companies; with a 
higher-speed Token-Ring Network and 
improvements to our NetView software, IBM 
strengthened its leadership in network 
management solutions. 
19 Our range of operating system software 
provides a platform for customers to plan 
their growth into the 1990s. Key to that 
growth is IBM's Systems Application Archi-
tecture (SAA), which will allow users to look 
at and work with applications in a consistent 
way across IBM's product line. In 1988, 


===== PAGE 6 =====
we introduced SAA-supported data base and 
communications software products and 
continued to provide customers and software 
developers with clear direction for their 
own development work. 
While managing the business efficiently, 
we are making significant investments for 
the long term in solutions, especially soft-
ware, as well as to assure IBM's leadership in 
technology. Last year, investments in 
research, development and engineering 
were more than $5.9 billion. 
More Efficient 
So we can provide the most value to cus-
tomers, we continue our drive to increase 
efficiency, control cost and expense, and 
streamline IBM. While maintaining full 
employment, we have trimmed staffs, 
reduced layers of management and elimi-
nated nonessential work, 
a To sharpen our focus on IBM's core busi-
nesses of computers and communications, 
we have sold our copier sales and service 
operations, as well as our educational pub-
lishing subsidiary. 
• Through redeployments from staff and 
support positions, we are nearing our goal of 
having 50,000 more people directly involved 
in developing, marketing or supporting 
our products than we had in 1986. 
• Advances in technology and manufac-
turing processes allowed us to further con-
solidate manufacturing operations and 
reduce the number of IBM plants in the U.S. 
from 19 to 14, while retaining the capacity 
for future growth. 
These actions are paying off in shorter 
product cycles and a better balance between 
revenue and profit growth. Since 1986, for 
example, net earnings per employee have 
increased by 26 percent. 
New Markets and New Partners 
Growth in our industry continues to create 
new opportunities and potential customers. 
One way IBM is reaching them is through 
alliances and joint ventures around the 
world, with companies including Fiat and 
Ericsson in Europe; Nippon Telegraph 
and Telephone and Mitsubishi Bank in Japan; 
Sears, NeXT and Supercomputer Systems, 
Inc., in the United States. With them, we are 
developing or marketing offerings that 
range from value-added network services, to 
advanced manufacturing systems, to infor-
mation, shopping and banking services for 
the home. 
During 1988, we announced an agree-
ment with Siemens — Europe's largest 
electronics company — under which our 
ROLM Systems development and manufac-
turing operations will become part of 
Siemens Information Systems, Inc. A mar-
keting and services company — ROLM— 
will be jointly owned by IBM and Siemens, 
and will market the products of ROLM 
Systems, Inc., in the United States. We 
expect this new arrangement will provide 
telecommunications customers with 
improved product choices and support. 
To further extend market coverage, we 
are strengthening relationships with IBM 
Business Partners: agents, dealers, industry 
and applications specialists whose resources 
and skills complement our own. These part-
ners, who add nearly 50 percent to our 
direct sales force, are increasingly important 
to IBM; we rely on them to reach and support 
the majority of Personal System/2 and Appli-
cation System/4oo customers worldwide. 
Kaspar V. Cassani to Retire 
In December, Kap Cassani relinquished his 
position as Vice Chairman of the Board in 
anticipation of his retirement in 1989. His 
career as an international business leader 
brought distinction to him and to the com-
pany he has served so well for 37 years, most 
of them in Europe. Kap made especially 
significant long-term contributions to IBM's 
international growth and success as head of 
our World Trade Europe/Middle East/ 
Africa operations. His keen insight and wise 
counsel were never more valuable than in his 
most recent assignment in the United States, 
where he led our worldwide marketing 
and services organizations. As he returns to 
Europe and prepares to retire, he has our 
every good wish and heartfelt thanks. 
Confidence in the Future 
We compete in a global marketplace, 
and IBM is uniquely positioned to bring 
worldwide resources to bear on solving cus-
tomers' specific problems and achieving 
their individual goals. We can call on 
an unmatched technology base, sustained 
investment and exceptional financial 
strength —all essential for growth in the 
years ahead. 
Above all, we are confident because of 
the talent, loyalty and energy of the 
people of IBM. During these very demand-
ing times, their hard work is preparing 
IBM for continued leadership in our industry. 
While we are changing much about IBM, 
we have more to do. We are determined to 
keep customers at the center of our business 
— to be the very best in the world at serving 
them.The actions we are taking have greatly 
strengthened our ability to achieve that goal. 
January 31,1989, by order of the 
Board of Directors 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 


===== PAGE 7 =====
The Competitive Edge 
Throughout its history, IBM has enjoyed its greatest 
success in the marketplace by transforming advanced infor-
mation technologies into products and services that provide 
customers with innovative solutions to their varied needs. 
Equally important have been the company's traditional 
strengths — a commitment to superior customer service 
through a dedicated worldwide support organization, a broad 
product line which leads the industry, and the continuous 
pursuit of excellence in all endeavors. In the hands of IBM 
people, these strengths provide customers with value 
that differentiates IBM products and services from those 
of the competition. 
As the company competes in the computer and commu-
nications marketplace today and in the future, IBM is 
committed to these business fundamentals and to deliver-
ing solutions that customers will continue to value. 
Bergen Brunswig, a wholesale pharmaceutical 
distributor in Orange, California, links its auto-
mated warehouse to IBM systems to speed delivery of 
drug and medical supplies to independent 
drugstores and hospitals in the Los Angeles area. 
The automated facility is a prototype for the 
company's distribution centers across the country. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
1 
VklHs 
"imm 
i 
i mm 
M I N S 
I 
R ^ G M E I
f O O R 
m a w d e s 
r 
Satisfied Customers... 
Satisfied customers provide the 
foundation on which a sound business 
is built, for these customers become 
loyal and long-term participants in the 
company's success. 
IBMers throughout the business 
recognize the value of such customer 
loyalty and are working diligently 
to continually earn it.. .by developing 
a keener understanding of their special 
needs.. .by being responsive to those 
needs... and by using IBM's expertise, 
experience and resources to deliver 
solutions that, in turn, help customers 
to be more productive in their 
endeavors. 
IBM people also are working to ensure 
they deliver a consistently superior 
level of service in every relationship 
with the customer.. .to make sure ever) 
involvement with IBM is a satisfying 
experience... and one the customer 
will want to repeat. 
Peugeot dealers throughout 
France 
can place orders for 
everything 
from parts to interior colors using 
IBM personal systems installed 
in each dealership. The computers an 
tied via a network of System/^6s to 
Peuseot headauarters 
in Paris. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
An IBM system has helped Thailand's 
largest tapioca processor increase 
its business by enabling the company 
to offer better service, quicker 
turnaround and next-day payments 
to local farmers supplying the 
raw root. Chao Phya Company has 
seen its productivity increase by 
percent. 
Competitive Products... 
Leadership hardware, programming 
and support services make possible 
comprehensive solutions that respond 
to customers' information needs. 
In the last year, IBM has made major 
strides in refreshing its product offerings 
... extending the connectivity and ease 
of use of operating systems and 
application programs... adding new 
function and flexibility across its 
computer families... and introducing 
enhanced support services. These 
offerings will respond to customers' 
needs for many years to come. 
To ensure that future products reflect 
customers' changing needs and 
expectations, IBM has invited customers 
into its product planning process. 
Their participation is already helping 
the company to deliver more 
responsive solutions, while protecting 
customers' current investments in 
IBM information products. 
The Hongkong and Shanghai 
Banking Corporation in 
Hong Kong employs a network of 
IBM systems to maintain its 
competitive position in the inter-
national money markets. 
Children in Prince George's 
County, Maryland, are receiving 
individualized, 
self paced 
instruction with the assistance of 
nearly 1,^00 PS/2s in the 
county's elementary schools. 


===== PAGE 10 =====


===== PAGE 11 =====
7 J 
4 # / , | # ' sW^^i 
g 
f ?3>, /j 
t! 
M 
mrtvlt**-^ 
r M - - - ? ^ 
^ - 
- 
. l L i r t > s « i 
' 
^ A 
% s-. 
Spectators view Sanyo Securities impressive, 
new trading room in Tokyo. Working with IBM, 
Sanyo has developed one of the world's most 
advanced portfolio management systems to bettei 
advise its customers on financial decisions. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
V 
nmsa 
• f ' : 
/ 
J®" 
'S&'^Sl^'* 
/ 


===== PAGE 13 =====
IBM computers at the University 
of Wisconsin are helping researchers 
analyze vast amounts of meteor-
ological data. The information is 
used by the National Weather 
Service, NASA, universities and 
companies like Federal Express. 
A W o r l d w i d e 
S c o p e . . . 
IBM's customers — current and 
potential — range from individuals 
considering a first computer to 
multinational companies looking 
for solutions on a global scale. 
What they share, however, is the 
need for a tailored solution that meets 
their specific needs. 
Of all the firms in the information 
industry, IBM is the company uniquely 
able to provide solutions for both... 
and all those in between. 
Customers can take advantage of 
solutions that require IBM's full range 
of products — from personal systems 
through the industry's largest general-
purpose computers — as well as 
communications networks, program-
ming, peripherals and numerous 
support services. A worldwide support 
organization, including IBM Business 
Partners, delivers these solutions 
in more than 130 countries around 
the world. 
El Corte Ingles, a Spanish depart-
ment store chain headquartered 
in Madrid, relies on IBM retail systems 
and nearly 6,^00 point-of-sale 
terminals to manage its inventory, 
billing and credit checks. 
The National Park Service of 
France at Mercantour is using IBM 
personal systems for applications 
ranging from monitoring and track-
ing movements of the endangered 
ibex to developing educational 
and informational programs for 
park visitors. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
• 
! 
r 
•I 
! 
^ 
j ' A l T ^ . 
V 
^ 
-1 
• - y 
-It 
, mm ™ 
V 
ratmi 
industry Leadership... 
Businesses around the world have 
grown to reahze that information tech-
nology is crucial in today's marketplace. 
It improves their efficiency, reduces 
their cost structure, and opens whole 
new markets and opportunities. Many 
find IBM solutions have given them 
a decided competitive advantage. 
IBM has long enjoyed a reputation for 
technological leadership in the industry 
... in semiconductors... in storage 
technology... and in communications 
architectures that have become 
important templates for emerging 
worldwide standards. 
To maintain its leadership, the compan) 
is quickening the pace of techno-
logical advances and speeding them 
from the laboratory into the product 
line, so customers continue to see 
a difference in IBM function and value. 
IBM will aim to be the industry leader 
in every market it enters, and be the 
front-runner in quality, efficiency and 
competitiveness. 
Schneider National, Inc., a coast-
to-coast truckload organization, 
is installing an innovative two-way 
satellite data communications 
link between an IBM 30^0 at the 
company's Green Bay, Wisconsin, 
headquarters and each of its 5,500 
tractors. This allows Schneider 
to improve customer service and 
automate routing. 
IRM mfl Annual Report 
I 
iiv 
t 
JWi V".' J^ « 


===== PAGE 15 =====
A Marketing Perspective 
IBM's marketing and services operations 
around the world continued to enhance the 
company's working relationships with 
customers in 1988, focusing on better under-
standing their needs and responding 
to them with comprehensive and innova-
tive solutions. 
Global marketing efforts continued 
to show steady progress in 1988, both in the 
U.S. and the World Trade organizations. 
The Systems Integration Division, 
for example, was awarded a major contract to 
upgrade the U.S. air traffic control system. 
The $3.5 billion multi-year contract calls for 
IBM to develop, install and service the 
advanced air traffic system. 
In Europe, a joint venture involving ten 
leading companies in the airline and 
travel industries placed an order for products 
and services that is among the largest 
ever signed by IBM in Europe. IBM systems 
will be used in a network designed to 
handle high-speed transactions, including 
ticketing, car reservations and other 
worldwide services. 
Continuing the dialogue it began 
in 1987, the company extended its series 
of forums for customers around the world. 
These forums provide IBM executives 
with an opportunity to discuss current prod-
uct strategies and business directions, 
and to get feedback and suggestions from 
customer executives. Regional forums 
and local meetings also were held to involve 
additional customers. 
IBM further expanded its field marketing 
force to increase the company's coverage in 
customer accounts. Worldwide, the company 
has added more than 15,000 marketing 
representatives and systems engineers in the 
last two years through redeployment 
IBM Around the World 
IBM currently does business with more 
than 3 million customers in more 
than 1^0 countries through its U.S. and 
World Trade organizations. The geo-
graphic organizations and their areas 
of responsibility are: 
IBM United States 
IBM World Trade Americas Group 
IBM World Trade Asia/Pacific Group 
IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/ 
Africa Corporation 


===== PAGE 16 =====
programs and new hiring. With this added 
resource, the company has seen a dramatic 
increase in the amount of time marketing 
representatives are able to devote to their 
customers and prospects, both in the United 
States and World Trade countries. 
The company also ran education pro-
grams throughout the world to sharpen spe-
cialized skills of its marketing personnel. 
These programs, coupled with the sales 
training program, made 1988 one of the most 
extensive years of marketing education in 
the company's history. 
To increase its coverage in new accounts 
and in those with special requirements, 
the company expanded its Business Partners 
program in 1988. IBM Business Partners 
include remarketers, dealers and agents who 
sell selected IBM products, or complement 
IBM products and services with their own 
products to address specific customer needs. 
To promote the development of applica-
tion programs for IBM products, the com-
pany created software development institutes 
in ten Latin American countries. These 
organizations provide special offerings — 
including financial incentives, hardware and 
systems engineering expertise —to help 
third-party agents and software companies 
develop computer applications for the Latin 
American marketplace. 
In 1988, IBM purchased Spectrum 
Services from PacTel Communications Com-
panies, a subsidiary of Pacific Telesis Group. 
Spectrum Services, now part of the National 
Service Division (NSD), helps customers 
manage a wide range of devices and associ-
ated communications lines. 
The company further broadened its 
support services to customers, announcing 
that it will coordinate and manage 


===== PAGE 17 =====
hardware maintenance on non-IBM equip-
ment through a new service offering. 
The announcement estabhshes IBM as a single 
service source for its customers. 
Taking advantage of the rapid growth of 
information processing throughout the 
Asia-Pacific area, IBM's Asia/Pacific Group 
(A/PG) is actively pursuing joint ventures 
and alliances. IBM Japan, for example, is 
involved in i8 alliances with Japanese com-
panies. Other alliances in Taiwan, Korea 
and Singapore are expected to contribute to 
A/PG's performance. 
IBM's World Trade Europe/Middle 
East/Africa Corporation also continued to 
address customers' needs through alliances 
and joint ventures. These relationships allow 
IBM to combine its information-handling 
capabilities with other firms' special skills 
and market access. Together they can provide 
highly specialized products and services that 
would be uneconomical for IBM to develop 
and market itself 
Recognizing the growth potential 
of the software and services business, IBM 
Canada is focusing on joint development 
programs with customers involving lead-
ing-edge applications. To date, it has 
entered more than 75 joint projects. These 
programs will provide customers with 
early access to advanced applications, while 
IBM gains valuable product experience 
under real business conditions. 
Twenty application development centers 
have been established in countries served 
by A/PG.These centers bring customers, IBM 
Business Partners and IBM account teams 
together to customize and develop new appli-
cations for use on IBM systems. As part of 
this effort, country operations have direct 
access to application data bases in A/PG, the 
U.S. and the U.K., making thousands of 
applications available to customers through-
out the Asia-Pacific area. 
An Italian clothing manufacturer relies on an IBM 
computer to help manage orders and client lists, 
and to estimatefabric needs. Thefirm purchased the 
system from SESA, an IBM agent in Florence. 
In many parts of the world, account 
executives dealing with larger customers are 
using a valuable new sales aid. With the 
help of a special computer program, market-
ing personnel can analyze customers' 
application portfolios, business goals and 
competitive position. They then can show 
how investments in information systems 
will improve the customers' return on equity 
and earnings per share. 
The company also continued to focus on 
making it easier for customers to do 
business with IBM. For example, IBMLink, an 
on-line electronic support service announced 
in May, makes it easier for customers to 
find information such as product and software 
specifications and functions, prices and 
delivery dates. 
To improve customer service and speed 
transactions, the company continued to 
simplify contracts and terms and conditions. 
IBM also worked to develop approaches 
to make it easier for multinational customers to 
do business with a single worldwide company. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
IBM's New Look 
In order to enhance responsiveness to customers, IBM 
restructured its operations in 1988 and established seven Une 
of business organizations. Working together, the hnes 
of business are responsible for meeting customers' needs for 
increased computing power, connectivity and ease of use, 
and for solutions to their business problems. 
To achieve these aims, the lines of business were given 
responsibility for worldwide development and manufacturing 
operations in the U.S., as well as for the revenue and profit-
ability goals of their products and services. These new organi-
zations — along with US Marketing and Services — 
report to IBM United States, which is now headquarters for 
all of IBM's day-to-day business operations in the U.S. 
Each line of business is described in the following pages. 
An ADP/IBM alliance utilizing ADP application 
software and IBM Personal System/2s enables 
Merrill Lynch & Co. and other brokerage firms to 
process securities transactions with increased 
productivity, while providing a higher level of 
service to their clients. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
IBM's New Look 
Application Solutions 
Application Solutions works with 
IBM's customers to develop 
solutions for their total informa-
tion processing requirements. 
This line of business unites 
application development, systems 
integration, professional 
services and market development 
activities, and also focuses on 
furthering IBM's ties with compa-
nies that develop, market and 
install IBM products. 
Ned Lautenbach 
General Manager 
Application Solutions 
R
egardless of the environment —the 
office, plant, laboratory, university or 
U.S. federal government —customers 
want solutions from IBM that make them 
more productive. 
Application Solutions' first priority is 
to understand the customer's business thor-
oughly and then devise a solution. That 
solution could come from IBM's broad range 
of information-handling products and 
services, or could be a unique system that 
combines IBM's offerings with those of 
other companies. 
For example, IBM led an industry team 
that won a $3.5 billion contract to modern-
ize the U.S. air traffic control system 
nationwide. Developing, deploying and 
servicing this Advanced Automation System 
(AAS) for the Federal Aviation Administra-
tion will be one of the largest projects ever 
undertaken by IBM. AAS has many unique 
requirements, but the lessons learned in cre-
ating such an advanced system can be 
applied to the needs of complex, commer-
cial enterprises, too. 
The individual user represents the 
other end of the customer spectrum. 
Here, Application Solutions also is busy 
fulfilling needs. For anyone working at a 
terminal, an application program can often 
be the part of the system that is most im-
portant to getting the job done. Application 
Solutions is rapidly expanding the number 
of programs that are available from IBM, 
or from other companies that provide soft-
ware to run with IBM equipment. This line 
of business assists software development 
companies through technical seminars 
and guidance to make it easier for them to 
create new solutions for IBM customers. 
In addition, consulting services are 
offered to help organizations define their 
information-handling requirements and 
determine how computing technology can 
aid them in meeting their goals. The plans 
that are prepared demonstrate IBM's commit-
ment to a partnership with customers. 
Finally, the industry marketing units 
and the market development organizations 
within Application Solutions work with 
enterprises to identify new opportunities for 
applying information technology. The 
increase in multinational financial transac-
tions, computer-integrated manufacturing 
and the use of image processing are examples 
of areas where Application Solutions is 
creating state-of-the-art systems that lead 
the industry. 
In all these areas, Application Solutions 
puts the customers' needs first. This line 
of business marshals IBM's uniquely broad 
resources and skill base to put information-
handling solutions at the customers' disposal. 
NBC is using a two-way satellite communications 
system to improve communications with affiliated 
stations. The satellite system features two IBM 
Application System/400 computers at its hub. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
Programming Systems 
Programming Systems is 
responsible for development of 
data management software, 
programming languages and 
application development 
software. The line of business 
also is responsible for the 
development and implemen-
tation of Systems Application 
Architecture. 
Earl Wheeler 
General Manager 
Programming Systems 
C
ustomers need rapid access to 
data and applications no matter 
where they are stored within their 
networks.They also want to be able to call 
up that information in a uniform fashion on 
all their equipment. Systems Application 
Architecture™ (SAA) ensures that applica-
tion software is consistent so that it can be 
run on different systems. 
SAA is part of IBM's ongoing commit-
ment to software leadership in the industry. 
Programming Systems ensures it is imple-
mented across IBM's product line. 
SAA development efforts are concen-
trated on three basic customer requirements. 
First, users want a uniform view of applica-
tions across multiple systems. Second, appli-
cation program interfaces —incluciing tools, 
languages and services —should be consis-
tent in all environments. Finally, standards 
should be consistent to facilitate the exchange 
of applications across different systems. 
Under SAA, applications written for one 
computer can be shifted without difficulty 
to a different system and run efficiently. 
Since the Programming Systems line of 
business was formed, two new SAA-sup-
ported operating systems —Operating Sys-
tem/2 (OS/2)™ and Operating System/^oo 
(OS/i-oo)™ — were introduced, and new 
versions of COBOL were shipped. In June, an 
SAA-supported relational data base was 
announced for the Application System/^oo!" 
A new version of DATABASE 2 (DB2™), 
one of IBM's relational data base manage-
ment systems, also was introduced. This 
version provides customers with advanced 
levels of data security while executing 
50 percent more work than the earlier version. 
The company also agreed to license 
selected application development and expert 
system technologies from Transform Logic 
Corporation of Scottsdale, Arizona. IBM 
will use the technology to enhance Cross 
System Product (CSP), a software tool cus-
tomers can use to create application pro-
grams under SAA. For those customers who 
want to write their own computer code, 
software like CSP substantially speeds up 
program development cycles. 
Programming Systems will continue to 
enhance SAA and ensure that it is uniformly 
and efficiently implemented across the IBM 
product line, giving the customer the 
benefits of reduced software development 
time and expense. 
A joint development effort involving Bankers 
Trust Company and IBM gives the bank's cor-
porate customers greater access to theirfinancial 
records through IBM personal systems linked 
to the bank's information systems. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
IBM's New Look 
Communication Systems 
Communication Systems is 
responsible for IBM's communica-
tions products, including con-
trollers, modems, connectivity and 
network management soft-
ware, and for Systems Network 
Architecture. The line of business 
also oversees IBM Information 
Network services, as well as 
internal telecommunications 
in the U.S. 
Ellen Hancock 
General Manager 
Communication Systems 
C
ustomers must be able to manage 
and distribute information through 
all levels of their business in a 
timely, reliable and cost-efficient manner. 
Ensuring that customers have the tools 
to do this is the mission of the Communica-
tion Systems line of business. 
Communication Systems provides the 
products that enable systems to com-
municate with each other and share infor-
mation and applications. The line of business 
also produces many telecommunications 
devices designed to speed the flow of 
information through networks. 
Controllers, for example, provide an 
efficient means of managing and distribut-
ing data among processors and peripherals. 
The IBM 3745, a high-availability, high-
performance communications controller, 
features twice as many channels as earlier 
models, vastly increasing the system's 
capacity and flexibility. 
Among the software products intro-
duced in 1988 were several advanced connec-
tivity offerings, including three new Open 
Systems Interconnection (OSI) products. 
They make it easier for computers operating 
in networks containing several manu-
facturers' equipment to communicate with 
each other and share information. 
IBM continued to enhance Systems 
Network Architecture (SNA) in 1988. SNA 
provides the rules and structure that 
enable users to establish and manage infor-
mation networks. 
Network management software like 
NetView™ and NetView/PC™ enables 
customers to manage global networks effi-
ciently from a central site and provides 
the channels for communication between 
IBM and non-IBM information products. 
Enhancements to IBM NetView, for example, 
assist customers in automating many 
aspects of their network operations. A new 
version of NetView/PC uses the acivanced 
Micro Channel™ Architecture of the 
Personal System/2® to enable NetView 
to function more effectively during periods 
of intense network activity. NetView/PC 
allows the customer to analyze problems 
and take action more quickly. 
IBM Token-Ring networks permit 
groups of personal computers and processors 
to share information, files and printers. 
Representatives of IBM and an independent 
consulting firm are working with the staff of the 
Rheinische Post to install an electronic page-
layout system at the newspaper. The system is part 
of an integrated approach for automating the 
DiXsseldorf newspaper's operations. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
A computer-aided dispatch system used by the 
Baltimore police speeds handling of emergency calls. 
The system, which features a high-availability 
IBM computer, verifies the caller's address and 
determines which patrol car should respond. 
IBM strengthened its support of local 
area network (LAN) environments, announc-
ing new high-speed LAN products that 
enable customers to handle advanced applica-
tions and communicate more eftectively. 
Token-Ring enhancements quadruple the 
speed at which a LAN can handle infor-
mation. This speed is made possible by the 
industry's first one-micron, combined 
analog/digital chip. 
The IBM Information Network 
ofters customers a single worldwide network 
connection to communicate with other 
companies and organizations, improving 
both efficiency and productivity. Network 
services include electronic mail and 
data interchanges such as purchase orders 
and invoices. Now offered in more than 
70 countries, including the U.S., Canada, 
Japan and countries throughout Europe, 
IBM's Information Network has become one 
of the industry's premier value-added net-
works, offering reliable around-the-clock 
national and international connectivity with 
a high level of data security. 
In December, IBM and Siemens announced 
an agreement under which ROLM Systems 
will become part of Siemens. Communication 
Systems will be responsible for coordinat-
ing telecommunications development efforts 
with ROLM Systems. A marketing and 
services company— ROLM —also was estab-
lished. It will be jointly owned by IBM 
and Siemens. ROLM will market voice tele-
communications products in the United 
States. In addition, IBM subsidiaries will 
market the 9750 Business Communications 
System in Canada, Hong Kong, Japan 
and other countries, and Siemens-manufac-
tured PBX products in Europe.This new 
arrangement strengthens IBM's offerings 
to its customers. 
IBM's success in the rapidly growing 
telecommunications market rests on increased 
connectivity, including linking IBM equip-
ment to that of other vendors. Because 
customers are building increasingly large and 
complex networks, IBM is working with 
industry-wide groups and government agen-
cies to help formulate international standards. 
The intent of these efforts is to ensure 
IBM continues to be a superior supplier in the 
worldwide telecommunications marketplace. 
Steelcase Inc., a manufacturer of office furniture 
in Grand Rapids, Michigan, employs a sophisticated 
network of IBM products to link its plants, head-
quarters and development sites. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
IBM's New Look 
Enterprise Systems 
Efiterprise Systems is responsible 
for all of IBM's 
System/^jo 
products, including the company's 
most advanced processors and 
their operating systems and 
storage subsystems. System/^jo 
processors include the industry's 
most powerful general-purpose 
computer, as well as IBM's 
supercomputer offering. Enter-
prise Systems also produces 
IBM's high-volume 
printers 
and 
software products. 
Carl Conti 
General Manager 
Enterprise Systems 
C
ustomers today are calling upon 
Enterprise Systems' family 
of System/370™ products to handle 
increasingly complex tasks such as managing 
global networks consisting of thousands 
of terminals, rapid processing of millions of 
transactions, and manipulating very large 
data bases.These systems provide IBM's great-
est information-handling capabilities, offer-
ing vast amounts of storage capacity, advanced 
programming and extensive application 
libraries to help meet customers' needs. 
At the top of the System/370 product 
line is the IBM Enterprise System/3090™S 
family of computers. Announced in July, 
these processors provide the largest span of 
application processing power available today. 
In addition, they establish a platform for 
developing solutions to meet very broad 
information processing requirements. 
The S series also offers customers the 
flexibility to easily upgrade smaller processors 
into more powerful models as customers' 
needs grow. 
IBM's mid-sized System/370 offerings 
consist of the widely used IBM £8/^381™ 
series, which is often used for distributed data 
processing, or as a smaller stand-alone system. 
The entry point into the System/370 
line is the IBM Enterprise System/9370™ 
Designed for customers who need the power 
of a mainframe in a compact processor, 
the ES/9370™ allows the advantages of the 
System/370 family to be distributed to 
an office environment. 
The ES/9370 was strengthened in 1988 
with the debut of three new models offering 
improved price/performance when com-
pared with earlier models. The number of 
applications available with the ES/9370 also 
Contel Corporation, an Atlanta-based communi-
cations company, manages its domestic telephone
and communications services using applications 
run on a network of IBM computers. 
increased substantially during the year. 
A range of powerful operating systems 
can be run on these System/370 processors. 
Multiple Virtual Storage (MVS) is the pre-
mier operating environment for IBM's largest 
and most complex systems, especially 
where maximum performance is required. 
Virtual Machine (VM) is IBM's most widely 
used operating system for developing new 
software applications. In addition, these sys-
tems can run the popular Virtual Storage 
Extended (VSE) and Transaction Processing 
Facility, commonly used in high-volume 
applications such as airline reservation 
systems. IBM also will offer AIX/370, IBM's 
version of the UNIX® operating system. 
The System/370 family, initially introduced 
in 1970, continues to evolve, enabling 
customers to add new function and power, 


===== PAGE 24 =====
while protecting their investments in 
programming and applications. 
In 1988, IBM continued to add to the 
value of the System/370 line, announcing 
Enterprise Systems Architecture/370 
(ESA/37o)y" The most advanced architecture 
in the industry, ESA/370 provides customers 
with as much as 8,000 times more virtual 
storage than IBM's previous architecture. 
Also introduced were the MVS/ESA™ oper-
ating system and related software subsystems 
that enable customers to take advantage of 
the architecture to effectively handle 
ever-increasing amounts of information. 
In the engineering and scientific com-
puting arena, IBM introduced an enhanced 
vector facility for mathematically inten-
sive workloads.The vector facility increases 
the speed at which complex calculations 
Engineers at Parker Hannifin Corporation in 
Cleveland, Ohio, are using IBM processors and design 
software to produce precise motion control systems 
for the aerospace and automotive industries. 
ConAgra Poultry Company of El Dorado, 
Arkansas, coordinates its growing houses, feed 
mills, processing plants and distribution facilities 
with the aid of a network of IBM computers. 
can be done.The larger ES/3090 S models, 
for example, provide supercomputer perform-
ance when equipped with multiple vector 
facilities. IBM is the only company in the 
industry which is manufacturing supercom-
puters in volume. 
Enterprise Systems also produces 
the IBM 3380 Direct Access Storage Device, 
IBM 3990 Storage Control units and 
storage management software. These subsys-
tems enhance a processor's data-handling 
capabilities by providing added storage 
capacity, fast access times and high reliabil-
ity. System printers, including the new IBM 
6262 line printer, add a rapid and flexible 
means of generating output on paper. 
To further its efforts in supercomputers, 
IBM signed an agreement with Supercom-
puter Systems, Inc. (SSI) for the development 
of advanced computing systems. The goal 
is to achieve accelerated development of 
supercomputers, using IBM's and SSI's com-
bined strengths in high-performance 
technology and system design. 
The prospects for the growth of large 
processors remain strong because customers 
continue to search for ways to increase the 
power and flexibility of their systems. 
Demand for these systems also will be 
driven by the growth of networks. As per-
sonal systems and workstations are installed 
in more offices, schools and homes, they 
increasingly will be tied to networks in 
which central host computers act as the link 
to data bases and applications from all 
over the world. 
In addition, emerging technologies like 
image processing, which requires very 
large amounts of storage, and knowledge-
based systems, which codify the skills of 
human experts, will augment today's infor-
mation-handling systems. The processing 
power for these new capabilities will come 
from IBM's large systems. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
IBM's New Look 
Application Business Systems 
Application Business Systems 
is responsible for IBM's midrange 
processors and related software 
and operating systems, including 
the Application 
System/400, 
and for the IBM System/^6 and 
System/^8, which are the 
most widely used midrange proces-
sors in the industry. This 
line of business also develops 
storage devices for IBM's 
midrange and Personal System/2 
product families. 
Stephen Schwartz 
General Manager 
Application Business Systems 
M
idrange systems represent a sub-
stantial opportunity for growth for 
IBM. Estimates show that in the 
U.S. there are about 3 milhon estabUshments 
with information-handhng requirements 
that justify the purchase of a midrange 
computer.There are an additional 9 milhon 
projected establishments worldwicie. 
Many of the midrange systems sold each 
year are bought by large companies for 
use as departmental systems or as part of dis-
tributed configurations. However, about 
two-thirds of these systems are purchaseci by 
small- and intermediate-sized businesses. 
Their data processing requirements are 
growing dramatically —as much as 2.5 times 
faster than those of large enterprises. 
To address this emerging opportunity, 
the company introduced the IBM Applica-
tion Systern4-oo (AS/4oo) — one of the most 
extensive product development undertakings 
ever. More than 170,000 people around the 
world attended the announcement meetings. 
IBM and its Business Partners also 
unveiled more than 1,000 software packages 
for use with the AS/^00 on announcement 
day. These Business Partners included 
software developers who create and market 
new application programs authorized by 
IBM. IBM provides technical assistance and 
guidance to help them bring solutions to 
market faster. By the end of 1988, more 
than 4,000 software applications were avail-
able, enabling users to put the AS/4oo 
into operation quickly. 
These applications — many of them 
custom-tailored for specific industries — 
allow the AS/4oo family to help users in 
In Japan, Nippon Life Insurance Company's sales 
force uses the computing power of IBM systems 
and customized software to develop comprehensive
financial plans for its customers. 
such diverse fields as retailing, manufactur-
ing, finance, distribution, health, legal, 
transportation, insurance and education. 
The six new AS/4oo models and Operat-
ing System/4oo are designed to grow as 
users' requirements change. 
The AS/4oo's integrated relational data 
base means that users only have to learn one 
set of system functions or commands 
to manipulate and store data. In addition, the 
systems' advanced architecture assures cus-
tomers that their processor will be able to 
accommodate emerging hardware and soft-
ware technologies such as optical storage, 
expert systems, image processing, voice-data 
integration and advanced communications. 


===== PAGE 26 =====
The A S / 4 O O also makes use of the best 
features of two of IBM's most successful 
products: the IBM System/36, recognized 
for its ease of use and connectivity — and the 
System/38, acclaimed for its program 
development productivity. Both are recog-
nized in the industry for their excellent price/ 
performance and are perennially ranked 
at the top of customer satisfaction surveys. 
In June, enhancements to the entry-
level IBM System/36 Model 5363 doubled 
the memory and direct access storage, 
and increased the communications speed of 
earlier models.The 5363 also expanded 
local area network support for personal com-
puters and added optical file capability. 
The year also included two techno-
logical firsts for storage products. One was 
IBM's first thin-film media file, announced 
with the low-end AS/^00 system. The 
thin-film file permits users to store more 
information in much less space. In addi-
tion, the company began the industry's first 
volume shipments of 3^/2-inch disk files 
with a capacity of more than 100 million 
bytes of information. The 3y2-inch files 
are used with the Personal System/2. 
IBM's success in midrange products 
depends on the company's ability to deliver 
solutions. IBM and its Business Partners 
are committed to developing application solu-
tions faster than ever before for midrange 
products, putting processing power in the 
hands of customers without the need for 
extensive training and system start-up costs. 
IBM also plans to continue efforts to 
enhance the price/performance, connectiv-
ity and function of these popular and 
versatile processors. 
Walker Williams Lumber Company of Hatchechub-
bee, Alabama, has installed an IBM Application 
System/400 to help manage its accounting 
operations. Eventually the company plans to use 
the computer to analyze production data. 
Horizon Hobby Distributors, a wholesaler of 
radio-controlled products in Champaign, Illinois, 
uses an IBM Application System/400 to provide 
24-hour-a-day service to its customers. Hobby stores 
with personal computers can link into Horizon 
Hobby's computer via telephone to check prices and 
availability, and place orders. 


===== PAGE 27 =====
IBM's New Look 
Personal Systems 
Personal Systems is responsible 
for IBM's desktop systems, includ-
ing the IBM Personal System/2, 
the high-performance IBM RT 
workstation, and their operating 
systems software and supplies. 
This line of business also oversees 
typewriters, displays and IBM's 
printers for desktop and mid-
range systems. 
Richard Gerstner 
General Manager 
Personal Systems 
I
nformation has become a critical asset 
in today's business world. The abihty to 
access and manipulate data quickly 
and easily is essential to business managers 
and professionals at every level. Personal 
computers and workstation products put 
information on the desktop, greatly 
enhancing people's productivity. 
Growth in desktop computer products 
has been dramatic. In October, the company 
shipped its three-millionth Personal 
System/2 (PS/2®) to a customer in Australia, 
just 18 months after the PS/2 family was 
announced. 
More than half of all the PS/2s sold 
have the company's advanced Micro Channel 
Architecture. Micro Channel provides the 
pathway to move large amounts of data 
more efficiently than previous IBM personal 
computers, resulting in improved function 
and reliability 
IBM continued its efforts to make its per-
sonal computers more powerful and eas-
ier to use, and refreshed its Personal System/2 
family with seven new desktop models 
that allow business professionals to process 
and share large, complex applications faster 
and more easily than ever before. 
One of the new models, the PS/2 
Model 70 386, available in three configura-
tions, is now IBM's fastest PS/2. One version 
of this desktop model provides customers 
with up to 1V2 times faster system 
throughput, or program execution, than 
was available on IBM's previous top-of-
the-line PS/2 model. 
Greyhound Lines of Canada, Ltd., a Canadian 
bus company, has installed IBM Personal System/Is
in its offices to assist its busiest ticket agents. 
Supplied by IBM Canada and ComputerLand 
Alberta, the application captures ridership, desti-
nation and fare information as it generates tickets. 
IBM also introduced the Personal 
System/2 Model 50 z, which provides cus-
tomers with up to 35 percent better perfor-
mance than the earlier Model 50. It offers faster 
memory, as well as more and faster storage. 
With DOS, OS/2 and Advanced Interac-
tive Executive (AIX™), IBM has a multiple 
operating system strategy for its desktop 
computers that gives customers a choice of 
solutions for addressing their information-
handling needs. 
OS/2 is the company's flagship product 
for Systems Application Architecture. It 
offers users improved productivity and ease 
of use, and enables the system to run several 
different programs simultaneously. PS/2, 
along with OS/2, provides the company's SAA 
platform for desktop processing into the 
next decade. 
IBM shipped several software products 
that enhance the performance and flexibility 
of the PS/2 family OS/2 Extended Edition 


===== PAGE 28 =====
and OS/2 LAN server, for example, pro-
vide users with the abihty to communicate 
with other computers, manage vast amounts 
of data more easily, and share information 
across a local area network. In addition, IBM 
introduced Presentation Manager™ a rich 
graphical interface for OS/2 users. For entry 
level users, the PS/2's DOS operating system 
was made easier to use. 
AIX, IBM's version of the UNIX oper-
ating system, will be extended to the 
company's largest computers with AIX/370. 
With the PS/2, the IBM RT® system and 
System/370 versions, AIX will offer the 
broadest growth path in its class. IBM is a 
founding sponsor of the Open Software 
Foundation, formed to develop a standard 
operating system for customers. 
Peavey Electronics, a musical and^ sound 
equipment manufacturer in Meridian, Mississippi, 
relies on IBM systems and software to design 
and produce guitars and amplifiers, and market 
them around the world. 
When Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., opened its first 
hypermart in Garland, Texas, the company selected 
IBM RT systems to help manage the large amounts 
of data generated by the store. 
The RT system, IBM's Reduced Instruc-
tion Set Computer (RISC) technology 
workstation, is a full-function, 32-bit work-
station that can perform complex informa-
tion processing tasks that normally require 
much larger computers. It can be used for 
manufacturing tasks and for engineering/ 
scientific applications, as well as for a variety 
of business and administrative applications, 
including general business publishing, 
project management, accounting, financial 
analysis and data base management. 
IBM announced three new models of the 
RT system during 1988.These workstations 
offer up to 25 percent faster performance 
than previous RT models. 
Printers, typewriters and displays are 
other important elements of the Personal 
Systems product line. IBM offers the broadest 
range of printers in the industry. Personal 
Systems is responsible for printers ranging 
from small models for individual users and 
departments to midrange printers capable of 
producing thousands of pages of output 
per hour. IBM's newer typewriter models 
incorporate some of the functions of 
personal computers, while maintaining the 
typewriter's familiar look and feel. 
The potential of the desktop market will 
grow further as the performance, capacity 
and ease of use of personal systems and work-
stations continue to improve. IBM is strength-
ening its position as the unquestioned 
leader in personal computing and the vendor 
of choice for technology on the desktop. 
IBM Personal Systems will continue to 
enhance the performance and application of 
its desktop computers by offering a wide 
range of products to serve the diverse com-
puting needs of customers in all segments 
of the market. 


===== PAGE 29 =====
IBM's New Look 
Technology Products 
Technology Products is responsi-
ble for the worldwide develop-
me7it and U.S. manufacturing of 
logic and memory technology, 
and the electronic packaging used 
throughout the entire IBM 
product line. 
Patrick Toole 
General Manager 
Technology Products 
T
echnology Products provides IBM's 
manufacturing and development sites 
with leading-edge semiconductors 
and circuit packaging used in the company's 
information systems and products. 
Over the years, the company has pio-
neered many of the major advances in circuit 
technology.These have given IBM systems 
exceptional performance and reliability. 
During 1988, for example, the IBM 
plant in Burlington, Vermont, became the 
first in the industry to produce semicon-
ductor chips from eight-inch wafers.The 
larger wafer yields three times as many 
chips as the five-inch wafer that has become 
the industry standard. It provides nearly 
twice the yield of six-inch wafers. 
IBM was also the first company in the 
industry to use one-million-bit memory 
technology in high-end computer products. 
In 1988, the company started producing 
four-mil lion-bit memory chips and began 
fabricating a i6-million-bit chip. 
Advances in logic have been as impressive 
and include high-performance chips in 
IBM's Enterprise System/3090 S processors 
that are four times denser and operate twice 
as fast as their predecessors. 
Significant advances are ahead. The 
Advanced Technology Center under con-
struction in East Fishkill, New York, will 
explore innovative techniques for designing 
and manufacturing the next generation of 
microchips at IBM's semiconductor facilities 
around the world. The center also will 
continue investigations into advanced 
packaging design. 
The trencis in microelectronics are clear 
— chip technology will continue to become 
faster, denser and smaller. Keeping IBM at 
the technological forefront of the industry is 
the responsibility of this line of business. 
IBM's advanced semiconductors make it 
possible to put significantly more power and 
function in smaller processors. Similarly, 
these advances in technology also are mak-
ing computing power more aftbrdable to 
more customers. 
Employees at IBM's Burlington, Vermont, manu-
facturing facility prepare eight-inch wafers 
containing one-million-bit chips used extensively 
in IBM products. 


===== PAGE 30 =====
Other Organizations 
I
n addition to its United States and World 
Trade organizations, IBM maintains a 
Research Division whicli focuses on basic 
research and de\'elopment of technologies 
of long-range importance to the company. 
IBM also operates IBM Credit Corporation and 
participates in Prodigy Services Company 
in partnership with Sears, Roebuck and Co. 
Research Division 
Scientists at IBM's research laboratories 
made several important advances in semi-
conductor technology during 1988.The 
researchers tested the world's smallest and 
fastest silicon circuits, made from parts 
that arc a tenth of a micron (one thousand 
times smaller than the width of a human 
hair) and able to switch on or off 75 billion 
times per second. 
Later in the year, researchers extended 
their work in miniaturization to CMOS 
(Complementary Metal Oxide Semicon-
ductor) technology by developing circuits 
made from parts only a quarter-micron wide. 
CMOS is predicted to be the dominant 
semiconductor technology into the 
next decade. 
IBM researchers also were the first 
to use X-ray lithography to make ad\'anced 
computer chips. The successful fabrication 
of these experimental semiconductors opens 
the tioor to future memory chips holding 
more than 64 million bits of information. 
Scientists at the Almaden Research 
Center set another record in high-tempera-
ture superconductivity. The group demon-
strated zero electrical resistance at 125 degrees 
Kelvin (minus 234 degrees Fahrenheit) 
with a material containing the elements thal-
lium, barium, calcium, copper and oxygen. 
IBM researchers and the University 
of California, Davis, are collaborating on the 
development of a state-of-the-art robotic 
system that may someday assist surgeons in 
replacing natural hip joints with metal 
and plastic implants.The robotic system may 
help ensure a more precise fit and accurate 
alignment of implants. 
IBM Credit Corporation 
IBM Credit Corporation, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of IBM, primarily offers financing 
of IBM products to customers through 
flexible offerings at competitive rates. In 
1988, IBM Credit introduced several new 
innovative programs. 
One of these, the Total System Lease, 
was developed to support IBM's mid range 
product line. It enables customers to finance 
their entire data processing needs — hard-
ware, software and maintenance — under one 
agreement for a single monthly payment. 
The lease includes several end-of-lease 
options, including purchase of equipment, 
lease extensions or return of equipment. 
The new Flexible Exchange Lease 
allows customers to exercise several options 
to exchange equipment under lease 
for new IBM technology in the future. For 
example, companies with an IBM 3090 
on a five-year Flexible Exchange Lease may 
replace it with new IBM technology at a 
pre-specified charge after 36 months. 
Prodigy 
Prodigy Services Company, formerly 
TRINTEX, is a partnership between IBM and 
Sears, Roebuck and Co. The PRODIGY^" 
interactive personal service allows families 
with personal computers to obtain 
news, sports and weather information; send 
electronic mail, and check stock quotes. 
The PRODIGY service brings people with personal 
computers a broad range of services including news, 
travel reservations and electronic mail and shopping. 
Members also can conduct a wide variety of 
transactions, including banking, making 
airline reservations, buying and selling secu-
rities, and ordering merchandise and 
services from dozens of national marketers. 
The PRODIGY service is distinguished 
from traditional "videotex" services 
by its flat monthly fee, its simplicity, and its 
consumer - marketing focus. 
In 1988, the PRODIGY service was 
introduced in Atlanta, San Francisco, San 
Jose, Los Angeles, San Diego, Santa Barbara, 
Sacramento and most of Connecticut. 
In 1989, it will become available in other 
major metropolitan areas across the U.S. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
I
n keeping with its commitment to 
support the countries and communities 
where its employees Hve and work, IBM 
gave more than $135 milHon in 1988 to social, 
cultural and educational programs through-
out the world. Contributions included 
cash, equipment and other resources. 
IBM's affirmative action programs for 
employment and advancement continued in 
1988. Of the nearly 7,300 people hired in the 
U.S. during the year, about 36 percent were 
women and 24 percent were minorities. At 
the end of the year, women held 20 percent 
of U.S. management positions and minorities 
held 12 percent. Women held nearly 11 
percent of the senior management positions, 
while minorities held almost 9 percent. 
The company did business with over 800 
minority-owned firms in 1988, purchasing 
goods and services in excess of $155 million. 
IBM also purchased goods and services 
worth over $90 million from some 1,000 
firms owned primarily by women and 
over $25 million from more than 70 compa-
nies whose work force is comprised of 
primarily handicapped workers. 
1988 marked the 20th anniversary of 
the IBM US. job training program. Designed 
to teach basic data- and word-processing 
skills, the program has prepared nearly 20,000 
U.S. graduates since its inception. IBM 
also supports job training programs in many 
other countries where it does business. 
In January 1988, the company intro-
duced the IBM Screen Reader™ designed 
to give blind and visually impaired computer 
users greater access to the IBM Personal 
System/2. The product, which combines 
hardware and software, allows users to hear 
text as it is displayed on the screen. Capable 
of monitoring up to 20 areas of the screen, 
the product reads aloud changes as they 
occur, and allows the user to control the pace 
and manner in which text is spoken. The 
Screen Reader is first in the new IBM Inde-
pendence Series™ of products for 
customers with special needs. 
The United Nations Environment Pro-
gram (UNEP) received equipment worth 
$6.5 million from the IBM World Trade 
Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation. 
The equipment is being used for UNEP's 
Global Resource Information Database, 
which channels environmental data from a 
variety of sources to people who investi-
gate the health of the planet. The data 
includes information on climate and atmo-
sphere, natural resources and pollutants. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) 
of the United Nations received a $ i .5 million 
grant of equipment, software and support 
for its efforts against AIDS. WHO will use the 
donation to link the Global Program on 
AIDS with its six regional agencies, the 34 
collaborating centers on AIDS, other United 
Nations agencies and various scientific 
institutions around the world.The equip-
ment also will assist in the creation of an 
AIDS data base, office systems support and 
in-house publishing. 
To improve child health in Latin America, 
the IBM World Trade Americas Group 
made a grant to the International Child 
Health Foundation and established a 
partnership with the Instituto de Investi-
gacion Nutricional in Lima, Peru.The objec-
tive is to train public health experts in the use 
of IBM computers to coordinate diarrheal 
disease programs, and to provide health edu-
cation for parents in poor and rural areas. 
IBM is providing cash, computers, software 
and systems engineering expertise. 
IBM entered into joint projects to advance 
technology and aid institutions of learning. 
In one such program, IBM and the 
University of California at Los Angeles em-
barked on a two-year $5 million project to 
develop an advanced network to integrate 
j l l i p p p ^ ^ 
Office workers in Singapore receive training in 
basic computer applications at IBM's Information 
Technology Training Center. The IT program 
was established by IBM Singapore and the Nationa
Productivity Board. 
UCLA's diverse multivendor computer 
systems and functions. Ultimately, the new 
campus network will extend to 10,000 work-
stations and all buildings on campus. 
In the Asia/Pacific Group, IBM Japan's 
Braille Forum project has become a model 
for using information technology to 
assist the handicapped. Researchers at the 
IBM Tokyo Research Laboratory, including 
a blind researcher, have developed a 
software system which converts English or 
Japanese katakana characters into braille 
far faster than previously existing systems. 
Because the new system also permits 
shared editing and data base facilities, 
translation work is made even more efficient. 
Thus, translation of a book that previously 
might have taken several months can now be 
done in a matter of weeks. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the 
financial information presented in this Annual Report 
rests with IBM management. The accompanying financial 
statements have been prepared in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles, applying certain 
estimates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system of internal 
accounting control. It consists, in part, of organizational 
arrangements with clearly defined lines of responsibility 
and delegation of authority. We believe this system 
provides reasonable assurance that transactions are exe-
cuted in accordance with management authorization, 
and that they are appropriately recorded, in order to per-
mit preparation of financial statements in conformity 
with generally accepted accounting principles and to 
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain accountability 
of assets. An important element of the system is an 
ongoing internal audit program. 
To assure the effective administration of internal 
control, we carefully select and train our employees, 
develop and disseminate written policies and procedures, 
provide appropriate communication channels, and foster 
an environment conducive to the effective functioning 
of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company 
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the 
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into 
numerous languages, are distributed to employees 
throughout the world, and reemphasized through inter-
nal programs to assure that they are understood 
and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accountants, 
are retained to examine IBM's financial statements. Their 
accompanying report is based on an examination con-
ducted in accordance with generally accepted auditing 
standards, including a review of internal accounting con-
trols and tests of accounting procedures and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is 
composed solely of outside directors, and is responsible 
for recommending to the Board the independent 
accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, sub-
ject to stockholder approval. The Audit Committee meets 
periodically and privately with the independent accoun-
tants, with our internal auditors, as well as with IBM 
management, to review accounting, auditing, internal 
accounting controls and financial reporting matters. 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 
Frank A. Metz, Jr 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance & Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial 
statements, appearing on pages 34, 35, 36, 38 and 
42 through 52, present fairly in all material respects the 
financial position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31,1988 
and 1987, and the results of their operations and their cash 
flows for each of the three years in the period ended 
December 31,1988, in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles. These financial statements are the 
responsibility of the company's management; our respon-
sibility is to express an opinion thereon based on our 
audits. We conducted our audits in accordance with gen-
erally accepted auditing standards which require that 
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assur-
ance about whether such statements are free of material 
misstatement. An audit includes examining, on a test 
January 31,1989 
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures 
in the financial statements, assessing the accounting 
principles used and significant estimates made by manage-
ment, and evaluating the overall financial statement 
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reason-
able basis for the opinion expressed above. 
As discussed in the note on Accounting and Report-
ing Changes on page 44, the company changed its methods 
of accounting for income taxes and certain wholly owned 
subsidiaries in 1988. We concur with these changes. 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
New York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 33 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Revenue: 
Sales 
Support services 
Software 
Rentals and financing 
Cost: 
Sales 
Support services 
Software 
Rentals and financing 
Gross Profit 
Operating Expenses: 
Selling, general and administrative 
Research, development and engineering 
Operating Income 
Other Income, principally interest 
Interest Expense 
Earnings before Income Taxes 
Provision for Income Taxes 
Net Earnings before Cumulative Effect of Accounting Change . 
Cumulative Effect of Change in Accounting for Income Taxes . 
Net Earnings 
Per share amounts: 
Before cumulative effect of accounting change 
Cumulative effect of change in accounting 
for income taxes 
Net earnings 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1988 — 5 9 2 , 4 4 4 , 4 0 9 
1987—602,961,63 I 
1986—612,838,531 
1988 
I 9 8 7 t 
I986t 
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 44. 
The notes on pages 42 through 52 are an integral part of this statement. 
39,959 
9,285 
7,927 
2,510 
17,499 
4,971 
2,110 
1,068 
19,362 
5,925 
$ 59,681 
25,648 
34,033 
25,287 
8,746 
996 
709 
9,033 
3,542 
5,491 
315 
$ 
5,806 
$ 
9.27 
^ 
$ 
9.80 
36,424 
9,297 
6,836 
2,699 
17,368 
4,686 
1,957 
1 , 1 1 1 
16,540 
5,434 
$ 55,256 
25,122 
30,134 
21,974 
8,160 
955 
485 
8,630 
3,372 
5,258 
$ 
5,258 
$ 
8.72 
$ 
8.72 
34,323 
8,787 
5,514 
3,536 
16,220 
4,060 
1,519 
1,354 
15,550 
5,221 
$ 52,160 
23,153 
29,007 
20,771 
8,236 
646 
475 
8,407 
3,618 
4,789 
$ 
4,789 
$ 
7.81 
$ 
7.81 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
Assets 
Current Assets: 
Cash 
Cash equivalents 
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 
Notes and accounts receivable—trade, net of allowances 
Other accounts receivable 
Inventories 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Investments and Other Assets: 
Software, less accumulated amortization (1988, $3,783; 1987, $3,013) 
Investments and sundry assets 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
Current Liabilities: 
Taxes 
Loans payable 
Accounts payable 
Compensation and benefits 
Deferred income 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
Long-Term Debt 
Other Liabilities 
Deferred Income Taxes 
Stockholders' Equity: 
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1988—590,037,328; 1987—597,326,059 
Retained earnings 
Translation adjustments 
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 
Shares: 1988—296,820; 1987—274,315 
1988 
I 9 8 7 t 
fRestated. See accounting change note on page 44. 
The notes on pages 42 through 52 are an integral part of this statement. 
$ 
1,072 
3,103 
1,948 
17,086 
1 , 0 1 4 
9,565 
1,555 
44,882 
21,456 
2,809 
11,459 
$ 35,343 
23,426 
14,268 
$ 73,037 
2,225 
4,862 
2,702 
2,624 
844 
4,130 
17,387 
8,518 
3,000 
4,623 
6,442 
3 1 , 1 8 6 
1 , 9 1 7 
39,545 
36 
39,509 
73,037 
782 
2,685 
3,954 
15,649 
1,092 
8,659 
1,548 
43,075 
20,108 
2,384 
10,309 
$ 34,369 
22,967 
12,693 
$ 70,029 
2,574 
3,971 
2,632 
2,632 
553 
3,577 
$ 15,939 
7,108 
3,045 
5,674 
6,417 
29,016 
2,865 
38,298 
35 
38,263 
$ 70,029 


===== PAGE 35 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
Cash Flow from Operating Activities: 
i> 
Net earnings 
Adjustments to reconcile net income to cash 
provided from operating activities: 
Depreciation 
Amortization of software 
(Gain) on disposition of investment assets 
(Increase) in accounts receivable 
(Increase) decrease in inventory 
(Increase) in other assets 
Increase (decrease) in accounts payable 
Increase in other liabilities 
Net cash provided from operating activities 
Cash Flow from Investing Activities: 
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property . . 
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines 
and other property 
Investment in software 
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments 
Proceeds from marketable securities and other investments. 
Net cash used in investing activities 
Cash Flow from Financing Activities: 
Proceeds from new debt 
Payments to settle debt 
Short-term borrowings less than 90 days—net 
Proceeds from employee stock plans—net 
Payments to purchase and retire capital stock 
Cash dividends paid 
Net cash used in financing activities 
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes 
on Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January 1 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31 
1 9 8 7 
$ 
5,806 
3,871 
893 
(133) 
(2,322) 
(1,232) 
(1,587) 
265 
519 
(5,390) 
409 
(1,318) 
(2,555) 
4,734 
4,540 
(3,007) 
1,028 
(11) 
(992) 
(2,609) 
$6,080 
(4,120) 
(1,051) 
(201) 
708 
3,467 
$ 4 , 1 7 5 
$ 
5,258 
3,534 
863 
(128) 
(2,542) 
129 
(808) 
300 
134 
(4,195) 
353 
(1,048) 
(4,815) 
5,900 
2,963 
(1,980) 
(399) 
105 
(1,425) 
(2,654) 
$ 6,740 
(3,805) 
(3,390) 
330 
(125) 
3,592 
$ 3,467 
$ 4,789 
3,331 
672 
(68) 
(275) 
1,120 
(1,626) 
(394) 
1,690 
(4,639) 
672 
(907) 
(7,239) 
5,362 
3,069 
(2,340) 
150 
23 
(1,488) 
(2,698) 
$9,239 
(6,751) 
(3,284) 
234 
(562) 
4,154 
$3,592 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Summary of Cash Inflows 
(Dollars in billions) 
Summary of Cash Outflows 
(Dollars in billions) 
Collections from 
Customers and 
Others $57.1 
Proceeds from 
Disposition of Investment 
Assets $5.1 
Proceeds from 
Debt $5.5 
A U.y-- 
- i * » > 
f^'.:'*•• 
S 
J
J
,
f
t
-
-
/
-
.
-
- 
V - - . J 
•• 
.
, 
» 
s 
,, J. 
. 
* 
+ * iU -n i - 1 t J. 
1 
' * . ' " { • 
I - • V 
^
^ 
* 
w> 
r i ^ ; , 
fman^mg 
^ 
i"." • ' 
• • • • * - 
- - t... " 
V'.-f.« 
• « 
^ 
' f'-.^-i ' W f e '•jf 
^Includes Effect of Exchange Rate Changes 
on Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Payments to Suppliers and 
Employees $46.4''' 
Interest Paid $1.4 
Income Taxes Paid $3.4 
Payments for Plant, 
Rental Machines and 
Other Property $5.4 
Investments in Software $1.3 
Purchase of 
Marketable Securities and 
Other Investments $2.5 
Payments to Settle Debt $3.0 
Capital Stock Purchased 
and Retired $1.0 
Cash Dividends $ 2.6 
Investment in Plant and Other Property 
Continuous upgrading of our facilities is essential 
to achieve our objectives to maintain techno-
logical leadership, improve productivity and meet 
customer demand. Over the past five years, 
the company has invested approximately $24 billion 
in land, buildings, machinery and equipment, 
and internally installed IBM manufactured equip-
ment. These recent additions represent 57 percent 
of the gross asset value of plant and other 
property as of December 31,1988. 
$27,000 
(In millions) 
2 4 , 0 0 0 
2 1 , 0 0 0 
1 8 , 0 0 0 
1 5 , 0 0 0 
1 2 , 0 0 0 
9 , 0 0 0 
6 , 0 0 0 
11 
1 1 1 
?,ooo 
i i 
o 
1984 
'85 
86 
-87 
1988 
Annual I I Cumulative for five-year period 


===== PAGE 37 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
1986 Stockholders'Equity, January 1,1986 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(1,965,505 shares) 
Purchases (7,033,465 shares) and sales 
(6,665,471 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(11,094,900 shares) 
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . 
Other (principally tax reductions—employee plans) 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1986 
1987 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(1,766,488 shares) 
Purchases (6,275,092 shares) and sales 
(6,692,196 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(11,252,000 shares) 
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . 
Conversion of debentures (197,203 s h a r e s ) . . . . 
Tax reductions—employee plans 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1987 
1988 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(1,321,697 shares) 
Purchases (8,140,101 shares) and sales 
(8,117,596 shares) of treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder plans—net . . . 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(8,611,396 shares) 
Tax reductions—employee plans 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1988 
Capital Stock 
Retained 
Earnings 
Translation 
Adjustments 
Treasury Stock 
Total 
$ 6,267 
141 
(115) 
(17) 
45 
6,321 
139 
(120) 
17 
30 
30 
6,417 
92 
(93) 
26 
$ 6,442 
$ 27,234 
4,789 
(2,698) 
(118) 
(1,373) 
27,834 
5,258 
(2,654) 
(117) 
(1,305) 
29,016 
5,806 
(2,609) 
(128) 
(899) 
$ 3 1 , 1 8 6 
$ (1,466) 
1,773 
307 
2,558 
2,865 
(948) 
1,917 
$(45) 
(43) 
(88) 
53 
(35) 
(1) 
$(36) 
31,990 
4,789 
(2,698) 
141 
(161) 
(1,488) 
(17) 
45 
1,773 
34,374 
5,258 
(2,654) 
139 
(64) 
(1,425) 
17 
30 
30 
2,558 
38,263 
5,806 
(2,609) 
92 
(129) 
(992) 
26 
(948) 
39,509 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Results of Operations 
In 1988, the company continued its efforts 
to improve its responsiveness, sharpen its compe-
titiveness, and increase its efficiency. As a 
result, IBM's business results have continued to 
improve and management is pleased with the 
positive customer response to the company's new 
products and services. 
Worldwide revenue increased 8.0 percent in 
1988 to $59.7 billion, following an increase of 
5.9 percent in 1987. Non-U.S. operations produced 
strong business growth, with revenue increas-
ing by 15.5 percent to $34.4 billion while revenue 
from U.S. operations declined slightly to 
$25.3 billion. Non-US. operations accounted for 
57.6 percent of total revenue in 1988 compared 
with 53.8 percent in 1987 and 50.3 percent in 1986. 
The Asia/Pacific area was 14.8 percent of 
total revenue, and showed the highest rate of in-
crease in revenue outside the United States 
at 27.7 percent. Revenue from the Europe/Middle 
East/Africa area, which grew 10.3 percent 
from 1987, amounted to $21.6 billion in 1988 
which represents 36.2 percent of total worldwide 
revenue. The Americas area also enjoyed signifi-
cant revenue growth in 1988 with a 21.0 percent 
increase and now represents 6.6 percent of 
total revenue. 
Net earnings for the year were $5.8 billion, 
up 10.4 percent. These earnings reflect the imple-
mentation in 1988 of Statement of Financial 
Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96, "Accounting for 
Income Taxes." Before the cumulative effect of 
this accounting change, net earnings from non-
US. operations amounted to $4.1 billion, while 
net earnings from U.S. operations amounted to 
$ 1.4 billion. U.S. operations were impacted by 
the costs of the manufacturing and headquarters 
consolidations announced in June 1988. 
Revenue from sales was $40.0 billion, an in-
crease of 9.7 percent over 1987, after a 6.1 percent 
increase in 1987. Sales revenue remained the 
largest single category of revenue at 67.0 percent 
of total revenue. Software revenue continued to 
show strong performance although the rate 
of growth in 1988 was slower than the growth 
rate in 1987 and in 1986 due to product transitions. 
Revenue from support services was essentially 
flat year to year, although maintenance services 
revenue declined 4.5 percent to $73 billion. 
This decline was all in U.S. operations. Revenue 
from rentals and financing in 1988 was 7.0 percent 
lower than in 1987. Although financing revenue 
increased, this increase was more than offset by a 
continued decline in rental revenue. 
Information on industry segments and classes 
of similar products or services is presented on 
page 51. Revenue from processors increased 
8.5 percent in 1988 over 1987. This increase is 
attributable to the top-of-the-line 3090 system 
and the mid range Application System/i-oo.The 
3090 S family of computers announced in July 
1988 provides the largest span of application proc-
essing power available today and offers customers 
the flexibility to easily upgrade smaller processors 
into more powerful models as customers' needs 
grow Introduced in June 1988, the Application 
System/4oo provides solutions and growth paths 
for small and intermediate size businesses. This 
product is also attractive to larger businesses for 
use by departments and remote locations. Rev-
enue from peripherals increased 10.7 percent in 
1988 over 1987, following a 5.7 percent decline in 
1987. These changes are primarily driven by stor-
age products.The 1988 increase reflects the strong 
performance of the IBM 3380 storage device and 
the IBM 3990 storage controller. These subsys-
tems enhance a processor's data-handling capabil-
ities by providing added storage capacity and fast 
access times. Worldwide revenue from work-
stations increased 9.1 percent in 1988 over 1987 
despite a decline in U.S. operations. Revenue from 
personal computer processors grew worldwide, 
driven by the success of the Personal System/2. 
The growth in these processors in the U.S. 
was more than offset by declines in revenue of 
other equipment. 
Revenue 
$ 6 0 , 0 0 0 
(In millions) 
4 % 
5 5 , 0 0 0 
1 
7% 
5% 
5 0 , 0 0 0 
^ ^ 
1 
1 0 % 
1 2 % 
1 6 % 
4 5 , 0 0 0 
15% ^^ 1 
17% 
4 0 , 0 0 0 
7% 
1 
3 5 , 0 0 0 
1 4 % 
3 0 , 0 0 0 
6 7 % 
2 5 , 0 0 0 
6 6 % 
6 6 % 
2 0 , 0 0 0 
6 4 % 
68% 
1 5 , 0 0 0 
1 0 , 0 0 0 
5 , 0 0 0 
1984 
'85 
'86 
'87 
J Rentals and Financing 
{ S o f t w a r e 
Support Services 
Sales 


===== PAGE 39 =====
During 1988, gross profit increased 12.9 per-
cent to $34.0 billion, and the gross profit margin 
improved to 57.0 percent from 54.5 percent the 
previous year. The improvement in gross profit 
margins is due to the 3.9 percentage point 
increase in sales gross profit margin. This increase 
primarily results from continuing manufacturing 
cost efficiencies. Improvement in sales and total 
gross profit margins was evident in both the 
U.S. and non-U.S. operations. 
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
for 1988, as reported, showed an increase of 
17.1 percent over 1987. Decreases in general and 
administrative expenses were more than offset by 
added selling expense as the company continued 
to expand its field marketing staff to enhance 
its working relationships with customers. After 
removing the impact to U.S. operations of the 
charge for the previously announced consolida-
tions, IBM's selling, general and administrative 
expenses increased 11.8 percent in 1988 over 1987. 
The information industry continues to be 
marked by rapid change: in expanding markets 
and new opportunities, in the pace of innovation, 
and in ever-increasing competition. In this 
environment, investments in research, develop-
ment and engineering are a vital factor in 
ensuring a continuing flow of competitive prod-
ucts to the marketplace. In 1988, IBM invested 
$5.9 billion in this activity, bringing the total for 
the last five years to $25.5 billion. 
Interest expense increased 46.3 percent 
in 1988 over 1987, primarily as a result of 
government-mandated interest rate increases on 
short-term borrowings in subsidiaries whose 
economic environment is highly inflationary. The 
high interest rates in those operations are 
mitigated by the effects of inflation on the funds 
borrowed. Interest expense also increased because 
of higher borrowings and a smaller amount 
of interest expense being capitalized in 1988 ver-
sus 1987. 
The effective tax rate for 1988 of 39.2 
percent was essentially equal to that of 1987 and 
was positively impacted by the decline in the 
U.S. statutory tax rate from 40 percent to 
34 percent. However, it is anticipated that lower 
tax credits will increase the tax rate in 1989. 
For the quarter ended December 31,1988, 
worldwide net earnings were $2.3 billion, com-
pared with $2.1 billion for the same period in 1987, 
an increase of 12.4 percent. Fourth quarter revenue 
was $20.0 billion, compared with $ 18.3 billion 
for the 1987 period, an increase of 9.3 percent. 
IBM's fourth quarter results include an 
additional one-time charge of $270 million result-
ing from greater-than-forecast personnel depar-
tures associated with the successful manufacturing 
and headquarters consolidations. The total charge 
for the year was $870 million. Approximately 
6,500 employees have chosen to leave IBM. As a 
result of arbitration between the two companies, 
fourth quarter results also include a $220 million 
payment made by Fujitsu to IBM for past and 
continued use of IBM software. 
IBM implemented SFAS 96 in the second 
quarter of 1988, effective as of January i, 1988, 
changing the accounting for income taxes. 
A significant feature of the standard requires 
recorded deferred taxes to be adjusted for changes 
in tax rates. Under the previous standard, deferred 
taxes were provided at current tax rates and were 
not adjusted for subsequent changes in those 
rates. The cumulative effect of adopting SFAS 96 
for periods ending prior to January i, 1988 
amounted to a benefit of $315 million, which has 
been included in 1988 net earnings. Income taxes 
for 1987 and 1986 are not restated for this change. 
The company also implemented SFAS 94 
which required the consolidation of its wholly 
owned finance subsidiaries. These subsidiaries 
were previously accounted for by the equity 
method. Prior years' financial statements have 
been restated to reflect this change. Since the net 
earnings of these subsidiaries were previously 
included in other income, this change had no 
effect on net earnings. 
During 1988, IBM announced an agreement 
with Siemens AG to establish joint activities in the 
field of telecommunications, which is expected 
to expand the range of products and services offered 
to customers. Under the agreement, IBM's ROLM 
development and manufacturing operations will 
become part of Siemens Information Systems, 
Inc. A marketing and service company will be 
formed and jointly owned by IBM and Siemens. It 
is expected that the agreement, which is subject to 
regulatory approval, will be finalized in 1989. 
Consequently, there was no effect on 1988 results, 
and management does not expect a material 
effect on 1989 financial results. 
Also in 1988, IBM sold its copier sales and 
service operations to Eastman Kodak Company. 
Additionally, Science Research Associates, a 
wholly owned subsidiary which publishes educa-
tional materials, was sold to Maxwell Com-
munications Corporation. These actions, which 
will help to sharpen management's focus on 
IBM's core business, did not have a material effect 
on earnings for 1988. 
In response to a changing industry, manage-
ment began a major transformation of the 
company in 1985. This transformation is marked 
by a continual drive to become even more respon-
sive to customers and to produce the products 
and solutions they need more quickly, efficiently, 
and cost-effectively.These initiatives will continue 
in the future as the company moves to become 
even more market driven. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Financial Condition 
During 1988, IBM continued to make significant 
investments for the long term. 
In addition to the $5.9 billion expenditure 
for research, development and engineering, the 
company invested $4.4 billion in plant and 
other property. Over the past five years, IBM has 
invested approximately $24 billion in these assets 
(see graph on page 37). These investments in 
plant and other property have provided the com-
pany with the technology, capacity for growth 
and the highly automated facilities which allow it 
to compete effectively and to satisfy customers' 
needs for the very latest in information technology. 
IBM invested $1.3 billion in capitalized 
production costs of software products in 1988, 
bringing total investments in this activity to 
$4.9 billion over the last five years.The unamor-
tized portion of this investment amounted to 
$2.8 billion at the end of 1988. Software revenue 
for the year was $7.9 billion, up 16.0 percent from 
1987. Increasing investment in software products 
reflects management's view that this activity 
will continue the significant growth that has been 
experienced in recent years. 
At year-end 1988, IBM's long-term net invest-
ment in sales-type leases was $6.5 billion, an 
increase of 19.2 percent over 1987. These invest-
ments, which are the primary reason for the year-
to-year change in investments and sundry assets, 
reflect IBM's growing participation in the financ-
ing of products purchased by our customers. 
Working capital at year-end 1988 was 
$ 18.0 billion, a 2.6 percent decrease from the 
$18.4 billion at year-end 1987. Current assets 
increased $1.0 billion primarily due to increases 
in accounts receivable and inventories. The 
increase in accounts receivable is consistent with 
the higher levels of shipments in the fourth 
quarter of 1988 compared to the same period 
in 1987. Inventory growth is primarily in work in 
process and reflects customers' demand for 
newer products. These increases were partially 
offset by declines in marketable securities in 
non-US. operations. Current liabilities increased 
$ 1.4 billion, primarily as a result of increased 
short-term borrowings in non-U.S. subsidiaries. 
As mentioned previously, the adoption 
of SFAS 94 had no effect on IBM's net earnings. 
However, on the statement of financial position, 
the consolidation of IBM's wholly owned finance 
subsidiaries had the effect of increasing both 
assets and liabilities by approximately $7 billion; 
the assets being primarily term-lease agreements, 
and the liabilities primarily short- and long-
term debt. As a result, certain balance sheet ratios 
have increased: for instance, the long-term 
debt-to-equity ratio of 21.6 percent would have 
been 13.4 percent prior to consolidations. 
The consolidation should have no effect on 
IBM's AAA credit rating. 
During 1988, worldwide long-term debt 
increased by $ 1.4 billion, from a total of $7.1 
billion at year-end 1987 to $8.5 billion at year-end 
1988.The new long-term debt included a U.S. 
public debt offering of $ 500 million, and a num-
ber of non-U.S. borrowings directly related to 
the financing of customers' long-term leases of 
IBM equipment in IBM's non-U.S. operations. 
Deferred income taxes decreased $1.1 billion 
reflecting the lower U.S. federal income tax rates 
and the adoption of SFAS 96, including the 
classification changes required by that statement. 
In 1986 and 1987, IBM announced stock 
repurchase programs totaling 28.0 million shares 
at a cost of $3,550 million. These programs were 
completed in May 1988. In September 1988, 
IBM's Board of Directors authorized the company 
to purchase, from time to time, additional shares 
of its capital stock up to a total expenditure 
of $2 billion. As of December 31,1988, the com-
pany had purchased a total of approximately 
3.0 million shares at a cost of $355 million under 
this latest authorization. Shares purchased 
under these programs were retired. Also during 
1988, the company continued open-market 
acquisition of shares to meet most requirements 
of IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans. 
The combination of IBM's strong financial 
position and its skilled and dedicated employees 
underlies management's confidence in the future. 
Research, Development 
and Engineering Expenses 
$6,000 
(In millions) 
5,000 
4,000 
3,000 
2,000 
1,000 
1984 
'87 
1988 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of Consolidation: 
Translation of 
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
The consoHdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and 
its U. S. and non-U. S. subsidiary companies. Investments in joint ventures and other companies in which 
IBM has a 20 to 50 percent ownership are accounted for by the equity method. Investments of less than 20 percent 
are accounted for by the cost method. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S. 
dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S. 
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, invento-
ries and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. All 
other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and depreciation 
are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange 
prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are included in earnings. 
Revenue: 
Revenue is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, from software when the program 
is shipped or as monthly license fees accrue, from support services (primarily maintenance services) over the contractual 
period or as the services are performed, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and 
from financing at level rates of return over the term of the lease or receivable. 
Software: 
Depreciation: 
Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development. 
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally 
capitalized. The annual amortization of the capitalized amounts is the greater of the amount computed based on the 
estimated revenue distribution over the products' revenue-producing lives or the straight-line method, but not 
in excess of six years. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged against income as incurred or when 
related revenue is recognized, whichever occurs first. 
Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using 
the straight-line method. 
Goodwill: 
The excess of the cost over the fair value of the net assets of purchased businesses is recorded as goodwill and amortized 
on a straight-line basis over 20 years. 
Retirement Plans and 
Other Postretirement Benefits: 
Selling Expenses: 
Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting frorrr improvements in 
the plans are amortized over the average remaining service period of employees expected to receive benefits. 
Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued when the employee retires. 
Selling expenses are charged against income as incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Inventories: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of 
temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and such 
amounts recognized for tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. 
In years prior to 1988, deferred taxes were accounted for at the tax rates in effect when the asset or liability was recorded, 
with no adjustment for subsequent rate changes. Deferred investment tax credits are being amortized as a reduction 
of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property. 
Raw materials, finished goods and work in process are stated at the lower of average cost or market. 
Cash Equivalents: 
All highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at date of purchase are considered to be 
cash equivalents. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
N o n - U . S . O p e r a t i o n s 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
1987 
1986 
At end of year: 
N e t assets employed 
Current assets 
$ 
2 0 , 0 0 5 
$ 
2 0 , 7 7 7 
$ 
1 5 , 8 1 3 
Current liabilities 
1 1 , 4 8 1 
9 , 8 1 8 
7 , 9 4 0 
W o r k i n g capital 
8 , 5 2 4 
1 0 , 9 5 9 
7 , 8 7 3 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
9 , 3 5 4 
9 , 4 1 1 
7 , 8 3 4 
Investments and other assets 
5 , 2 5 1 
4 , 6 2 6 
4 , 1 4 8 
2 3 , 1 2 9 
2 4 , 9 9 6 
1 9 , 8 5 5 
L o n g - t e r m debt 
2 , 3 4 0 
1 , 5 7 5 
1 , 3 5 5 
O t h e r liabilities 
2 , 5 0 5 
2 , 6 6 8 
1 , 9 2 1 
Deferred income taxes 
1 , 5 8 0 
1 , 5 4 0 
1 , 2 8 8 
6 , 4 2 5 
5 , 7 8 3 
4 , 5 6 4 
N e t assets employed 
$ 
1 6 , 7 0 4 
$ 
1 9 , 2 1 3 
$ 
1 5 , 2 9 1 
N u m b e r o f employees 
1 6 3 , 9 0 4 
1 6 1 , 3 9 9 
1 6 6 , 2 3 4 
For the year: 
Revenue 
$ 
3 4 , 3 6 1 
$ 
2 9 , 7 5 2 
$ 
2 6 , 2 4 4 
E a r n i n g s before income taxes 
$ 
7 , 0 8 8 
$ 
5 , 6 8 0 
$ 
5 , 8 7 0 
Provision for income taxes 
3 , 0 0 9 
2 , 3 7 1 
2 , 6 7 7 
N e t earnings (1988 before cumulative effect o f accounting change) 
$ 
4 , 0 7 9 
$ 
3 , 3 0 9 
$ 
3 , 1 9 3 
Investment in plant, rental machines a n d other property 
$ 
2 , 3 8 9 
$ 
1 , 8 4 7 
$ 
1 , 9 7 0 
Non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a 
local currency environment account for approxi-
mately 90% of the company's n o n - U S . revenue. 
The remaining 10% of the company's non-U. S. 
revenue is from subsidiaries and branches which 
operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic 
environment is highly inflationary. 
As the value of the dollar weakens, net assets 
recorded in local currencies translate into more 
U.S. dollars than they would have at the previous 
year's rates. Conversely, as the dollar becomes 
stronger, net assets recorded in local currencies 
translate into fewer U.S. dollars than they would 
have at the previous year's rates. The translation 
adjustments, resulting from the translation of net 
assets, amounted to $1,917 million at December 
31,1988, $2,865 million at December 31,1987, 
and $307 million at December 31,1986. The 
changes in translation adjustments since the end 
of 1986 are a reflection of the weakening of the 
dollar in 1987 and the strengthening in 1988. 
Undistributed earnings of non-US. subsid-
iaries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $12,374 million at December 31, 
1988, $13,076 million at December 31,1987, and 
$12,108 million at December 31,1986. These 
earnings, which reflect full provision for non-
U S . income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in 
non-US. operations or will be remitted sub-
stantially free of additional tax. Accordingly, no 
provision has been made for taxes that might be 
payable upon remittance of such earnings. 
It is extremely improbable that all these earnings 
would be remitted to the U.S. Nevertheless, SFAS 
96, "Accounting for Income Taxes," requires 
disclosure of the amount of withholding taxes 
that would be payable were this unlikely event to 
occur. Therefore in response to that requirement, 
it is estimated that such withholding taxes 
would be as much as $ 1,200 million. 


===== PAGE 43 =====
Accounting and Reporting Changes 
In 1988, the company implemented several State-
ments of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS). 
In accordance with SFAS 94—"Consoli-
dation of All Majority-owned Subsidiaries," the 
company has consolidated its wholly owned 
finance subsidiaries, which were previously 
accounted for by the equity method. Prior years' 
financial 
statements, as well as the selected 
quarteriy information, have been restated to 
reflect this change. Since the net earnings of these 
subsidiaries were previously included in other 
income, this change had no effect on net earnings. 
Information regarding these previously uncon-
solidated subsidiaries is shown on page 48. 
The company adopted SFAS 95—"Statement 
of Cash Flows," which requires presentation 
of a statement of cash flows in place of the state-
ment of changes in financial position. Prior 
years' statements have been reclassified to conform 
to the new presentation. 
SFAS 96—"Accounting for Income Taxes" 
was implemented in the second quarter of 1988, 
effective as of January i, 1988.The cumulative 
effect of this change on prior years was $315 mil-
lion, or $.53 per share, and has been reflected in 
the first quarter of 1988. Prior years' 
financial 
statements have not been restated. Income 
tax accounting is discussed further on page 47. 
In addition, certain prior year amounts 
on the consolidated statements of earnings and 
financial 
position have been reclassified to 
conform to the 1988 presentation. 
M a r l < e t a b l e S e c u r i t i e s 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 
D e c e m b e r 
3 1 , 1 9 8 7 
U. S. G o v e r n m e n t securities 
T i m e deposits a n d other b a n k obligations 
N o n - U . S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 
Total 
Market value 
$ 
1,944 
$ 
3,951 
$ 
6 4 2 
5 0 4 
802 
$ 
1 , 9 4 8 
$ 
680 
2,282 
9 9 2 
$ 
3 , 9 5 4 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 
D e c e m b e r 
3 1 , 1 9 8 7 
Current inventories: 
Finished g o o d s 
Work in process 
R a w materials 
Total current inventories 
Work in process and field service parts included in 
plant, rental machines and other property 
. 
Total inventories 
$ 
2 , 9 7 2 
6 , 4 4 4 
1 4 9 
9 , 5 6 5 
1 , 1 0 8 
$ 1 0 , 6 7 3 
$ 
2 , 5 7 6 
5 , 8 7 7 
206 
8 , 6 5 9 
8 9 7 
$ 
9 , 5 5 6 


===== PAGE 44 =====
Plant, Rental M a c h i n e s and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 31,1988 
December 31,1987 
L a n d a n d l a n d i m p r o v e m e n t s 
$ 
1 , 4 9 3 
$ 
1 , 4 5 7 
B u i l d i n g s 
1 1 , 5 9 0 
1 1 , 3 6 0 
Plant, l a b o r a t o r y a n d office e q u i p m e n t 
2 8 , 6 7 8 
2 7 , 5 0 3 
4 1 , 7 6 1 
4 0 , 3 2 0 
Less: A c c u m u l a t e d depreciation 
1 9 , 7 1 1 
1 8 , 2 3 4 
2 2 , 0 5 0 
2 2 , 0 8 6 
R e n t a l m a c h i n e s a n d p a r t s 
3 , 1 2 1 
2 , 7 5 5 
L e s s : A c c u m u l a t e d depreciation 
1 , 7 4 5 
1 , 8 7 4 
1 , 3 7 6 
8 8 1 
Total 
$ 2 3 , 4 2 6 
$ 2 2 , 9 6 7 
Investments and Sundry A s s e t s 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 31,1988 
December 31,1987 
N e t investment in sales-type leasest 
Less: C u r r e n t p o r t i o n classified as notes a n d accounts receivable—trade. 
I n s t a l l m e n t p a y m e n t receivables 
G o o d w i l l , less a c c u m u l a t e d a m o r t i z a t i o n (1988, $ 1 8 4 ; 1987, $ 1 3 9 ) . 
P r e p a i d p e n s i o n cost 
M o r t g a g e investments 
I n v e s t m e n t in M C I C o m m u n i c a t i o n s C o r p o r a t i o n ^ 
O t h e r investments a n d s u n d r y assets 
Total 
$ 10,121 
3 , 6 4 0 
6 , 4 8 1 
1 , 0 3 6 
7 1 7 
5 5 1 
4 6 0 
4 0 0 
1 , 8 1 4 
$ 
1 1 , 4 5 9 
$ 
8 , 7 0 5 
3 , 2 6 9 
5 , 4 3 6 
1 , 1 7 1 
7 6 2 
4 9 6 
2 3 3 
5 2 8 
1 , 6 8 3 
$ 1 0 , 3 0 9 
tThese leases relate to IBM equipment and are for 
terms generally ranging f r o m three to five years, 
t i n 1986, IBM entered into agreements with 
MCI under which I B M received approximately 
47 million unregistered shares o f MCI c o m m o n 
stock in exchange for substantially all the assets 
and operations o f Satellite Business Systems. 
In 1988, MCI repurchased these shares for $ 6 7 7 
million. In a separate transaction IBM acquired 
$ 4 0 0 million o f MCI 7.35% preferred stock. 
T h e preferred stock is not convertible, nor is it 
planned to be publicly traded. MCI has the 
option to redeem all or part of the new issue at 
any time. These investments have been accounted 
for by the cost method. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) 
U . S . dollars: 
778% convertible s u b o r d i n a t e d d e b e n t u r e s d u e 2 0 0 4 t . 
6 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 0 
ioV4% notes d u e 1995 
9% notes d u e 1 9 9 8 
8 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 2 
9 % % d e b e n t u r e s d u e 2 0 0 4 ( w i t h s i n k i n g f u n d p a y m e n t s t o 2 0 0 3 ) 
i o % % extendable notes, initial m a t u r i t y 1 9 8 9 
7V8% notes d u e 1 9 8 9 
8 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 0 
7 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 1 
8 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 1 
8 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 1 
9.32% notes d u e 2 0 0 0 
6 % % notes d u e 1 9 8 9 
8% notes d u e 1 9 9 0 
12^4% notes d u e 1 9 9 2 
9 % notes d u e 1988 
9 % % extendable notes, initial m a t u r i t y 1988 
9 % % notes d u e 1 9 9 0 
M e d i u m - t e r m note p r o g r a m , payable 1 9 8 9 - 2 0 0 8 ( 6 . 9 % - 1 0 . 1 % ) 
O t h e r U. S. dollars, d u e 1 9 8 9 - 2 0 1 2 (7.2%) 
O t h e r (average interest rate at D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , in parentheses), payable in: 
F r e n c h francs, d u e 1 9 8 9 - 1 9 9 9 (10.6%) 
Australian dollars, d u e 1 9 8 9 - 1 9 9 2 ( 1 3 . 4 % ) 
Japanese y e n , d u e 1 9 8 9 - 2 0 1 8 (5.4%) 
C a n a d i a n dollars, d u e 1 9 9 1 - 1 9 9 3 (9.3%) 
S w i s s francs, d u e 1 9 9 6 (4.875%) 
O t h e r currencies, d u e 1 9 8 9 - 1 9 9 9 (10.5%) 
L e s s : N e t u n a m o r t i z e d d i s c o u n t 
Less: C u r r e n t m a t u r i t i e s 
Total 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 
D e c e m b e r 
3 1 , 1 9 8 7 
1 , 2 5 4 
5 0 0 
5 0 0 
5 0 0 
4 5 0 
3 6 3 
3 0 0 
3 0 0 
2 5 0 
2 5 0 
2 5 0 
2 0 5 
2 0 0 
2 0 0 
2 0 0 
6 6 7 
9 5 4 
7 , 3 4 3 
5 1 3 
5 0 9 
3 5 5 
261 
2 3 2 
4 3 7 
9 , 6 5 0 
9 , 6 3 7 
1 , 1 1 9 
8 , 5 1 8 
$ 
1 , 2 5 4 
5 0 0 
5 0 0 
3 7 0 
3 0 0 
3 0 0 
3 0 0 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
200 
4 3 5 
1,112 
6 , 2 7 1 
5 9 3 
260 
3 2 8 
8 5 
2 7 5 
5 3 2 
8 , 3 4 4 
T l 
8 , 3 1 7 
1 , 2 0 9 
; 7 , 1 0 8 
A n n u a l m a t u r i t y a n d s i n k i n g f u n d r e q u i r e m e n t s in m i l l i o n s o f dollars o n 
l o n g - t e r m debt o u t s t a n d i n g at D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , are as f o l l o w s : 
1 9 8 9 , $ 1 , 1 1 9 ; 1 9 9 0 , $ 1 , 6 5 8 ; 1 9 9 1 , $ 1 , 3 9 5 ; 1 9 9 2 , $ 1 , 1 2 4 ; 1 9 9 3 , $ 8 7 8 ; 
1 9 9 4 a n d b e y o n d , $ 3 , 4 7 6 . 
t T h e 7 % % convertible subordinated debentures 
are unsecured subordinated obligations o f 
IBM, which are convertible into IBM capital stock 
at a conversion price of $153.6563 per share. 
T h e y are redeemable, at the option o f the 
company, as o f N o v e m b e r 1988 at a price of 
104.725% of the principal a m o u n t , and at 
decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking f u n d pay-
ments starting in 1 9 9 4 are intended to retire 75% 
o f the debentures prior to maturity. D u r i n g 
1988, conversions o f debentures resulted in the 
issuance o f 968 shares of I B M capital stock. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
1987 
1986 
E a r n i n g s before i n c o m e taxes: 
U. S. operations 
$ 
1 , 9 4 5 
$ 
2 , 9 5 0 
$ 
2 , 5 3 7 
N o n - U . S. operations 
7 , 0 8 8 
5 , 6 8 0 
5 , 8 7 0 
$ 
9 , 0 3 3 
$ 
8 , 6 3 0 
$ 
8 , 4 0 7 
Provision f o r i n c o m e taxes: 
$ 
9 , 0 3 3 
$ 
8 , 6 3 0 
$ 
8 , 4 0 7 
U. S. o p e r a t i o n s 
$ 
5 3 3 
$ 
1 , 0 0 1 
$ 
9 4 1 
N o n - U . S . operations 
3 , 0 0 9 
2 , 3 7 1 
2 , 6 7 7 
3 , 5 4 2 
3 , 3 7 2 
3 , 6 1 8 
S o c i a l S e c u r i t y , real estate, personal p r o p e r t y a n d other taxes 
2 , 5 2 8 
2 , 3 7 0 
2 , 0 2 6 
Total 
$ 
6 , 0 7 0 
$ 
5 , 7 4 2 
$ 
5 , 6 4 4 
T h e c o m p o n e n t s o f the provision f o r i n c o m e taxes are as follows: 
U. S. Federal: 
C u r r e n t 
$ 
7 9 t 
$ 
( 1 2 3 ) t 
$ 
( 2 6 6 ) 
D e f e r r e d 
( 8 6 ) 
1 7 7 
3 4 5 
N e t deferred investment tax credits 
( 1 2 5 ) 
( 1 5 0 ) 
4 4 
N o n - U . S . : 
( 1 3 2 ) 
( 9 6 ) 
1 2 3 
C u r r e n t 
3 , 5 6 2 
3 , 0 1 3 
3 , 2 3 6 
D e f e r r e d 
8 7 
3 2 0 
1 7 0 
3 , 6 4 9 
3 , 3 3 3 
3 , 4 0 6 
U. S. State a n d local: 
3 , 6 4 9 
3 , 3 3 3 
3 , 4 0 6 
C u r r e n t 
1 2 
2 3 
1 2 4 
D e f e r r e d 
1 3 
1 1 2 
( 3 5 ) 
2 5 
1 3 5 
8 9 
Total provision 
$ 
3 , 5 4 2 
$ 
3 , 3 7 2 
$ 
3 , 6 1 8 
tAs a result of the alternative minimum tax requirements which commenced in 1987, 
actual tax payments related to the respective years have been, and may continue to be, 
substantially higher. 
In 1988, the company implemented Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96. 
This standard calls for adjustment of deferred tax 
assets and liabilities whenever there is a change 
in enacted tax rates, with a corresponding adjust-
ment being reflected in income tax expense for that 
period. Previous rules called for recording these 
assets and liabilities at the current rate, with 
no subsequent adjustment for tax rate changes. 
T h e cumulative effect of adopting SFAS 96 
for periods ending prior to January i , 1988, 
which amounted to a benefit o f $ 315 million, has 
been included in 1988 net earnings.The effect 
on the 1988 provision for income taxes was not 
material. Income taxes for 1987 and 1986 have 
not been restated for this change. 
Deferred income taxes reflect the impact 
o f temporary differences between the a m o u n t o f 
assets and liabilities recognized for 
financial 
reporting purposes and such amounts recog-
nized for tax purposes. T h e principal items m a k i n g 
up the deferred tax provision in 1988 included 
$283 million for sales-type leases and installment 
sales and $175 million for deferred software costs, 
partially offset by $ 1 8 2 million of deferred tax 
credits associated with the alternative mini-
m u m tax. In 1987, the principal item was $535 
million for depreciation while in 1986 these 
amounts were $ 3 7 1 million for depreciation and 
$483 million for sales-type leases and install-
ment sales. N o other individual item was 
material. 
Under the rules o f SFAS 96, no 
financial 
recognition is allowed for net deferred tax assets 
in excess o f the a m o u n t that could be recovered 
as income tax refunds through existing loss 
carryback or carryforward provisions. Conse-
quently, at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , the com-
pany had unrecognized deferred tax assets of 
approximately $ 2 0 0 million, most of which have 
carryforwards for substantial periods. In addition, 
the company has $388 million of deferred 
investment tax credits for financial reporting 
purposes, which will reduce tax expense in 
future years. 
T h e consolidated effective income tax rate 
was 39.2% in 1988, 39.1% in 1987, and 43.0% in 
1986. In 1988, the higher effective tax rate on 
earnings of non-U.S. operations accounts for 6.6 
percentage points of the difference between the 
effective rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate o f 
34.0%. In prior years, there were no individually 
significant items which caused the effective rate 
to differ from the U.S. federal statutory rate. 
Worldwide income tax payments amounted 
to $ 3 , 4 0 5 million, $ 2 , 1 8 6 million and $ 3 , 0 6 7 
million for 1 9 8 8 , 1 9 8 7 and 1986, respectively. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
Research, Development and Engineering 
Research, development and engineering expenses 
amounted to $5,925 million in 1988, $ 5 , 4 3 4 
million in 1987 and $ 5 , 2 2 1 million in 1986. 
Included in these amounts were expendi-
tures of $ 4 , 4 1 9 million in 1988, $ 3 , 9 9 8 million 
in 1987 and $3,975 million in 1986 for a broad 
program o f research and development covering 
basic scientific research in a variety o f fields 
and the application o f scientific advances to the 
development o f n e w and improved products 
and their uses. In addition, expenditures 
for product related engineering a m o u n t e d to 
$ 1 , 5 0 6 million, $ 1 , 4 3 6 million and $ 1 , 2 4 6 
million for the same three years. 
interest C o s t 
Interest on borrowings o f the c o m p a n y 
and its subsidiaries amounted to $ 1 , 3 2 1 million 
in 1988, $ 1 , 0 8 4 million in 1987 and $ 1 , 0 2 0 
million in 1986. O f these amounts, $ 9 3 million 
in 1988, $ 134 million in 1987 and $ 129 
million in 1986 were capitalized. T h e remainder 
was charged to cost o f rentals and 
financing 
and 
interest expense. C a s h payments for interest 
during this period, including amounts capital-
ized, were $ 1 , 4 4 0 million, $ 1 , 0 4 8 million 
and $ 9 6 2 million, respectively. 
Rentai Expense and Lease C o m m i t m e n t s 
Rental expense, including amounts charged to 
inventories and fixed assets, amounted to $ 1 , 5 6 6 
million in 1988, $ 1 , 5 1 5 million in 1987 and 
$ 1 , 3 6 3 million in 1986. M i n i m u m rental commit-
ments, in millions o f dollars, under noncancelable 
leases for 1989 and thereafter are as follows: 
1989, $ 1 , 3 4 1 ; 1990, $ 1 , 1 0 5 ; 1 9 9 1 , $ 9 1 2 ; 1 9 9 2 , 
$ 7 6 1 ; 1993, $ 6 2 7 ; and after 1993, $2,543. 
These leases are principally for the rental o f 
office premises. 
Other Liabilities 
Other liabilities consist principally o f indemnity 
and retirement plan reserves for non-U. S. 
employees. 
Lines of Credit 
A t December 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , the company and its 
subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit 
with a number o f U.S. and n o n - U S . banks per-
mitting borrowings, primarily short-term, up 
to an aggregate o f $ 5 , 8 0 0 million. Interest 
rates on borrowings w o u l d vary f r o m country to 
country depending on local market conditions. 
Finance Subsidiaries 
T h e company's wholly o w n e d finance subsidiaries 
consist o f I B M Credit C o r p o r a t i o n and several 
non-U. S. finance subsidiaries. I B M Credit 
C o r p o r a t i o n offers lease financing of selected 
I B M products, finances receivables resulting f r o m 
Financial position at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
Assets: 
Cash and cash 
equivalents 
$ 
5 3 6 
Installment payment 
receivables—net 
1 , 2 7 1 
Net investment in capital 
leases 
6,488 
Receivable from IBM 
and affiliates 
1 3 0 
Other 
1 , 6 8 5 
Total Assets 
$ 1 0 , 1 1 0 
installment sales by I B M o f its products, and 
finances 
selected n o n - I B M equipment in 
the U S. T h e non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer 
leases and in some cases finance installment 
receivables. 
S u m m a r i z e d below is combined 
financial 
information for these finance subsidiaries, 
o f which I B M Credit C o r p o r a t i o n accounts 
for more than 8 0 % o f the net earnings. In accor-
dance with Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards 94, these wholly o w n e d subsidiaries are 
n o w consolidated in the accompanying 
financial 
statements. Financing activity in countries in 
which the c o m p a n y does not have a 
finance 
subsidiary is not included below. 
Additional information is available in the 1988 
A n n u a l R e p o r t o f the IBM Credit Corporation. 
Copies may be obtained by writing to: 
I B M Stockholder Relations D e p a r t m e n t 
590 M a d i s o n Avenue, N e w York, N.Y. 1 0 0 2 2 
1987 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
Liabilities and 
Stockholder's Equity: 
4 5 5 
Short-term debt 
$ 
3,007 
Deferred taxes and 
1,606 
accruals 
1 , 0 9 2 
Due to IBM and 
5 , 4 1 3 
affiliates 
1 , 7 9 6 
Long-term debt 
3 , 2 1 8 
284 
Stockholder's equity . . . . 
997 
—
^ 
Total Liabilities and 
8,567 
Stockholder's Equity . . $ 1 0 , 1 1 0 
1987 
$ 2 , 3 3 0 
1,200 
3 , 2 2 4 
9 2 5 
$ 8,567 
Earnings for the years ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
1987 
1986 
Financing and other income 
$ 
9 1 4 
$ 
876 
$ 
7 5 7 
Interest and other expenses 
7 9 1 
744 
597 
Provision for income taxes 
26 
2 7 
2 2 
Net earnings (1988 before cumulative effect of accounting change). . . . 
$ 
97 
$ 
1 0 5 
$ 
1 3 8 


===== PAGE 48 =====
Retirement Plans 
T h e company and its subsidiaries have retire-
ment plans covering substantially all employees. 
T h e total cost of all plans for 1 9 8 8 , 1 9 8 7 and 
1986 was $ 4 6 0 million, $ 2 8 9 million and $585 
million, respectively. 
Pension cost in 1988 was higher than 
in 1987 principally due to the g r o w t h in service 
and interest cost exceeding the g r o w t h in the 
expected return on plan assets, and the refine-
ment of translation techniques for non-U.S. plans 
in highly inflationary economic environments. 
These increases in cost were partially offset 
by actuarial assumption changes in several non-
U.S. plans. Pension cost in 1987 was lower 
than in 1986 primarily because of a one-time 
cost in 1986 for special termination benefits 
associated with a 1986 a m e n d m e n t to the U.S. 
retirement plans, increased plan assets, and 
changes in actuarial assumptions in U.S. and 
several non-U.S. plans.These decreases in 
cost were partially offset by the effects of changes 
in currency rates. 
A n n u a l cost is determined using the Pro-
jected Unit Credit actuarial method. Prior 
service cost is amortized on a straight-line basis 
over the average remaining service period of 
employees expected to receive benefits. A n 
assumption is made for modified career average 
plans that the average earnings base period 
will be updated to the years prior to retirement. 
It is the company's practice to f u n d pen-
sion costs to the extent that such costs are tax 
deductible. F u n d i n g decisions made in 1987 
contributed towards the prepaid pension cost 
in U.S. plans. T h e assets of the various plans 
include corporate equities, government securi-
ties, corporate debt securities and income-
producing real estate. 
T h e tables provide information on the 
status o f the U.S. retirement plans, and selected 
non-U.S. plans which represent approximately 
98% of the total non-U.S. accumulated benefit 
obligations. 
T h e f u n d e d status at December 31 was as follows: 
(Dollars in millions) 
U.S. Plans 
Non-U.S. Plans 
1988 
1987 
1988 
1987 
Actuarial present value of benefit obligations: 
Vested benefit obligation 
Accumulated benefit obligation 
Projected benefit obligation 
Plan assets at fair value 
Projected benefit obligation (in excess of) 
less than plan assets 
Unrecognized net (gain) loss 
Unrecognized prior service cost 
Unrecognized net asset established at January i, 1986 . . 
(Accrued) prepaid pension cost recognized 
in the statement of financial position 
tincludes accrued pension cost of $ 2 0 4 million in 1988 
and $219 million in 1987 for one country where 
the accumulated benefit obligation exceeds plan assets 
since this plan is financed by reserves only. 
N e t periodic pension cost for the years ended December 31 included the following components: 
( 1 0 , 1 3 5 ) 
$ 
( 9 , 0 7 2 ) 
$ 
( 6 , 0 1 7 ) 
$ 
( 5 , 8 5 1 ) 
( 1 0 , 4 7 3 ) 
$ 
( 9 , 3 5 1 ) 
$ 
( 6 , 8 9 8 ) 
$ 
( 6 , 6 6 5 ) 
( 1 5 , 4 6 6 ) 
$ 
( 1 4 , 1 8 5 ) 
$ 
( 1 0 , 6 7 6 ) 
$ 
( 1 0 , 7 0 1 ) 
1 9 , 5 9 8 
1 8 , 0 7 0 
9 , 8 3 5 
9 , 0 9 9 
4 , 1 3 2 
3 , 8 8 5 
( 8 4 1 ) 
( 1 , 6 0 2 ) 
( 1 , 2 7 2 ) 
( 9 2 8 ) 
( 5 3 1 ) 
1 0 5 
8 4 6 
8 9 8 
2 3 9 
2 7 6 
( 3 , 1 5 5 ) 
( 3 , 3 5 9 ) 
( 1 7 6 ) 
( 2 1 5 ) 
5 5 1 
$ 
4 9 6 
$ 
( l , 3 0 9 ) t 
$ 
( l , 4 3 6 ) t 
U.S. Plans 
Non-U.S. Plans 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
1987 
1986 
1988 
1987 
1986 
Service c o s t -
benefits earned during 
the period 
J g 
5 7 9 
$ 
5 4 5 
$ 
5 7 5 
$ 
4 8 2 
$ 
4 4 5 
$ 
3 6 3 
Interest cost on the 
projected benefit 
obligation 
1 , 1 2 0 
1 , 0 1 5 
9 0 0 
6 4 8 
6 3 9 
4 9 5 
Actual return 
on plan assets 
( 2 , 0 5 8 ) 
( 8 4 6 ) 
( 2 , 5 2 8 ) 
( 1 , 0 0 3 ) 
( 1 3 5 ) 
( 7 0 1 ) 
Net amortization 
and deferral 
3 0 4 
( 8 5 6 ) 
1 , 2 2 5 
3 4 5 
( 5 8 0 ) 
2 0 7 
Net periodic pension cost 
J 5 
( 5 5 ) 
$ 
( 1 4 2 ) 
$ 
1 7 2 
$ 
4 7 2 
$ 
3 6 9 
$ 
3 6 4 
Total net periodic pension 
cost for all non-U.S. plans 
$ 
5 1 5 
$ 
4 3 1 
$ 
4 1 3 
U.S. Plans: U.S. regular and part-time 
employees are covered by noncontributory plans 
which are f u n d e d by company contributions to 
an irrevocable trust f u n d , which is held for the 
sole benefit of employees. M o n t h l y retirement 
benefits generally represent the greater o f a fixed 
a m o u n t per year of service, or a percent of 
career compensation. For plan purposes, annual 
compensation before January i, 1987 is defined 
as the average annual compensation paid for the 
years 1977 through 1986. Actual compensation is 
used thereafter. Prior to January i, 1989, benefits 
became vested upon completion of 10 years of 
service. Effective January i, 1989, benefits become 
vested upon the completion of five years of 
service. T h e number of individuals receiving bene-
fits at December 31,1988 and December 31,1987 
was 40,567 and 38,207, respectively. 
T h e expected long-term rate of return on 
plan assets used in the calculation of net peri-
odic pension cost was 9% in 1988 and 1987, and 
8 % % in 1986. Measurement of the 1988 and 


===== PAGE 49 =====
1987 projected benefit obligation was based on 
an 8% discount rate and a 5% long-term rate of 
compensation increase. 
Non-U.S. Plans: Most subsidiaries and 
branches outside the U.S. have retirement plans 
covering substantially all employees, under 
which funds are deposited under various 
fiduciary-
type arrangements, annuities are purchased 
under group contracts, or reserves are provided. 
Retirement benefits are based on years of service 
and the employee's compensation, generally 
during a fixed number of years immediately prior 
to retirement. 
The ranges of assumptions used for the 
non-U.S. plans reflect the different economic 
environments within the various countries. The 
expected long-term rates of return on plan 
assets used in the calculation of net periodic 
pension cost ranged from 5% to 11% in 1988, 
from 6% to 11% in 1987, and from 5% to 11% in 
1986. Measurement of the projected benefit 
obligation was based on discount rates ranging 
from 4^/2% to 10% in both 1988 and 1987, 
and long-term rates of compensation increase 
ranging from 3% to %V2% in 1988, and from 
3% to 9V2% in 1987. 
Postretirement Benefits 
The company and its U.S. subsidiaries have med-
ical, dental and life insurance plans for retirees, 
the estimated cost of which is fully accrued 
at retirement. The cost amounted to $ 105 million, 
$50 million and $201 million in 1988,1987 
and 1986, respectively. Cost in 1988 and 1986 was 
higher than 1987 primarily because of an 
increased number of retirees in those years. The 
retiree increases were a result of the manufactur-
ing and headquarters consolidations in 1988, 
and the retirement incentive program offered in 
1986. It is the company's practice to fund 
postretirement benefits cost, with an indepen-
dent trustee, to the extent it is tax deductible. 
Certain of the company's non-U.S. sub-
sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However, 
many retirees outside the U.S. are covered 
by government sponsored and administered pro-
grams. As a result, the cost of company spon-
sored programs outside the U.S. is not significant. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The employees stock purchase plan enables 
employees who are not participants in a stock 
option plan to purchase IBM's capital stock 
through payroll deductions of up to 10% of eli-
gible compensation. The price an employee 
pays for a share of stock is 85% of the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. 
During 1988, employees purchased 
7,097,290 shares, all of which were treasury 
shares, for which $702 million was paid to IBM. 
At December 31,1988, 9,672,337 reserved 
unissued shares remain available for purchase. 
Stock Option Plans 
The stock option plans provide for granting 
officers and other key employees options 
to purchase IBM's capital stock at 100% of the 
market price on the date of grant. Options have 
a maximum duration of 10 years and become 
exercisable in up to four annual installments, 
commencing one year from date of grant. 
The plans are administered by the Execu-
tive Compensation Committee of the Board of 
Directors. The Committee may, at its discretion, 
grant Stock Appreciation Rights (SARs) to 
holders of options. Such rights offer optionees 
the alternative of electing not to exercise the 
related stock option, but to receive instead an 
amount in cash, stock, or a combination of cash 
and stock, equivalent to the difference between 
the option price and the average market price of 
IBM stock on the date of exercising the right. 
The plans also provide, subject to Commit-
tee approval, that payment by the optionee upon 
exercise of an option may be made using IBM 
stock as well as cash. 
The following table summarizes stock option 
transactions during 1988: 
Number of Shares 
Under 
Option 
Available 
for Option 
Balance at 
January i,1988 . .. 
Options granted , . . . 
Options terminated . 
Options cancelled— 
SARs exercised. . . . 
Options exercised . . . 
Balance at 
December 31,1988 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1988 
1 5 , 5 6 7 , 1 7 4 
4 , 0 5 4 , 9 2 9 
( 4 7 3 , 9 5 1 ) 
( 1 8 4 , 9 6 6 ) 
( 1 , 2 8 8 , 5 4 1 ) 
1 7 , 6 7 4 , 6 4 5 
1 0 , 4 9 2 , 9 8 9 
6 , 0 1 7 , 3 5 5 
( 4 , 0 5 4 , 9 2 9 ) 
3 1 8 , 9 6 2 
2 , 2 8 1 , 3 8 8 
The options exercised during 1988 were at an 
average option price of $67.42 per share. The 
17,674,645 shares under option at December 31, 
1988, are at option prices ranging from $54.97 
to $ 159.50 per share. 
Stock Repurchase Programs 
Under programs for purchasing IBM stock, 
8,611,396 shares were repurchased during 1988 at 
a cost of $992 million, 11,252,000 shares during 
1987 at a cost of $1,425 million and 11,094,900 
shares during 1986 at a cost of $ 1,488 million. 
The repurchased shares were retired and restored 
to the status of authorized but unissued shares. 


===== PAGE 50 =====
S e g m e n t Information 
IBM is in the field o f advanced information 
technology. T h e company operates primarily in 
the single industry segment which offers cus-
tomers solutions that incorporate information 
processing systems, software, communica-
tions systems and other products and services. 
This segment represents more than 9 0 % 
o f consolidated revenue, operating profit and 
identifiable assets. T h e schedule below shows rev-
enue by industry segments and by classes of 
similar products or services within the informa-
tion technology segment. 
Financial information by geographic 
area is summarized on the next page to provide j 
better understanding of IBM's operations. Material 
interdependencies and overlaps exist a m o n g 
IBM's operating units and, therefore, the informa-
tion may not be indicative of the financial 
results of, or investments in, the reported areas 
were they independent organizations. 
Revenue by Industry S e g m e n t s and Classes of Similar Products or Services 
(Dollars in millions) 
Consolidated 
U.S. Only 
(Dollars in millions) 
1988 
1987 + 
I986t 
1988 
I987t 
i986t 
I n f o r m a t i o n T e c h n o l o g y : 
Processors 
$ 
1 5 , 2 3 9 
$ 1 4 , 0 5 2 
$ 1 3 , 1 6 1 
$ 
5 , 6 4 3 
$ 
5 , 5 3 1 
$ 
5 , 5 3 4 
Peripherals 
1 1 , 2 8 0 
1 0 , 1 8 6 
1 0 , 8 0 7 
4 , 7 6 4 
4 , 6 5 6 
5 , 2 9 8 
W o r k s t a t i o n s 
1 1 , 3 1 5 
1 0 , 3 7 0 
9 , 4 3 6 
4 , 6 8 5 
4 , 9 5 4 
4 , 6 5 9 
S o f t w a r e 
7 , 9 2 7 
6 , 8 3 6 
5 , 5 1 4 
2 , 9 2 5 
2 , 8 1 7 
2 , 3 6 7 
M a i n t e n a n c e Services 
.
.
.
. 
7 , 3 4 7 
7 , 6 9 1 
7 , 4 1 3 
3 , 1 0 2 
3 , 6 8 8 
4 , 0 1 6 
O t h e r 
4 , 4 7 7 
3 , 8 1 6 
3 , 6 4 0 
2 , 1 1 0 
1 , 5 6 2 
1 , 8 6 1 
5 7 , 5 8 5 
5 2 , 9 5 1 
4 9 , 9 7 1 
2 3 , 2 2 9 
2 3 , 2 0 8 
2 3 , 7 3 5 
Federal S y s t e m s 
2 , 0 6 5 
2 , 2 3 8 
2 , 1 2 1 
2 , 0 6 5 
2 , 2 3 8 
2 , 1 2 1 
O t h e r Business 
3 1 
6 7 
68 
2 6 
58 
60 
Total 
$ 5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 5 2 , 1 6 0 
$ 2 5 , 3 2 0 
$ 2 5 , 5 0 4 
$ 2 5 , 9 1 6 
tReclassified to conform with 1988 presentation. 
W h i l e IBM operates primarily in a single 
industry segment and manages its worldwide 
business as such, revenue has been categorized 
into major classes o f product. 
For purposes of classifying similar infor-
mation technology products, user programmable 
equipment having the capability of manipulat-
ing data arithmetically or logically and m a k i n g 
calculations, in a manner directly addressable 
by the user through the operation of a stored 
p r o g r a m , has been classified as Processors, 
except that small business computers and intelli-
gent workstations are included under Work-
stations. Typewriters have also been classified 
under Workstations. Peripherals include printers. 
storage and telecommunication devices. 
Peripheral functions embedded in processors are 
classified with Processors. Software includes 
both applications and systems software. Mainte-
nance Services consist of separately billed 
charges for maintenance. Other consists princi-
pally of financing revenue, supplies and 
miscellaneous support services. 
S o m e products logically fit in more than 
one class and are assigned to a specific class 
based on a variety o f factors. O v e r time, prod-
ucts tend to overlap, merge into or split from 
existing classes as a result o f changing technolo-
gies, market perceptions, a n d / o r customer use. 
For example, market demand may create require-
ments for technological enhancements to permit 
a peripheral product (e.g., printer), to be func-
tionally integrated with a display, a telecommuni-
cation device and a processor to form a work-
station. Such interchangeability and technological 
progress tend to make year-to-year comparisons 
less valid than they would be in an industry 
less subject to rapid change. 
Federal Systems consists of specialized 
information technology products and services pri-
marily for the United States defense, space and 
other agencies. 
Other Business consists of training and test-
ing materials for school, home and industrial use. 


===== PAGE 51 =====
Geographic A r e a s 
(Dollars in millions) 
U n i t e d States 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
E u r o p e / M i d d l e E a s t / A f r i c a 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
A s i a / P a c i f i c 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
A s s e t s at D e c e m b e r 31 
A m e r i c a s 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
A s s e t s at D e c e m b e r 31 
E l i m i n a t i o n s 
R e v e n u e 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets 
C o n s o l i d a t e d 
R e v e n u e 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
11988 net earnings excludes cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes. 
1 9 8 8 1 
1987 
1 9 8 6 
$ 2 5 , 3 2 0 
4 , 9 5 1 
$ 3 0 , 2 7 1 
1 , 4 0 8 
3 9 , 2 4 5 
$21,600 
9 5 5 
$ 2 2 , 5 5 5 
2 , 3 4 9 
2 2 , 7 4 5 
$ 
8 , 8 2 4 
1 , 8 3 7 
$ 10,661 
1 , 3 9 4 
7 , 6 3 3 
$ 
3 , 9 3 7 
1 , 2 9 0 
$ 
5 , 2 2 7 
4 , 9 1 5 
$ 
( 9 , 0 3 3 ) 
12 
( 1 , 5 0 1 ) 
$ 5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 
5 , 4 9 1 
$ 7 3 , 0 3 7 
$ 2 5 , 5 0 4 
3 , 9 9 4 
$ 2 9 , 4 9 8 
1 , 9 3 6 
3 6 , 0 2 6 
$ 1 9 , 5 8 8 
1,008 
$ 2 0 , 5 9 6 
2 , 2 0 9 
2 4 , 6 2 5 
$ 
6 , 9 1 0 
1 , 4 3 1 
$ 
8 , 3 4 1 
^ 
6 , 8 4 0 
$ 
3 , 2 5 4 
8 5 0 
$ 
4 , 1 0 4 
S ^ 
4 , 1 8 8 
$ 
( 7 , 2 8 3 ) 
(8) 
( 1 , 6 5 0 ) 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 
5 , 2 5 8 
$ 7 0 , 0 2 9 
$ 2 5 , 9 1 6 
3 , 0 5 8 
$ 2 8 , 9 7 4 
1 , 6 0 3 
3 5 , 9 4 5 
$ 1 7 , 3 1 0 
6 9 6 
$ 18,006 
2 , 2 6 7 
1 9 , 6 8 7 
$ 
5 , 9 2 2 
862 
$ 
6 , 7 8 4 
^ 
5 , 0 3 9 
$ 
3 , 0 1 2 
7 3 8 
$ 
3 , 7 5 0 
i u 
3 , 6 1 3 
$ 
( 5 , 3 5 4 ) 
2 
( 1 , 2 6 4 ) 
$ 5 2 , 1 6 0 
$ 
4 , 7 8 9 
$ 6 3 , 0 2 0 
N o n - U . S. subsidiaries w h i c h operate in a local 
currency environment account for approxi-
mately 9 0 % o f the company's non-U. S. revenue. 
T h e remaining 1 0 % is f r o m subsidiaries and 
branches, predominantly in the Americas, 
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose eco-
nomic environment is highly inflationary. 
I n the E u r o p e / M i d d l e East/Africa area, 
E u r o p e a n operations accounted for approximately 
95% o f revenue in 1 9 8 8 , 1 9 8 7 and 1986. 
Interarea transfers consist principally o f 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
and software. These transfers are generally priced 
at cost plus an appropriate service charge. 
T h e cost and service charges that relate to fixed 
asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or 
a m o r t i z e d by the i m p o r t i n g area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the u n a m o r t i z e d portion o f 
service charges, and the net change during the 
year in u n a m o r t i z e d service charges have been 
eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 52 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1988 
i p S y t 
I 9 8 6 t 
1 9 8 5 1 
I 9 8 4 t 
For the year: 
R e v e n u e 
$ 
5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 5 2 , 1 6 0 
$ 5 0 , 7 1 8 
$ 4 6 , 3 0 9 
N e t e a r n i n g s before c u m u l a t i v e 
effect o f a c c o u n t i n g c h a n g e 
5 , 4 9 1 
5 , 2 5 8 
4 , 7 8 9 
6 , 5 5 5 
6 , 5 8 2 
Per share 
9 . 2 7 
8 . 7 2 
7 . 8 1 
1 0 . 6 7 
1 0 . 7 7 
C u m u l a t i v e effect o f c h a n g e in 
a c c o u n t i n g f o r i n c o m e taxes 
3 1 5 
— 
— 
— 
.— 
Per share 
. 5 3 
— 
— 
— 
— 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
5 , 8 0 6 
5 , 2 5 8 
4 , 7 8 9 
6 , 5 5 5 
6 , 5 8 2 
Per share 
9 . 8 0 
8 . 7 2 
7 . 8 1 
1 0 . 6 7 
1 0 . 7 7 
C a s h d i v i d e n d s p a i d 
2 , 6 0 9 
2 , 6 5 4 
2,698 
2 , 7 0 3 
2 , 5 0 7 
Per share 
4 . 4 0 
4 . 4 0 
4.40 
4.40 
4 . 1 0 
I n v e s t m e n t in plant, rental m a c h i n e s 
a n d o t h e r p r o p e r t y 
5 , 4 3 1 
4 , 3 1 2 
4 , 6 4 4 
6 , 4 3 4 
5 , 5 0 7 
R e t u r n o n stockholders' e q u i t y 
1 4 . 9 % 
1 4 . 5 % 
1 4 . 4 % 
2 2 . 4 % 
26.59, 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 
7 3 , 0 3 7 
$ 7 0 , 0 2 9 
$ 6 3 , 0 2 0 
$ 5 6 , 9 8 3 
$ 4 4 , 9 8 9 
N e t investment in plant, rental 
m a c h i n e s a n d o t h e r p r o p e r t y 
2 3 , 4 2 6 
2 2 , 9 6 7 
2 1 , 3 1 0 
1 9 , 7 1 3 
1 6 , 3 9 6 
W o r k i n g capital 
1 7 , 9 5 6 
1 8 , 4 3 0 
1 5 , 5 4 6 
1 4 , 9 5 8 
1 0 , 7 5 1 
L x ) n g - t e r m debt 
8 , 5 1 8 
7 , 1 0 8 
6 , 9 2 3 
6 , 3 6 8 
4 , 2 3 2 
S t o c k h o l d e r s ' e q u i t y 
3 9 , 5 0 9 
3 8 , 2 6 3 
3 4 , 3 7 4 
3 1 , 9 9 0 
2 6 , 4 8 9 
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 44. 
Per Share 
Stock Prices 
Earnings Dividends 
High 
Low 
Selected Quarterly Data 
Gross 
Net 
(Dollars in millions except per share and stock prices) 
Revenue 
Profit 
Earnings 
1 9 8 8 
First Q u a r t e r t 
$ 1 2 , 0 5 8 
$ 6 , 8 5 3 
$ 1 , 2 4 8 $ 
S e c o n d Q u a r t e r t 
1 3 , 9 0 7 
7 , 9 3 6 
9 6 4 
T h i r d Q u a r t e r t 
1 3 , 7 1 4 
7 , 8 2 6 
1 , 2 4 7 
F o u r t h Q u a r t e r 
2 0 , 0 0 2 
1 1 , 4 1 8 
2 , 3 4 7 
Total 
$ 5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 3 4 , 0 3 3 
$ 5 , 8 0 6 
1 9 8 7 
First Q u a r t e r t 
$ 1 0 , 9 2 7 
$ 
5 , 9 9 7 
$ 
7 8 5 
S e c o n d Q u a r t e r t 
1 3 , 0 3 5 
7 , 1 0 9 
1 , 1 7 8 
T h i r d Q u a r t e r t 
1 2 , 9 9 2 
7 , 0 3 3 
1 , 2 0 8 
F o u r t h Q u a r t e r t 
1 8 , 3 0 2 
9 , 9 9 5 
2 , 0 8 7 
T o t a l 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 3 0 , 1 3 4 
$ 5 , 2 5 8 
tRestated. See accounting change note on page 4 4 . 
tlncludes $315 million, or $.53 per share, cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes. 
There were 833,785 stockholders o f record 
T h e regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
at D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 . D u r i n g 1988, stockhold- 
M a r c h 1 0 , 1 9 8 9 , will be at the rate o f $ 1 . 1 0 
ers received $ 2 , 6 0 9 million in cash dividends. 
per share. This dividend will be IBM's 2 9 6 t h 
consecutive quarterly cash dividend. 
$2.10t 
1 . 6 3 
2.10 
3 . 9 7 
$1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
$ 1 2 4 . 0 0 
$ 1 0 4 . 5 0 
1 2 8 . 3 8 
1 0 5 . 6 3 
1 2 9 . 5 0 
1 0 9 . 5 0 
1 2 5 . 0 0 
1 1 2 . 7 5 
$ 9 . 8 0 
$ 4 . 4 0 
1 . 3 0 
1 . 9 5 
2.00 
3 . 4 7 
$ 1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
1 5 6 . 6 3 
1 6 8 . 6 3 
1 7 5 . 8 8 
1 5 7 . 2 5 
$ 8 . 7 2 
$ 4 . 4 0 
$ 1 1 5 . 7 5 
1 4 2 . 6 3 
1 4 8 . 5 0 
100.00 
T h e stock prices reflect the high and low prices 
for IBM's capital stock on the N e w York Stock 
Exchange composite tape for the last t w o years. 


===== PAGE 53 =====
I B M Corporation 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Chairman, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, CaHf.-engineering and construction 
Harold Brown 
Chairman, Foreign PoHcy Institute,The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman of the Board, Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick, N.J-health care products 
FrankT. Cary 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Kaspar V Cassani* 
Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, 
IBM World Trade Corporation 
William T. Coleman, Jr 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C, New York, N.Y., London, England, 
and Tokyo, Japan-attorneys at law 
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. 
Chairman of the Board, HCA, Nashville, Tenn.-health services 
Carla Anderson Hills** 
Partner, Weil, Gotshal & Manges, Washington, D.C, New York, N.Y., Miami, Fla., 
Houston and DaIIas,Tex.-attorneys at law 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; Partner, Riker, Danzig, Scherer, Hyland & Perretti, 
Morristown, N.J-attorneys at law 
Nannerl O. Keohane 
President, Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass. 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
Director, Institute for International Studies, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif 
J. Richard Munro 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Time Inc., New York, N.Y-publishing 
Thomas S. Murphy 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., 
New York, N.Y.-broadcasting and publishing 
John R.Opel 
Chairman of the Executive Committee, IBM 
John B. Slaughter 
President, Occidental College, Los Angeles, Calif 
Edgar S. Woolard, Jr. 
President, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Co., Inc.-chemical products 
•Retired from the Board 12/31/88 
**Resigned from the Board 12/31/88 
Board Committees: 
Executive Committee: 
John R. Opel, Chairman 
John F. Akers 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
FrankT. Cary 
Kaspar V. Cassani* 
J. Richard Munro 
Retirement Plans Committee: 
Jack D. Kuehler, Chairman 
Harold Brown 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Carla Anderson Hills** 
Compensation Committee: 
James E. Burke, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr 
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. 
J Richard Munro 
Thomas S. Murphy 
Audit Committee: 
Richard W. Lyman,Chairman 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Nannerl O. Keohane 
John B. Slaughter 
Advisory Board: 
George B. Beitzel 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, New York Stock Exchange 
George L. Hinman 
Partner, Hinman, Howard & Kattell, Binghamton, N.Y-attorneys at law 
John N. Irwin II 
O f Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb ScTyler, New York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, New York, N.Y. 
Allen J. Krowe 
Retired Executive Vice President, IBM; Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Texaco Inc. 
T. Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
President du Conseil d'Administration, Centre Fran^ais du Commerce Exterieur, Paris, France 
William McChesneyMartin, Jr 
Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dean R. McKay 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Chief Executive Officer, A.P Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark-owners of the Maersk Fleet 
William H. Moore 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Trust Company, New York, N.Y. 
Dean P Phypers 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. Rizzo 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Dean, Graduate School of Business Administration, 
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
William W. Scranton 
Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, Wilmington, Del.-attorneys at law 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, New York, N.Y-attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
Officers: 
Chairman of the Board 
John F. Akers 
Vice Chairmen of the Board 
Kaspar V Cassani* 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Senior Vice Presidents 
C. Michael Armstrong 
George H. Conrades 
Carl ]. Conti 
Ralph E. Gomory, 
Science and Technology 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
David E. McKinney 
Frank A. Metz, Jr., 
Finance and Planning 
Patrick A.Toole 
Vice Presidents 
Ray S. AbuZayyad 
John A. Armstrong 
Michael J. Attardo 
Walton E. Burdick 
James A. Cannavino 
Ralph W. Clark 
Vincent N. Cook* 
Kenneth W. Dam 
Nicholas M. Donofrio 
Gerald W. Ebker 
Donato A. Evangelista. 
General Counsel 
Howard G. Figueroa 
Lucie J Fjeldstad 
Larry J. Ford 
James J. Forese 
Heinz K. Fridrich 
Richard T. Gerstner 
Victor J. Goldberg 
William O. Grabe 
Joseph M. Guglielmi 
Lutz F. Hahne 
Ellen M. Hancock 
Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. 
Edward J. Kfoury 
Robert J LaBant** 
Ned C. Lautenbach 
Paul R. Low 
Edward E. Lucente 
Victor R, Macdonald* 
Marvin L. Mann 
David E. McDowell** 
Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. 
M. Bernard Puckett 
Michael J. Quinlan 
Renato Riverso 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
Robert M. Stephenson 
Charles H.Swair 
Nancy H.Teeters 
H.Mitchell Watson, Jr. 
Earl E Wheeler 
Vice President and Controller 
John P. Cunningham 
Secretary 
William W.K. Rich 
Treasurer 
David A. Finley 
Assistant Controller 
Michael H.Van Vranken 
Assistant Treasurers 
Joe Grills 
Ira D. Hall 
Robert N. Mattson 
John H. Stewart 
•Retiring in 1989 
^*Elected 1/31/89 
^Deceased 1/21/89 


===== PAGE 54 =====
IBM World Trade 
Sir Roderick Carnegie 
President, Business Council of Australia, Melbourne, Australia 
Asia/Pacific Group Jill K.Conway 
Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.; 
Board: 
former President of Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
Kenneth W. Dam 
Vice President, IBM 
Richard T. Gerstner 
Vice President, IBM; General Manager, Personal Systems 
David K. P Li 
Director and Chief Executive,The Bank of East Asia, Ltd., Hong Kong 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM World Trade Asia/Pacific Group 
Mohamed Noordin Soplee 
Director General, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
Ralph A. Pfeiffer, Jr 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Clarence B. Rogers, Jr 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; President, Equifax, Inc., Atlanta, Ga. 
Takeo Shiina 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan Ltd. 
Tan Chok Kian 
Executive Chairman, Stock Exchange of Singapore; Singapore's Trade Representative to Taiwan 
Jiro Ushio 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ushio, Inc., Tokyo, Japan 
IBM World Trade 
C. Michael Armstrong 
Senior Vice President, IBM; Chairman, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation 
Europe/Middle East/Pierre Barazer 
President, IBM Erance 
Africa Corporation 
Eric Bourdais de Charbonniere — 
Executive Vice President, Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of New York, Paris, France 
Board of Directors: Juan Antonio Garcia Diez 
Attorney; Chairman, URALITA S. A., Madrid, Spain 
Pierre L. Gousseland 
Honorary Chairman, AMAX Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Lutz E Hahne 
Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Plans et Services Techniques, IBM Europe 
Hans-Olaf Henkel 
President, IBM Germany 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
President du Conseil dAdministration, Centre Fran^ais du Commerce Exterieur, Paris, France 
David E. McKinney 
Senior Vice President, IBM; President Directeur General, IBM Europe; 
President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM World Trade Europe/Middle East/Africa Corporation 
Umberto Nordio 
Retired Chairman, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy; 
Chairman,The Galileo Company Limited, Swindon, U.K. 
Renato Riverso 
Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe 
Bo Rydin 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Svenska Cellulosa AB, Sundsvall, Sweden 
Sir Philip Shelbourne 
Chairman, Henry Ansbacher Holdings PLC, London, England 
Otto Sturzenegger 
Chairman of the Board, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y. 
Nancy H. Teeters 
Vice President and Chief Economist, IBM 
Kurt Werner 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany 
IBM World Trade 
Manuel F Ayau 
President Emeritus, Universidad Francisco Marroquin, Guatemala City, Guatemala 
Latin America 
Roberto Konder Bornhauser 
Vice Chairman, Unibanco, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Board: 
William A. Etherington 
Vice President and Assistant General Manager, IBM Latin America 
James J. Forese 
Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM World Trade Americas Group 
Jaime Garcia Parra 
President, Acerias Paz del Rio, S.A., Bogota, Colombia 
Julio J. Gomez 
Vice President and General Manager, Banco Shaw, S. A., Buenos Aires, Argentina 
Claudio X. Gonzalez 
Chairman of the Board and Director General, Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico 
Rudolf Hohn 
President and General Manager, IBM Brazil 
Robeli J. Libero 
President and General Manager, IBM Latin America 
Eliodoro Matte L 
Vice Chairman, Compania Manufacturera de Papeles y Cartones S. A., Santiago, Chile 
Paulo D. Villares 
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S.A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Gustavo J. Vollmer 
Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S. A., Caracas, Venezuela 
Richard Webb 
Chairman, Cuanto, S. A., Lima, Peru 


===== PAGE 55 =====
The following 
information 
is provided 
as a convenient reference for IBM 
stockholders: 
The 1989 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held on Monday, 
April 24, at 10 a.m., at the David L. Lawrence 
Convention Center, Pittsburgh, Pa. 
Notice of Annual Meeting, 
Proxy Statement and Proxy Voting Card 
are mailed to each stockholder in March. The 
Proxy Statement describes the items of business 
to be voted on at the Annual Meeting and 
provides biographies of the Board's nominees 
for director and their principal affiliations 
with other companies or organizations, as well 
as other information about the company. 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes 
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including 
a report on the company, questions and answers 
of general interest, and the results of voting 
on items of business. 
IBM Stockholder Records 
are maintained by the IBM Stockholder 
Relations Department, 590 Madison Avenue, 
New York, N.Y. 10022.This department distrib-
utes dividends and can answer questions 
regarding stockholder accounts. 
IBM Stock Transfer 
is handled by Morgan Shareholder Services 
Trust Company, 30 West Broadway, New York, 
N.Y. 10007. Stockholders wishing to transfer 
stock or to change the name on a stock certifi-
cate should contact Morgan. 
Stock certificates are valuable and should 
be safeguarded since replacement takes time 
and requires payment of a surety bond premium 
by the stockholder. If a stock certificate is lost, 
stolen or destroyed, Stockholder Relations 
should be notified. Registered mail should be 
used whenever stock is mailed. 
IBM Stock is Traded 
on the New York Stock Exchange, other 
exchanges in the United States, and exchanges 
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, 
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and 
the Netherlands. 
The following information may be obtained 
without charge from the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department, Box J896, Church Street Station, 
New York, N.Y. 10242. 
The Form 10-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
provides further details on IBM's business, 
including a list of subsidiaries, summarized in 
the Annual Report. Form lO-K is available 
in April. 
The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting 
is available in June. 
IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of 
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles that 
the company sets for the conduct of its business. 
Equal Opportunity, Affirmative 
Action and Community Programs 
in IBM are outlined in a document that describes 
programs in the United States for women, 
minorities and handicapped persons, and reviews 
IBM's affirmative action efforts in the community. 
IBM Annual Report Translations 
and Recordings 
are available. The report is translated into 
French and Japanese. An audio cassette recording 
in English is available for the blind. 
A Service for Deaf Stockholders 
provided by the IBM Stockholder Relations 
Department enables deaf stockholders who have 
access to a teletypewriter to communicate 
with the department's New York City office. 
Stockholders who wish to use the service 
should call (212) 735-7120. 
For Information 
regarding stockholders' accounts, call 
(212) 735-7000. 
General questions about IBM, call 
(800) 426-3333-
Outside the continental U. S., call 
(617) 895-2874-
international Business Machines 
Corporation 
Corporate Headquarters 
Armonk, N.Y. 10504 
AIX, Application Systcmy4oo, DB2, Enterprise System/3090, 
ES/4381, Enterprise System/^370, ES/ti370, Enterprise 
Systems Architecture/370, ESA/370, Independence Series, 
Micro Channel, MVS/ESA, NetView, NetView/PC, 
Operating Systcm/2, OS/2, Operating Systeni/^oo, 
OS/4^oo, Presentation Manager, Screen Reader, System/370 
and Systems Application Architecture are trademarks of 
the IBM Corporation. 
IBM RT, Personal Systcm/2 and PS/2 are registered 
trademarks of the IBM Corporation. UNIX is a registered 
trademark of AT&T Company. 
PRODIGY is a service mark and registered trademark of 
Prodigy Services Company. 


===== PAGE 56 =====


===== PAGE 57 =====
G505-
988-0 3 
