

===== PAGE 1 =====


===== PAGE 2 =====
Contents: 
1 
Financial Highlights 
2 
Letter to Stockholders 
5 
22 
25 
Reshaping IBM for the '90s: 
A Progress Report 
IBM and the Community 
4 6 
Financial Report 
Report of Management 
Report of Independent Accountants 
Earnings 
Financial Position 
Cash Flows 
Stockholders' Equity 
Management Discussion 
Notes to Financial Statements 
Five-Year Comparison of Financial Data 
Directors and Officers 
IBM's operations: 
IBM is in the business of applying advanced 
information technology to help solve the 
problems of business, government, science, 
space exploration, defense, education, 
medicine and other areas of human activity. 
IBM olfers customers solutions that 
incorporate information processing systems, 
software, communications systems and 
other products and services to address specific 
needs. These solutions are provided by 
IBM's worldwide marketing organizations, 
as well as through the company's Business 
Partners, including authorized dealers 
and remarketers. 
48 
Stockholder Information 
Cover and right: Visitors to the historic Louvre 
museum in Paris, France, are welcomed by an 
eye-catching pyramid that serves as the new public 
entrance to the renowned museum. The new 
entrance gives visitors better access to the Louvre's 
diverse treasures, while improving the museum's 
ability to accommodate museum-goers from around 
the world. Designed by architect I. M. Pei, the 
complex includes the museum bookstore and a 
variety of shops supported by an IBM Application 
System/400 and 75 IBM468} point-of-sale terminals. 
IBM, too, is transforming itself to be more 
responsive to customers, building on the company's 
enduring values of service and excellence. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
Financial Highlights 
for the year ended December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1989 
Highlights of the year: 
R e v e n u e 
E a r n i n g s before i n c o m e taxes 
I n c o m e taxes 
N e t e a r n i n g s before c u m u l a t i v e elfect o f a c c o u n t i n g c h a n g e 
Per share 
C u m u l a t i v e effect o f c h a n g e in a c c o u n t i n g f o r i n c o m e taxes. 
Per share 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Per share 
C a s h d i v i d e n d s p a i d 
Per share 
I n v e s t m e n t in plant, rental m a c h i n e s a n d o t h e r p r o p e r t y . 
. 
Average n u m b e r o f shares o u t s t a n d i n g (in millions) . 
. 
. 
. 
R e t u r n o n stockholders' equity 
6 2 , 7 1 0 
6 , 6 4 5 
2 , 8 8 7 
3 , 7 5 8 
6 . 4 7 
3 , 7 5 8 
6 . 4 7 
2 , 7 5 2 
4 . 7 3 
6 , 4 1 0 
5 8 1 
9 . 6 % 
5 9 , 6 8 1 
9 , 0 3 3 
3 , 5 4 2 
5 , 4 9 1 
9 . 2 7 
3 1 5 
.53 
5,806 
9.80 
2 , 6 0 9 
4.40 
5 , 4 3 1 
5 9 2 
1 4 . 9 % 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 
7 7 , 7 3 4 
$ 
7 3 , 0 3 7 
N e t investment in plant, rental m a c h i n e s a n d o t h e r p r o p e r t y 
$ 
2 4 , 9 4 3 
$ 
2 3 , 4 2 6 
W o r k i n g capital 
$ 
1 4 , 1 7 5 
$ 
1 7 , 9 5 6 
L o n g - t e r m debt 
$ 
1 0 , 8 2 5 
$ 
8 , 5 1 8 
S t o c k h o l d e r s ' equity 
$ 
3 8 , 5 0 9 
$ 
3 9 , 5 0 9 
N u m b e r o f employees 
3 8 3 , 2 2 0 
3 8 7 , 1 1 2 
N u m b e r o f stockholders 
8 1 5 , 5 8 0 
8 3 3 , 7 8 5 
Revenue 
Dividends/ Net Earnings 
Earnings Per Share 
50,7 
62,710 
59,681 
52,160 
55,256 
1985 
'86 
'87 
6,555 
4,789 
5,806 
5,258 
2,703 1 2 , 6 9 8 • 2,6<i4l 2-609 
3,758 
2,752 
1985 
'86 
'87 
'88 
198 
Dividends 1 8 
Net Earnings 
10.67 
781 
9.80 
6.47 
1985 
'86 
'87 
'88 
1989 


===== PAGE 4 =====
Letter to Stockholders 
For the fourth quarter and full year, IBM's 
1989 shipments and revenue exceeded 
those of 1988, while earnings decreased from 
the prior-year periods. The company took 
significant actions to restructure its U.S. 
business, resulting in a $2.4 billion charge 
against fourth-quarter earnings. Revenue 
and earnings v^ere unfavorably affected by a 
stronger U.S. dollar and by an increase 
in operating lease activity. While the increase 
in IBM operating leases has an unfavorable 
impact on short-term results, these leases will 
benefit the company in the long term. 
Demand for IBM's products and services 
remains good. Revenue in 1989 continued 
to show strong growth outside the 
United States, with modest growth in the 
U.S. With the U.S. restructuring announced 
in December, we look forward to a more 
competitive IBM. 
Worldwide revenue for the year ended 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , was $62.7 billion, up 
5.1 percent from the prior year's $ 5 9 . 7 billion. 
Worldwide net earnings for the year were 
$3.8 billion, compared with $5.8 billion 
in 1988.The after-tax margin was 6.0 percent 
in 1989, compared with 9.7 percent in 1988. 
Earnings per share were $ 6 . 4 7 in 1 9 8 9 , 
compared with $ 9 . 8 0 per share in 1 9 8 8 . T h e 
one-time charge against earnings for the 
restructuring initiatives, investment revalua-
tions and other actions amounts to $ 2 . 5 8 per 
share. Average shares outstanding were 581.1 
million in 1 9 8 9 and 5 9 2 . 4 million in 1 9 8 8 . 
Revenue from non-US. operations in 
1989, included in consolidated results, was 
$ 3 7 . 0 billion, up 7.6 percent from $ 3 4 . 4 
billion in 1988. Non-US. net earnings were 
$4.1 billion in 1989, compared with 
$3.6 billion in 1988. 
For the quarter ended December 31, 
1 9 8 9 , worldwide revenue was $ 2 0 . 5 billion, 
up 2.3 percent from the prior year's $ 2 0 . 0 
billion. Worldwide net earnings for the three 
months were $.6 billion in 1989, compared 
with $2.3 billion in 1988, with after-tax 
margins of 2.9 percent and 11.7 percent, 
respectively. Earnings per share were $ 1.04 
in 1 9 8 9 , compared with $ 3 . 9 7 in 1 9 8 8 . 
Average shares outstanding for the period 
were 575.9 million in 1 9 8 9 and 590.8 
million in 1988. 
In a generally difficult year for the 
computer industry, IBM's performance did 
not meet our expectations — or yours. 
At the same time, our World Trade busi-
nesses continued to demonstrate strong sales 
and earnings growth. Our United States 
operations achieved modest revenue growth 
for the first time in four years, despite gener-
ally sluggish demand in the U S . market-
place. And IBM's 3090 large-scale processor, 
midrange Application System/4oo and 
Personal System/2 product lines all enjoyed 
better than double-digit revenue growth. 
These results, and the restructuring 
actions we have taken, give us confidence that 
IBM will be the stronger, more competi-
tive company it must be to prosper in the '90s 
and to provide enhanced value to the 
company's shareholders. 
A Changing and 
Highly Competitive Industry 
For almost a quarter of a century, growth 
in the information industry averaged nearly 
15 percent each year, driven largely by 
advances in technology that dramatically 
reduced the cost of computing. Over the 
past three years, however, industry growth 
has slowed to between 8 and 10 percent 
worldwide, with the fastest growth coming 
outside the United States. 
At the same time, the industry is under-
going fundamental change. Opportunities 
are shifting in favor of software and services, 
and toward small computers, open systems 
and standards. Rapid changes in technology 
and advances in manufacturing productivity 
have created overcapacity in both physical 
and human resources. Intense competition is 
increasing pressure on prices, margins 
and profitability. And customers continue to 
raise the level of their expectations. 
These changes confirm our resolve 
to continue with the competitive transforma-
tion of IBM — a resolve to strengthen: 
• Our relationships with our customers; 
• The competitiveness of our products and 
services; 
• Our efficiency. 
The pages that follow provide a progress 
report. A few points bear particular mention. 
Focus on Customers 
In transforming IBM, we have increased the 
number of people working directly with 
customers by 23 percent over the past three 
years. With in-depth education and longer 
tenure, they are more knowledgeable and 
better prepared to understand and to help 
customers solve their business problems. 
Our customers also report we are 
making it easier and simpler to do business 
with IBM — to acquire, finance, support 
and use our offerings. To be certain we are 
developing products and services that meet 
customers' real needs, we are being as 
forthcoming as we can about our plans and 
directions, and we continue to ask customers 
to participate in the work of our develop-
ment laboratories. 
Customers tell us we are on the right 
course — that they welcome the changes in 
IBM, and would like to see us do more, and 
even more quickly. We are following that 
very good advice. 
While these changes strengthen our 
ability to respond to customers' individual 
needs, IBM is also well-positioned for 
an environment of fast-moving markets and 
diverse opportunities. 
With customer expectations at the 
center of how we manage our business and 
measure our progress, we have a sharper 
focus on understanding and selecting 
specific markets where we can achieve clear 
leadership and attractive returns. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
IBM Chairman of the Board John F.Akers and 
IBM President Jack D. Kuehler (seated). 
Today, more than ever, that requires 
leadership in quahty —world-class quality in 
our products, in our services, in the way 
we make a proposal or render a bill.Through-
out our operations, we are putting specific 
initiatives and measurements in place to 
be certain we are meeting customers' expecta-
tions—so that, in their eyes, the quality of 
every aspect of their relationship with IBM is 
as nearly perfect as we can make it. 
Expanding Alliances 
In developing specific solutions for cus-
tomers or pursuing longer-range opportuni-
ties, we often come to a choice: whether to 
rely entirely on IBM resources, or to join 
with other companies whose strengths com-
plement and extend our own. The result 
can be access to technology, to software, or to 
specific markets and distribution channels. 
Around the world, for example, IBM has 
relationships with more than 10,000 joint 
marketers, systems integrators and Business 
Partners who reach and support the 
majority of our Application System/4oo 
and Personal System/2 customers. 
Other relationships take the form of 
direct equity investments; through 1989, we 
had established more than 75 equity 
alliances worldwide. Our partners range 
from large, long-established companies such 
as Sears and Siemens, to small, entrepre-
neurial software ventures; we are investing in 
promising opportunities from supercom-
puters to interactive information services 
for the home. 
These relationships are important to IBM 
today, and a key element of our plans for 
growth in the future. 
More Competitive Product Line 
In our drive for more competitive products 
and services, delivered on ever-shorter 
cycles, we are making essential investments in 
research, development and engineering. 
We have not compromised in this area and in 
1989, as in prior years, these investments 
outpaced revenue growth. 
We continue to shift the balance of 
our investments to software —up 41 percent 
in 1989. 
During the year, the results were evident 
in a series of significant new products: 
• OfficeVision, a family of easy-to-use appli-
cations for document preparation, filing, 
electronic mail and calendars. Our first major 
Systems Application Architecture offering, 
OfficeVision provides consistent, integrated 
office functions across IBM's product line. 
• AD/Cycle, a series of products, tools 
and services and programming languages 
developed by IBM and our Business Partners. 
AD/Cycle uses computer automation to 
improve the productivity and quality of cus-
tomers' application development efforts. 
• CIM Advantage, a package of hardware 
and software products that provides a com-
prehensive approach to computer-integrated 
manufacturing. CIM Advantage includes 
several solutions we developed for use in our 
own manufacturing plants. 
Other announcements reflected our 
determination to lead in introducing and 
applying advanced technologies. The 3390 
Direct Access Storage Device, introduced 
and shipped in 1989, is the industry's fastest 
high-performance storage product —40 
percent faster and capable of storing as much 
data as its predecessor in one-third the space. 
During the year, IBM was the first in the 
industry to use Intel's powerful new i486 
microprocessor in a product — an upgrade to 
the IBM Personal System/2 Model 70-A21. 
And we delivered the first product in the 
industry to incorporate a 4-million-bit 
memory chip, as we did with the earlier 
one-million-bit chip. 
To maintain our position in the forefront 
of semiconductor technology, and there-
fore in our systems business, we dedicated 
a new Advanced Semiconductor Technology 
Center at our site in East Fishkill, New York, 
in October. This research and development 
facility —the first of its kind in the United 
States — will be home to a new manufactur-
ing technology called X-ray lithography, 
essential to producing future generations of 
semiconductor chips. 
We have offered to share our technolo-
gies and to make the facility available for use 
by other companies because we believe it is 
vital to IBM's long-term interests for the U.S. 
to be part of a semiconductor industry that 
is competitive worldwide. We are delighted 
that Motorola is the first company to join us. 
Greater Efficiency 
Over the past four years, we have taken a 
series of actions to reduce our costs, expenses 
and structure, and to sharpen IBM's com-
petitiveness worldwide. We have consolidated 
manufacturing capacity; we are operating 
with fewer layers of management; and we 
have reduced overhead and indirect positions 
by some 50,000, while maintaining our tra-
dition of full employment. We believe that the 
returns —in the loyalty, flexibility and pro-
ductivity of IBM employees — continue to be 
a competitive advantage for the company. 
While our business in the United States 
is improving, that improvement is not as 
rapid as we expected. As a result, in 1989 we 


===== PAGE 6 =====
announced further actions to restructure 
our operations and improve our efficiency. 
These initiatives include plans for additional 
consolidations of capacity and reductions 
in selected skills. Through a combination 
of attrition and incentive payments, 
we expect our U.S. population to decline by 
at least 10,000 during 1990.The year-end 
figure of 206,000 will represent a reduction 
of 37,000 from the 1985 peak, and a return 
to the level of 1981. 
The costs of this restructuring, in-
cluding investment revaluations announced 
at the same time, are included in the 
provision against fourth-quarter earnings. 
As a result of these actions, we will 
reduce IBM's ongoing cost and expense rate 
by approximately $ i billion per year. We 
expect to see the return in our 1990 results, 
and to achieve the full earnings benefit 
of about $1.00 per share in 1991. 
E n h a n c i n g S h a r e h o l d e r V a l u e 
We believe these actions will substan-
tially improve IBM's operating returns and 
reward the company's shareholders for 
their support. 
To further enhance shareholder 
value, IBM has, since 1986, repurchased 
shares of its common stock — a total of 
47 million shares through the end of 1989. 
Repurchase reduces shareholders' equity, 
distributing earnings over a smaller base 
and increasing returns.The benefit to 
IBM shareholders has been to increase return 
on equity by approximately 6 percent in 
1 9 8 8 and 1 9 8 9 . 
In December, the IBM Board of Directors 
authorized the repurchase of as much as 
$4 billion in additional shares.This additional 
repurchase would bring the total investment 
since 1986 to $10.5 billion —a continuing 
reflection of the company's confidence in its 
prospects, and an indication that we regard 
IBM stock as an attractive investment. 
P r o s p e c t s for t h e Future 
These investments also reflect our 
confidence in the information industry and 
its prospects for growth. Long term, we 
expect industry growth of 7 to 10 percent 
per year, faster than overall economic 
growth worldwide. 
Given a reasonable economic environ-
ment, IBM is planning for growth in all 
major geographies in 1990, led by the Asia 
Pacific area, followed by Europe and the 
United States. With these plans, we expect 
significant improvement in our financial 
results beginning in 1990, with additional 
progress in 1991. 
Our confidence is based on two 
fundamentals. The first is the opportunity 
we see in the potential for new customers 
and new applications. For example, as 
the 1980s began, personal systems in use 
on desktops around the world numbered in 
the tens of thousands. Today, the figure is 
in the tens of millions. 
Even with that remarkable growth, the 
great majority of companies worldwide 
do not use modern information products. 
An even larger majority of employees 
who could use some type of workstation do 
not have them. In fact, only about two 
percent of the world's business information 
has been digitized — that is, put on a 
computer system. So the opportunity is 
clearly there — for IBM and for others. 
The second fundamental is our con-
fidence that IBM is well-positioned to par-
ticipate fully in the opportunity we see 
ahead — in our worldwide presence, our 
financial resources, our investments in 
technology and software. 
Above all, our faith and confidence rests 
in the people of IBM. We are grateful for 
their unflagging energy and loyalty and 
their readiness to do whatever is required to 
assure that IBM continues to prosper. 
laniiary 30, 1990, by order of the 
Board of Directors 
lohn F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 
Singapore Airlines operates over 500 flights a week 
and its routes span five continents — linking 
57 cities in 37 countries. This international airline 
utilizes IBM systems to schedule cabin and flight 
crews, manage the maintenance of its aircraft, and
control ground services, including passenger 
and cargo handling. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
The incredible pace of new 
W XM W 
Msav* 
shifting market trends. 
a i i u 
i i c i c e 
C u i i i p < = t , i i . i o n 
G H 
every front have chanaed 
t h e f a c e 
o f m t s 
i i i i u r n i d n o n 
j p r l i i c f r r y f o r c k « f Q | > , | p M 
i s 
changing, as well, to become 
• w i • • ^ 
* WW • • • 
w 
* • » ^ 
information processing 
C O i i i p a i i / i n t , i i d W v r i 
l U . . . 


===== PAGE 8 =====
.., .. o 
e. 
Q) 
a:: 
U) 
U) 
Q) .. 
m 
o .. 
a.. 
<C . . 
U) o 
~ 
Q) 
.c 
.., .. 2 
:E 
m -m 
c 
I-e. 
ca 
.c 
U) 
Q) 
a:: 
Mazda Motor Corporation 
is using a computer-
integrated manufacturing 
network to tailor cars like 
the Miata to the driving 
needs and style preferences 
of its customers. IBM 
systems link Mazda develop-
ment laboratories and 
manufacturingfacilities 
around the world. 
6 
IBM 1989 Annual Report 
The last four years have been a period of dramatic 
change for IBM and for the information industry as a 
whole. Rapid strides in technology and product 
innovations have brought about millions of new com-
puter users, including consumers and small busi-
nesses, and a tremendous demand for new applications, 
open systems and standardized products. 
Manufacturing efficiencies have resulted in 
excess capacity throughout the industry, and there are 
pressures on prices, margins and profitability . 
Moreover, competition, ranging from one-person 
software consulting firms to major global companies, 
is intense and unrelenting . 
Recognizing the scope of these challenges, IBM 
developed a strategy in 1985 to become leaner, more 
efficient and, most important, market driven. 
IBM's goal is to be the world's champion in meeting 
customers' wants and needs . 
In a sense, this strategy means getting back 
to basics: selecting markets that offer the best returns 
and pursuing leadership in them by making 
customer satisfaction the number-one priority. 
To this end, IBM has been taking decisive and far-
reaching steps to refocus its business on the customer. 
Headquarters operations around the world have been 
streamlined. To move more resources and authority 
closer to customers, seven lines of business have 
been established. These largely independent organi-
zations are responsible for developing and manu-
facturing product and service solutions for customers 
ranging from individuals using personal systems 
to large enterprises with worldwide networks. 
To extend direct customer support, IBM launched 
the largest retraining and redeployment program 
in its history. The company also consolidated manufac-
turing plants and redirected the missions of some 
of its development laboratories to respond to increased 
demand for software and services. Further, some 
operations that were not part ofIBM's core business 
of computing and communications have been sold. 
Product lines have been refreshed from top to 
bottom,and production cycles have been shortened 
to enable the company to deliver solutions faster. 
Along with these changes, the company has inten-
sified its focus on quality and on delivering superior 
customer service. At the same time, it is exploring 
innovative new ways of doing business. 
While the transformation continues, IBM 
is better-positioned-in organization and outlook-
for success in the years ahead. The following 
pages review the company's progress in becoming 
more market driven. 
Available in a variety of colors and textures, 
Robinson Brick's products are viewed among the best 
in the industry. Five years ago, when construction 
in the Denver, Colo. , area slowed, this fourth-
generation brick company began marketing on a 
national basis. Today, the company counts on 
an IBM AS,4oo to help manage a distribution net-
work that includes 135 distributors in 44 states. 
IBM 1989 Annual Report 
7 


===== PAGE 9 =====
Communication among Mobil Corporations 
worldwide offices is becoming easier with IBM's 
OfficeVision. The OfficeVision system will link 
Mobil's office workers engaged in activities ranging 
from management of oil supplies through 
delivery of finished products. It will help Mobil 
improve its efficiency and productivity, while 
enhancing customer service. 
Doing business 
in n e w ways 
The cornerstone of IBM's business has been, 
and remains, the strength of its relationship 
with customers. As the company reshapes its 
business for the challenges of the 1990s, 
IBM is reaffirming its commitment to provide 
customers with the most competitive solu-
tions available. Often this means doing busi-
ness in new ways. 
The growing trend toward global busi-
ness has led to significant changes in the 
support that international customers require. 
To expand its international business, IBM 
has given its country general managers world-
wide responsibility for key international 
customers headquartered in their countries. 
Moreover, to ensure consistent, coordinated 
solutions and support, regions and branch 
offices have been created specifically to sup-
port each of these customers' operations 
worldwide. In the U.S., for example, a branch 
office in New York coordinates all market-
ing and support activities for Citicorp in 
4 4 countries. 
Japanese customers expanding their 
operations into global markets are now 
receiving marketing, language and cultural 
support from IBM Japan at their new 
sites. Currently, more than 30 employees 
of IBM Japan are on international assign-
ments in the U.S., Europe and parts of Asia 
to assist Japanese customers. 
IBM is also offering customers a wide 
range of financing options through its U.S. 
subsidiary, IBM Credit Corporation, and 
other credit operations around the world. In 
1989, customer financing volumes grew 
by 45 percent worldwide. In the U.S., IBM 
Credit Corporation financed one-third of 
all customer purchases of IBM products and 
nine out of ten Personal System/2 (PS/2)* 
computer shipments to authorized dealers. 
The company is seeing a growing trend 
toward leasing equipment, particularly 
in the U.S., where IBM Credit Corporation 
has become the preferred source of IBM 
customer financing. 
Business alliances have grown in impor-
tance in recent years as IBM turns to them 
to complement marketing and development 
efforts, to gain access to specialized skills 
and new technologies, and to deliver inter-
national solutions to customers faster. 
The most visible of these alliances are 
IBM Business Partners —remarketers, agents, 
application specialists, and dealers who 
sell selected IBM products or complement 
them with their own products and 
services. Today they account for about 80 
percent of Application System/^oo 
(AS/i-oo)* and Personal System/2 computer 
sales in the U.S. 
Service representatives at USAA (United Services 
Automobile Association), an insurance and finan-
cial services company based in San Antonio, Texas,
are using an advanced IBM image processing 
system to improve customer service, while reducin
costs and paper clutter. The system, which com-
presses mountains of insurance data into compact 
computerized files, can retrieve and display 
images of correspondence and policies in seconds. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
St. Francis Hospital, The Heart Center, in Long 
Island, N. Y., is staying in the forefront of cardiac 
care with the help of IBM systems. In the radiology 
department, a radiology management system 
developed by an IBM Business Partner tracks and 
reports on patient information and on staff and 
equipment scheduling. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
Nawarat Marine Farm knows all too well that the 
slightest drop in the temperature of a shrimp 
pond or change in feeding patterns can result in a 
costly business loss. That's why Nawarat, one 
of Thailand's largest shrimp producers, relies on 
IBM computers to control its ponds and monitor 
the growth and feeding rates of its shrimp. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
IBM has made equity investments in 
many of the companies with which it has 
alHances. Examples include PCO Inc., an 
optoelectronics company, and Policy Man-
agement Systems Corporation, a provider of 
insurance applications. The benefits of such 
equity investments are twofold: First, 
they help accelerate the development of solu-
tions for customers; second, they offer the 
opportunity for financial returns to IBM as 
these companies grow and prosper. 
During 1989, the company completed 
the sale of ROLM manufacturing and develop-
ment activities to Siemens AG. However, 
telecommunications will continue to be an 
important part of IBM's business. A newly 
formed company jointly owned by IBM and 
Siemens will market and service Siemens 
telephones, telephone switching systems 
and other telecommunications products in 
the U.S. IBM will also remarket Siemens 
telephone products to businesses in Europe 
and Australia. 
On a broader level, IBM is facilitating the 
development of customer solutions through 
a Worldwide Customer Solutions Oppor-
A shopper completes a purchase in the glass shop 
of an NK department store in Stockholm. 
With assistance from Skandinaviska Banken and 
IBM Sweden, the prestigious Swedish retail 
company has automated point-of-sale and credit 
card operations at its department and fashion 
stores located throughout Sweden. 
tunity Council formed in 1988.The council, 
composed of marketing and development 
executives from IBM U.S. and World Trade 
organizations, directs resources and invest-
ments toward developing new industry solu-
tions in promising international markets. 
More than 30 industry opportunities 
have been identified to date. In one instance, 
the council provided $ 15 million in funding 
and 130 personnel to develop opportunities 
in wholesale distribution. Within this indus-
try, specialists were responsible for develop-
ing solutions in 27 segments, including food 
and drug wholesalers, automotive parts, 
and hotels. In the year since the council's 
initial funding, IBM's revenues in wholesale 
distribution have increased by nearly 
$300 million. 
In October, IBM reaffirmed its intent 
to remain in the forefront of global semicon-
ductor technology with the opening of the 
Advanced Semiconductor Technology Center 
(ASTC) in East Fishkill, N.Y. The center 
will develop advanced chip technology for 
future IBM products and house the first 
commercial X-ray lithography facility in the 
U.S. Motorola is participating in IBM's 
research on the use of X-ray lithography tech-
nology and some of this research will 
be conducted at the new ASTC as the facility 
becomes operational. 
In addition, IBM is licensing process 
technology and its 4-million-bit chip to 
Micron Technology, Inc., to help broaden 
U.S. sources of supply for this key semi-
conductor component. 
IBM continues to explore new ways of 
applying advanced technologies such as 
artificial intelligence, image-based systems 
and computer-integrated manufacturing 
(CIM) to solving customer problems. Many 
banking, insurance, manufacturing and 
retailing customers are helping IBM to pio-
neer these technologies. 
Snow doesn't slow mail deliveries at Canada Post 
Corporation. A network of IBM systems allows 
Canada Post to track Priority Courier deliveries 
across the country; mail delivery performance 
is at record levels. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
Members of the North Dakota State Legislature 
discuss a bill under review. Legislators' tradi-
tional "bill books" are being replaced by IBM Per-
sonal System/2 workstations. The PS/2s are part 
of a new legislative network that will enable repre-
sentatives to more efficiently track bills, revisions 
and amendments that are before their chamber. 
A strengthened 
product line 
The basic building blocks for addressing 
unique customer requirements are IBM's 
products — hardware, software and sup-
port services. In recent years, customers 
have worked closely with IBM during prod-
uct development cycles to ensure that 
new products accurately respond to their 
specific needs. 
For example, customers with System/36 
and System/38 computers indicated they 
needed to expand their computing capabili-
ties with a new system that would also 
be compatible with large processors and 
Personal System/2 computers. IBM responded 
with the Application System/^oo, a power-
ful midrange system that was supported by 
more than i ,000 application programs 
on the day it was announced. Early and exten-
sive customer involvement in the planning, 
development and testing made the AS/^oo 
product introduction the most successful in 
IBM history 
Customers wanted a framework for build-
ing applications that are consistent in appear-
ance and function when running on any 
IBM system; IBM responded with the Systems 
Application Architecture (SAA)* platform. 
Applications developed using this unifying 
architecture look the same and have the 
capability to run on a Personal System/2, 
Application System/^oo or high-end proces-
sor like the Enterprise System/3090.* 
In response to customers' requirement 
for an operating system that would run on 
both IBM and non-IBM processors, the 
company introduced Advanced Interactive 
Executive (AIX*), a UNIX**-based operating 
system. By the end of 1990, AIX support will 
extend across IBM's Personal System/2, 
high-function workstations and System/370* 
product lines. 
During the year, IBM continued to deliver 
innovative products that effectively respond 
to customer needs. One of the most impor-
tant was OfficeVision, a family of applications 
that allows IBM customers to boost their 
office productivity and efficiency across their 
information networks. 
OfficeVision applications are easy 
to use and provide a range of office func-
tions, including document preparation, 
filing, electronic mail and calendar schedul-
ing. They also allow all office personnel, 
from secretaries to executives, to use 
the power and resources of large IBM systems 
at their desktop workstations. 
OfficeVision is the first major product 
developed using SAA architecture. 
Another SAA-based solution announced 
in 1989 was CIM Advantage.* A comprehen-
sive approach to computer-integrated manu-
facturing, CIM Advantage features more 
than 50 hardware and software products, 
developed by IBM and its Business Partners, 
When "TCBY" The Country's Best Yogurt opened 
its first franchise store seven years ago, a personal 
computer handled the company's information 
processing needs. Today, 1,600 stores later, "TCBY
uses three distributed Application System/400 
computers to help manage its operations, and its 
frozen yogurt has never tasted better. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
• 
ssi 
1 I 
SE(X)M security service at the Ueno Zoo in Tokyo 
is getting help from IBM computers which monitor 
animal cages. SECX)M Co., Ltd., uses IBM 
System/88s to provide residential and commercial 
security services to customers throughout Japan, 
and in some parts of the U.S. 


===== PAGE 15 =====
i 
. • \ t 
. 'J 
"J*' 
-s, 
. t. 
ff'i 
'-J 
V-. 
. 
im 
Australia's largest retail chain, Coles Myer, has 
1,600 supermarkets, and discount and department 
stores. From hats to pastries, the company aims 
to provide for all of its customers' retailing needs. 
IBM information systems play an important 
part in Coles Myer's superior customer service 
and business success. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
that integrate design, engineering, produc-
tion planning and plant operations 
with marketing, business planning and dis-
tribution. CIM Advantage also incorporates 
some of the solutions that IBM uses in 
its manufacturing operations to help reduce 
costs, improve productivity and shorten 
production cycles. 
To help customers improve the quality 
and management of their application develop-
ment efforts, IBM introduced AD/Cycle, a 
series of IBM and Business Partner products, 
tools, services and improved program-
ming languages that will enhance produc-
tivity. AD/Cycle addresses each phase of 
the development process, including modeling, 
analysis/design, producing the application, 
testing and maintenance. 
In response to customer requirements for 
more function and power at the high end, 
IBM dramatically reduced batch processing 
time, enhanced system security and intro-
duced new models of the 3090. In addition, 
the Application System/4oo was enhanced 
with new top-of-the-line, intermediate and 
entry models. 
A chef in one of Varig Airlines' renowned 
catering 
kitchens prepares salads for an upcoming flight. 
Varig, a major international airline 
headquar-
tered in Brazil, manages its reservations netivork, 
maintenance and ejigineering activities, and 
catering operations through an information net-
work featuring IBM products that spans the globe. 
IBM also enhanced the power, perform-
ance and function of its Personal System/2 
family of desktop systems. Moreover, IBM 
Japan introduced the Personal System/55 
family to address special needs of the mar-
ketplaces of Japan, Korea and Taiwan. 
The company continued to shorten 
the time it takes to get new technologies into 
products. IBM was the first company in the 
world to ship products that use 4-million-bit 
memory chips. These chips, capable of 
storing about 4 0 0 pages of double-spaced 
typewritten text, almost double the 
maximum processor storage of IBM's new 
3090 models. The chips also are used in 
an optional memory upgrade for high-end 
Personal System/2 models. 
Recognizing customers' increasing need 
for more storage capacity, IBM introduced 
the industry's most advanced disk storage 
product, the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage 
Device.The 3390 can store as much data 
as its predecessor, the IBM 3380K disk 
storage system, in one-third the space. It 
offers significant reductions in maintenance 
costs, power and cooling requirements. 
The company also demonstrated an advanced 
3y2-inch disk file for IBM personal and 
midrange systems and workstations, as well 
as other manufacturers' systems. 
In a laboratory demonstration, the 
company set a world record in the amount 
of information that could be stored on a 
magnetic hard disk. A billion bits of 
information —the equivalent of 100,000 
double-spaced typed pages —were stored on 
a square inch of magnetic hard ciisk.This 
advance could yielci i5-t0-30 times more stor-
age density in future disk storage prociucts. 
IBM took the technology lead in the 
personal computer market when it shipped 
the industry's first system using Intel's 
new i486** microprocessor, an upgrade to 
the Personal System/2 Model 70-A21. A new 
Model 70 486, which also uses the i486 
microprocessor, can process numerically 
intensive applications up to three times faster 
than systems based on the earlier 386** 
microprocessor. There is up to an 80 percent 
performance improvement in processing 
business applications. 
Newly manufactured cutting tools rest on a special 
rack, awaitingfinal 
inspection. Montanwerke 
Walter, a German manufacturer of quality machin-
ing tools and systems, has installed a sophisticated 
IBM computer-integrated 
manufacturing 
application to ensure the quality and efficiency 
of its manufacturing 
operations. 


===== PAGE 17 =====
Cannondale Corporation, an American 
manufacturer of high-performance 
bicycles and 
bicycle clothing and gear, uses three IBM 
Application System/400 computersfor 
administra-
tive and manufacturing 
applications, 
and 
to stay on top of cycling trends. 
Innovative new services 
Increasingly, service is being defined by 
the customer. Whether it involves repairing 
another manufacturer's products, con-
figuring 
software or training a customer's 
employees on a new system, IBM is 
responding with innovative service solu-
tions that are helping customers solve busi-
ness problems, increase their competitiveness, 
and improve the returns on their informa-
tion processing investments. 
The word "service" took on a broader 
meaning in 1989 when IBM signed unique 
service contracts with firms including East-
man Kodak and Hibernia National Bank. 
These agreements call for IBM to assume 
responsibility for operating and maintaining 
the customers' computer systems and for 
providing information processing support 
throughout their organizations. IBM also 
assumed responsibility for building Kodak a 
new data center in Rochester, N.Y. 
The new service allows customers to 
focus their time, resources and attention on 
running their businesses. At the same 
time, it can help them reduce their operating 
costs, while expanding the range of informa-
tion processing services to their end-users. 
Sometimes the solution to a complex 
business problem calls for integrating IBM 
products and services with those of other 
companies. IBM has extensive experience in 
this area and is uniquely qualified to pro-
vide the required support. For example, when 
Burger King Corporation, the fast-food 
chain, wanted to automate its customer serv-
ice operations, IBM had no fast-food 
order-entry products or services. Working 
with Burger King, the company developed 
a customized order-entry station and 
contracted for specialized displays, cash draw-
ers and tills, and enclosures that protect 
the equipment from heat, grease and spills. In 
addition, IBM tailored service olferings, 
including a management training program, 
to address Burger King's needs. 
Interruption of information processing 
operations caused by fires, floods, earth-
quakes or other disasters can seriously affect 
a customer's competitiveness. In April, 
IBM introduced Business Recovery Services, 
an offering that enables a business to con-
tinue operations in the event of an unplanned 
outage or disaster. The new service gives 
customers with midrange and large systems 
assurance that information processing 
systems that are critical to their operations — 
including some non-IBM products —will 
be operational within 24 hours of the time 
IBM learns of the disaster. 
IBM Germany has added another 
innovative ofi^ering in this area. IBM mobile 
service vehicles are "on the road" and 
can be dispatched to anywhere in the country 
within 24 hours to respond to customer 
emergencies. 
With the introduction of ServicePlan 
in the U.S. in January, IBM simplified service 
contracts for customers. ServicePlan 
consolidates IBM services into a simple, one-
page contract and allows customers to 
select the services they need and determine 
when and how often IBM should bill them. 
With fewer invoices, customers can reduce 
their administrative costs, as well. 
IBM is also tailoring service solutions 
for specific market needs. In Brazil, IBM 
customers can order applications, or report 
software problems and get help in resolving 
them via terminals and a countrywide 
toll-free telephone number. In the U.S., per-
sonal computer specialists are on call 
around the clock to assist subscribing cus-
tomers with hardware and software 
problems, whether they involve IBM systems 
or some products of competitors. IBM 
Canada Ltd. has shortened distribution 
cycles for high-volume products to within a 
week to enhance customer service. 
One of the fastest-growing areas is 
operational services that are tailored to a 
customer's individual needs. IBM Japan, for 
example, developed a unique network serv-
ice for Nomura Securities, one of the world's 
largest financial institutions. This service 
enables Nomura to monitor its worldwide 
net work from its Tokyo headquarters, 
quickly determine the status of each branch, 
and address problems. 


===== PAGE 18 =====
J : 
• • ,'ica 
iiii 
ii 
I'll 
i»i 
I 
% 
A unique service agreement 
is enabling Louisiana's 
Hibernia National Bank 
to concentrate its time, 
attention and resources on 
the business of banking, 
while IBM takes care of its 
information processing 
needs. An IBM facility in 
Boulder, Colo., provides 
support to the bank's more 
than i^o branches. 


===== PAGE 19 =====
V'i-'-', 
ji| I 
i
l
^
i
i
l
t
-
Wafers processed at IBM's Sindelfingen, 
Germany, 
plant await a cutting operation which will slice them into 
4-million-bit 
memory chips — the densest memory chips 
currently available in the industry. The 
advanced 
memory chips are now in production 
in IBM plants in 
Sindelfingen 
and Essex Junction, 
Vt. 


===== PAGE 20 =====
An organization focused 
on the customer 
In positioning itself to be more com-
petitive, IBM is building on its most valuable 
asset— the quality of its people. From 
Hannover, Germany, to Tampa, Florida... 
from Bangkok, Thailand, to Sumar^ Brazil 
... IBMers around the world have been asked 
to change jobs, careers and work habits to 
become more responsive to customer needs. 
During the past three years, over 60,000 
IBMers have been retrained and reassigned to 
new jobs. Of these, more than 30,000 
switched from overhead positions — head-
quarters staffs, administration and distri-
bution, for example — into sales, systems 
engineering, programming and other jobs 
that help produce revenue and directly 
contribute to IBM's growth. 
Between 1986 and the end of 1989, one 
out of every five overhead jobs — roughly 
Employees at IBM's Business Recovery Services 
Center in Tampa, Florida, support a growing 
number of customers who are using a new service 
to safeguard against disasters or unplanned 
outages. These specialists provide technical assis-
tance in testing and executing business recovery 
plans. They are among the thousands of 
IBMers who have retrained for new jobs and 
careers that directly support customers. 
50,000 positions — has been eliminated. 
Today, over half of all IBM employees world-
wide are doing work directly involved 
with developing, making, marketing or serv-
icing customer solutions. In addition, 
headquarters staffs worldwide have been 
reduced by more than 11,000. 
To drive decision-making and account-
ability closer to customers, IBM restructured 
its U.S. development and manufacturing 
operations into seven lines of business dur-
ing 1988.These organizations have world-
wide responsibility for solutions in areas 
ranging from application and programming 
development and network management sup-
port to semiconductor products and large 
and small systems. 
IBM also has taken significant actions 
to expand its marketing force. Today, there 
are over 70,000 marketing people work-
ing with customers around the globe, 23 
percent more than three years ago. 
The company continues to invest heavily 
in software development and has steadily 
increased resources in this high-growth area. 
By 1990, IBM's software development pop-
ulation will grow to about 35,000 employees 
worldwide, an approximate 59 percent 
increase since 1986. Much of this growth will 
have come from the ranks of redeployed or 
retrained employees. 
On the manufacturing side, improved 
production techniques and productivity 
gains enabled IBM to reduce its number of 
manufacturing plants worldwide from 42 
to 33 between 1986 and 1989. 
IBM's customers operate in many 
different industries — banking, government, 
education, manufacturing, airlines and 
insurance, to name a few. Because their needs 
are so varied, developing customized solu-
tions requires in-depth industry knowledge 
and expertise. In addition, more and 
more customers are looking to IBM not just 
ipact.^^ 
p2.:3 VV KA;^JiiitE&colo 
2. 
International Translation and Services 
Company, Ltd., was formed through a joint ven-
ture between IBM Japan and two of its retirees. 
The company provides translation services, from 
English to Japanese, utilizing IBM computers. 


===== PAGE 21 =====
Using the brightest colors in the rainbow, The 
Benetton Group has established itself as a premier 
firm in the clothing industry with more than 
5,000 shops in 80 countries. To help the Italian 
clothing designer manage its operations, 
IBM Italy developed a special application to link 
Benetton's 3090 processor with PS/2 work-
stations installed throughout the company. 
for hardware and software products, but for 
insight into their particular industries and 
guidance on information strategies that will 
help them gain a competitive advantage. 
To ensure that IBM marketing repre-
sentatives and systems engineers are equipped 
to address these needs, IBM restructured its 
marketing education program last year. N e w 
curricula, training techniques and tools 
have been incorporated to sharpen the focus 
on industry specialization and address 
customers' special needs. Advanced educa-
tion for marketing representatives and 
systems engineers has increased by 50 per-
cent worldwide. 
A n example of a new training tool 
is the use of artificial intelligence in comput-
erized instruction. One such application 
is helping account teams better understand 
their financial customers' businesses. In 
effect, this new financial training system 
brings the wisdom of financial experts 
to marketing plans and proposals. It gives 
marketing representatives and systems engi-
neers access from their workstations to 
knowledge about financial strategies, current 
business news, Business Partners and 
industry support. 
The company also has enhanced the level 
of technical support available to customers 
by redeploying engineers and product devel-
opers from IBM laboratories to branch 
offices to assist account teams in analyzing 
customer problems and developing 
solutions. 
Another important element of high-
level customer support is continuity in the 
relationship between customers and the 
marketing teams supporting them. IBM has 
extended marketing assignments to enable 
marketing representatives and systems 
engineers to build long-term relationships 
with their customers and more effectively 
plan solutions for their information needs. 
The decline in IBM's population since 
the transformation began has been as signifi-
cant as the organizational and skill changes. 
Through normal attrition, limited hiring, 
and special incentives, the company has 
reduced its employee population worldwide 
by 2 4 , 0 0 0 since early 1986, to approximately 
383,000 employees.The largest reduction 
occurred in the U.S., where more than 
13,000 IBMers took advantage of a voluntary 
retirement incentive announced in 1986, and 
another 7,500 voluntarily retired or resigned 
as a result of U.S. manufacturing and head-
quarters consolidations begun in 1988. 
Voluntary retirement incentives were 
also offered in Canada and selected 
European locations during 1986 and 1987. 
About 2,000 employees retired under these 
programs. 
In December 1989, IBM announceci 
additional restructuring initiatives at 
most U.S. locations. These actions, coupled 
with attrition and reduced hiring, are 
expected to lower IBM's U.S. population by 
another 10,000 people, to 206,000 by 
the end of 1990 —a reduction of 37,000 
from the 1985 peak. 
Operating in a state where severe storms 
and lightning often cause power outages, 
Florida 
Power & Light Company uses IBM systems to 
help identify where power linefailures have occurred 
so that repair crews can be quickly dispatched to 
restore service. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
To better prepare its young people for the challenges of the 
2ist century, the Omar Dengo Foundation and the 
government of Costa Rica are underwriting a nationwide 
program to put computers in the hands of nearly 
210,000 
students, about 45 percent of the country's primary 
school population. Working with educational experts, 
IBM developed a comprehensive solution which includes 
sophisticated PS/2 networks in each school. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
The countries and communities in which 
IBM carries out its daily business face many 
complex economic and social issues — 
employment, education and environmental 
concerns, to name just a few. As a responsible 
corporate citizen, IBM is committed to help-
ing address these issues, particularly where 
technology and the special skills of IBM's 
people can add significant value. In 1989, 
IBM contributed $135 million in support of 
social, cultural and educational programs 
worldwide. 
IBM's affirmative action p r o g r a m pro-
vides assistance to minorities, w o m e n , per-
nor more than a year, Dave Johnson, an IBM 
branch manager in Baltimore, Md., has been a 
role model and friend to 18-year-old Shawn 
Satterfield. Johnson heads up Project Roadmap, a 
program supported by IBM and the Baltimore 
Urban League. This program aims to raise the self-
esteem of young men and women who typically 
have dropped out of school and are finding it diffi-
cult to participate in today's society. Shawn is 
preparing for a high-school-equivalency diploma, 
and the effort has been made easier by the 
support that Johnson provides. 
sons with disabilities, and Vietnam-era and 
disabled veterans to ensure that they have 
equal opportunity to participate in the eco-
nomic mainstream of American society. 
Of the 11,200 new employees hired in the 
U.S. during 1989, approximately 24 percent 
were minorities and 38 percent were 
women. Minorities and women currently 
make up 17.3 percent and 29.2 percent, 
respectively, of the company's U.S. popula-
tion. In addition, IBM employs about 
26,000 Vietnam-era and disabled veterans. 
Minorities held 12.9 percent of U.S. 
management positions at year end, while 
women held 20.7 percent. Minorities held 
9.8 percent of senior management positions, 
while women held 12.6 percent. 
During the past decade, IBM has 
purchased in excess of $ i billion in goods 
and services from minority-owned busi-
nesses. IBM is also actively involved in 
business relationships with companies owned 
primarily by women and organizations 
with workforces composed predominantly 
of handicapped workers. In 1989, IBM 
purchased goods and services from approxi-
mately 1,800 such businesses. 
Support of educational initiatives 
continues to be an area of emphasis for IBM. 
In the U.S., for example, IBM committed 
more than $46 million targeted at improv-
ing elementary and secondary education. 
A five-year, $25 million grant program is sup-
porting two types of projects — those that 
prepare teachers to use existing technology 
and those that stimulate new, innovative 
uses of technology in the classroom. 
IBM Korea has entered a joint agree-
ment with the Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology to create a Systems 
Engineering Center. The center will pro-
vide a computer education curriculum for 
aspiring data processing professionals at 
universities in Korea. 
The Instituto Autonomo Biblioteca 
Nacional, Venezuela's National Library, 
recently initiated a joint project with IBM 
Venezuela to enhance the previous national 
library system by combining the library's 
bibliographic database with information 
contained in seven university libraries. 
The network will permit students and other 
users to retrieve academic and scientific 
information from libraries throughout 
Venezuela and in the U.S. and Europe. 
IBM continued its support of university 
research in 1989. In one such effort, the 
company initiated a joint study with the 
University of Missouri School of Journalism 
to define new uses for microcomputer tech-
nology in the field of journalism. 
Changing job markets continue to put 
pressure on the economically disadvantaged. 
Job training programs, on the other hand, 
offer unemployed and underemployed work-
ers new avenues of opportunity. 
IBM has actively supported job training 
efforts for disadvantaged and handicapped 
persons for more than 20 years. In the U.S., 
128 community-based centers are preparing 
students for careers in areas such as word 
processing, data entry, computer program-
ming and operations, using IBM-loaned 
equipment. 
To counter adult illiteracy in the U.S., 
IBM announced a plan to help job training 
In line with its efforts to assist disabled persons, 
IBM France provided the Lycee Toulouse-Lautrec 
in Vaucresson, France, an employee to teach the 
institutions first course in information technology. 
The Lycee Toulouse-Lautrec has one of the 
largest handicapped enrollments within France's 
Public University system. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
ccntcrs establish adult literacy and basic 
skills programs for students who need reme-
dial training before beginning their job 
training curricula. 
IBM Canada Ltd., and the government 
of Saskatchewan also initiated a cooperative 
project to address adult illiteracy in that 
province. Under the program, IBM Canada 
provided the Saskatchewan Department 
of Education with IBM PS/2 workstations, 
InfoWindow* displays and Principles of 
Alphabet Literacy Software for use in liter-
acy laboratories across the province. 
IBM continued to extend its assistance to 
disabled persons in 1989. For instance, IBM 
United Kingdom and IBM France both 
established Support Centers for People with 
Disabilities. These centers provide interested 
individuals, professionals and community 
agencies with advice on information products 
and accessories that make it easier for dis-
abled persons to perform productively. 
In the U.S., the company continued to 
provide equipment and consultation to 
centers that train persons with severe disa-
bilities in skills ranging from computer 
programming to data entry. 
Environmental concerns have long 
been a point of focus in IBM. Over the years, 
the company has worked to maintain a 
responsible environmental approach in its 
operations. These efforts earned the company 
international recognition when it was named 
the recipient of the World Environment 
Center's 1990 Gold Medal for International 
Corporate Environmental Achievement. 
To stimulate employee participation in 
their communities on a worldwide basis, 
IBM announced in 1989 a one-time program 
to provide seed monies to support volun-
teer initiatives. Under the plan, the company 
will provide grants for new programs 
and projects in nine countries where IBM 
volunteers are involved. 
A ijth-century Royal Swedish man-of-war which 
was sunk in 1628 is the featured attraction at the 
new Vasa Museum, scheduled to open this summe
in Stockholm. The vessel was discovered and 
raised from the seabed during the ip6os. IBM 
Sweden, the museum and the Swedish National 
Board of Education are jointly developing 
an information system that uses IBM PS/2 work-
stations to relate information about lyth-century 
Sweden and life onboard the vessel. 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Using satellite data and 
sophisticated IBM image 
processing techniques, 
researchers from IBM 
Denmark, the Danish 
Hydraulic Institute and the 
Electromagnetics Institute 
at theTechnical University of 
Denmark are tracking 
and measuring ice move-
ments along the east 
coast of Greenland. These 
data will give scientists 
insights into the relationship 
between the ice packs and 
the weather and climate 
in the Atlantic Ocean and 
in Western Europe, and 
could prove valuable 
to industries ranging from 
shipping to agriculture 
and fishing 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Report of Management 
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the 
financial information presented in this Annual Report 
rests with IBM management. T h e accompanying financial 
statements have been prepared in conformity with 
generally accepted accounting principles, applying certain 
estimates and judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective system o f internal 
accounting control. It consists, in part, o f organizational 
arrangements with clearly defined lines o f responsibility 
and delegation o f authority. We believe this system 
provides reasonable assurance that transactions are exe-
cuted in accordance with management authorization, 
and that they are appropriately recorded, in order to per-
mit preparation of financial statements in conformity 
with generally accepted accounting principles and to 
adequately safeguard, verify and maintain accountability 
o f assets. A n important element of the system is an 
o n g o i n g internal audit program. 
To assure the effective administration of internal 
control, we carefully select and train o u r employees, 
develop and disseminate written policies and procedures, 
provide appropriate communication channels, and foster 
an environment conducive to the effective functioning 
o f controls. We believe that it is essential for the company 
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the 
highest ethical standards, as set forth in the IBM Business 
C o n d u c t Guidelines. These guidelines, translated into 
numerous languages, are distributed to employees 
throughout the world, and reemphasized through inter-
nal programs to assure that they are understood 
and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accountants, are re-
tained to examine IBM's financial statements. Their accom-
panying report is based on an examination conducted 
in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards, 
including a review of the internal control structure and 
tests of accounting procedures and records. 
T h e Audit C o m m i t t e e of the Board of Directors is 
composed solely of outside directors, and is responsible 
for recommending to the Board the independent 
accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, sub-
ject to stockholder approval. The Audit C o m m i t t e e meets 
periodically and privately with the independent accoun-
tants, with our internal auditors, as well as with IBM 
management, to review accounting, auditing, internal 
accounting controls and financial reporting matters. 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 
Frank A. Metz, Jr 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance & Planning 
Report of Independent Accountants 
To the Stockholders and Board o f Directors of 
International Business Machines C o r p o r a t i o n 
In o u r opinion, the accompanying consolidated financial 
statements, appearing on pages 26, 27, 28, 30 and 
34 through 4 4 , present fairly in all material respects the 
financial position of International Business Machines 
C o r p o r a t i o n and its subsidiaries at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
and 1988, and the results o f their operations and their cash 
flows for each of the three years in the period ended 
December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles. These financial statements are the 
responsibility of the company's management; o u r respon-
sibility is to express an opinion thereon based on o u r 
audits. We conducted o u r audits in accordance with gen-
erally accepted auditing standards which require that 
we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assur-
ance about whether such statements are free of material 
misstatement. A n audit includes examining, on a test 
January 3 0 , 1 9 9 0 
basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures 
in the financial statements, assessing the accounting 
principles used and significant estimates made by manage-
ment, and evaluating the overall financial statement 
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reason-
able basis for the opinion expressed above. 
As discussed in the note regarding Taxes on 
page 39, the company changed its method of accounting 
for income taxes in 1988. We concur with this change. 
U-OSI, 
Price Waterhouse 
153 East 53rd Street 
N e w York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 27 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
Revenue: 
Sales 
Support services 
Software 
Rentals and financing 
Cost: 
Sales 
Support services 
Software 
Rentals and financing 
Gross Profit 
Operating Expenses: 
Selling, general and administrative 
Research, development and engineering 
Operating Income 
Other Income, principally interest 
Interest Expense 
Earnings before Income Taxes 
Provision for Income Taxes 
Net Earnings before Cumulative Effect of A c c o u n t i n g Change 
Cumulative Effect of Change in A c c o u n t i n g for Income Taxes 
Net Earnings 
Per share amounts: 
Before cumulative effect of 
accounting change 
Cumulative effect of change in 
accounting for income taxes 
Net earnings 
Average number of shares outstanding: 
1 9 8 9 — 5 8 1 , 1 0 2 , 4 0 4 
1 9 8 8 - 5 9 2 , 4 4 4 , 4 0 9 
1 9 8 7 — 6 0 2 , 9 6 1 , 6 3 1 
1988 
$ 4 1 , 5 8 6 
9 , 8 5 8 
8 , 4 2 4 
2 , 8 4 2 
1 8 , 0 0 1 
5 , 7 0 1 
2 , 6 9 4 
1 , 3 0 5 
2 1 , 2 8 9 
6 , 8 2 7 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
2 7 , 7 0 1 
3 5 , 0 0 9 
28,116 
6 , 8 9 3 
7 2 8 
9 7 6 
6 , 6 4 5 
2 , 8 8 7 
3 , 7 5 8 
$ 
3 , 7 5 8 
$ 
6 . 4 7 
$ 
6 . 4 7 
3 9 , 9 5 9 
9 , 2 8 5 
7 , 9 2 7 
2 , 5 1 0 
1 7 , 4 9 9 
4 , 9 7 1 
2,110 
1,068 
1 9 , 3 6 2 
5 , 9 2 5 
$ 
5 9 , 6 8 1 
2 5 , 6 4 8 
3 4 , 0 3 3 
2 5 , 2 8 7 
8 , 7 4 6 
9 9 6 
7 0 9 
9 , 0 3 3 
3 , 5 4 2 
5 , 4 9 1 
3 1 5 
$ 
5 , 8 0 6 
$ 
9 . 2 7 
^ 
$ 
9 . 8 0 
3 6 , 4 2 4 
9 , 2 9 7 
6 , 8 3 6 
2 , 6 9 9 
1 7 , 3 6 8 
4 , 6 8 6 
1 , 9 5 7 
1,111 
1 6 , 5 4 0 
5 , 4 3 4 
$ 
5 5 , 2 5 6 
2 5 , 1 2 2 
3 0 , 1 3 4 
2 1 , 9 7 4 
8,160 
9 5 5 
4 8 5 
8 , 6 3 0 
3 , 3 7 2 
5 , 2 5 8 
$ 
5 , 2 5 8 
$ 
8 . 7 2 
$ 
8 . 7 2 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
Assets 
C u r r e n t A s s e t s : 
Cash 
Cash equivalents 
Marketable securities, at cost, which approximates market 
Notes and accounts receivable — trade, net of allowances 
Other accounts receivable 
Inventories 
Prepaid expenses and other current assets 
P l a n t , R e n t a l M a c h i n e s a n d O t h e r P r o p e r t y 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
I n v e s t m e n t s a n d O t h e r A s s e t s : 
Software, less accumulated amortization ( 1 9 8 9 , $ 4 , 8 2 4 ; 1 9 8 8 , $ 3 , 7 8 3 ) 
Investments and sundry assets 
Liabilities and Stockholders' Equity 
C u r r e n t L i a b i l i t i e s : 
Taxes 
Loans payable 
Accounts payable 
Compensation and benefits 
Deferred income 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
L o n g - T e r m D e b t 
O t h e r L i a b i l i t i e s 
D e f e r r e d I n c o m e T a x e s 
S t o c k h o l d e r s ' E q u i t y : 
Capital stock, par value $1.25 per share 
Shares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1 9 8 9 — 5 7 4 , 7 7 5 , 5 6 0 ; 1 9 8 8 — 5 9 0 , 0 3 7 , 3 2 8 
Retained earnings 
Translation adjustments 
Less: Treasury stock, at cost 
S h a r e s : 1 9 8 9 — 7 5 , 7 2 3 ; 1 9 8 8 — 2 9 6 , 8 2 0 
1989 
» 
7 4 1 
2 , 9 5 9 
1 , 2 6 1 
18,866 
1 , 2 9 8 
9 , 4 6 3 
1 , 2 8 7 
4 8 , 4 1 0 
2 3 , 4 6 7 
3 , 2 9 3 
1 3 , 6 2 3 
$ 
3 5 , 8 7 5 
2 4 , 9 4 3 
1 6 , 9 1 6 
$ 
7 7 , 7 3 4 
$ 
2 , 6 9 9 
5 , 8 9 2 
3 , 1 6 7 
2 , 7 9 7 
1 , 3 6 5 
5 , 7 8 0 
2 1 , 7 0 0 
1 0 , 8 2 5 
3 , 4 2 0 
3 , 2 8 0 
6 , 3 4 1 
3 0 , 4 7 7 
1 , 6 9 8 
3 8 , 5 1 6 
7 
3 8 , 5 0 9 
7 7 , 7 3 4 
1 , 0 7 2 
3 , 1 0 3 
1 , 9 4 8 
1 7 , 0 8 6 
1 , 0 1 4 
9 , 5 6 5 
1 , 5 5 5 
4 4 , 8 8 2 
2 1 , 4 5 6 
2 , 8 0 9 
1 1 , 4 5 9 
$ 3 5 , 3 4 3 
2 3 , 4 2 6 
1 4 , 2 6 8 
$ 7 3 , 0 3 7 
2 , 2 2 5 
4 , 8 6 2 
2 , 7 0 2 
2 , 6 2 4 
8 4 4 
4 , 1 3 0 
1 7 , 3 8 7 
8 , 5 1 8 
3 , 0 0 0 
4 , 6 2 3 
6 , 4 4 2 
3 1 , 1 8 6 
1 , 9 1 7 
3 9 , 5 4 5 
3 6 
3 9 , 5 0 9 
$ 7 3 , 0 3 7 


===== PAGE 29 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
Cash Flow from Operating Activities: 
Net earnings 
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to cash 
provided from operating activities: 
Depreciation 
Amortization of software 
(Gain) on disposition of investment assets 
(Increase) in accounts receivable 
(Increase) decrease in inventory 
(Increase) in other assets 
Increase in accounts payable 
Increase in other liabilities 
Net cash provided from operating activities 
Cash Flow f r o m Investing Activities: 
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property . . 
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines 
and other property 
Investment in software 
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments 
Proceeds from marketable securities and other investments. 
Net cash used in investing activities 
Cash Flow f r o m Financing Activities: 
Proceeds from new debt 
Payments to settle debt 
Short-term borrowings less than 90 days —net 
Proceeds from (payments to) employee stock plans — net. . 
Payments to purchase and retire capital stock 
Cash dividends paid 
Net cash used in financing activities 
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes 
on C a s h and C a s h Equivalents 
Net Change in Cash and C a s h Equivalents 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January 1 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at December 31 
Supplemental Data: 
Cash paid during the year for: 
Income taxes 
Interest 
1988 
$ 
3 , 7 5 8 
4 , 2 4 0 
1 , 1 8 5 
( 7 4 ) 
( 2 , 6 4 7 ) 
( 2 9 ) 
( 1 , 6 7 4 ) 
8 7 0 
1 , 7 4 3 
( 6 , 4 1 4 ) 
5 4 4 
( 1 , 6 7 9 ) 
( 1 , 3 9 1 ) 
1,860 
6 , 4 7 1 
( 2 , 7 6 8 ) 
228 
( 2 9 ) 
( 1 , 7 5 9 ) 
( 2 , 7 5 2 ) 
$ 7 , 3 7 2 
( 7 , 0 8 0 ) 
( 6 0 9 ) 
( 1 5 8 ) 
( 4 7 5 ) 
4 , 1 7 5 
$ 
3 , 7 0 0 
3 , 0 7 1 
1 , 6 0 5 
$ 
5 , 8 0 6 
3 , 8 7 1 
8 9 3 
( 1 3 3 ) 
( 2 , 3 2 2 ) 
( 1 , 2 3 2 ) 
( 1 , 5 8 7 ) 
2 6 5 
5 1 9 
( 5 , 3 9 0 ) 
4 0 9 
( 1 , 3 1 8 ) 
( 2 , 5 5 5 ) 
4 , 7 3 4 
4 , 5 4 0 
( 3 , 0 0 7 ) 
1,028 
(11) 
( 9 9 2 ) 
( 2 , 6 0 9 ) 
$6,080 
( 4 , 1 2 0 ) 
( 1 , 0 5 1 ) 
(201) 
7 0 8 
3 , 4 6 7 
$ 4 , 1 7 5 
$ 3 , 4 0 5 
$ 
1 , 4 4 0 
$ 
5 , 2 5 8 
3 , 5 3 4 
8 6 3 
(128) 
( 2 , 5 4 2 ) 
1 2 9 
(808) 
3 0 0 
1 3 4 
( 4 , 1 9 5 ) 
3 5 3 
( 1 , 0 4 8 ) 
( 4 , 8 1 5 ) 
5 , 9 0 0 
2 , 9 6 3 
( 1 , 9 8 0 ) 
( 3 9 9 ) 
1 0 5 
( 1 , 4 2 5 ) 
( 2 , 6 5 4 ) 
$ 6 , 7 4 0 
( 3 , 8 0 5 ) 
( 3 , 3 9 0 ) 
3 3 0 
( 1 2 5 ) 
3 , 5 9 2 
$ 3 , 4 6 7 
$2,186 
$ 
1 , 0 4 8 


===== PAGE 30 =====
S u m m a r y of C a s h Inflows 
(Dollars in billions) 
S u m m a r y of C a s h O u t f l o w s 
(Dollars in billions) 
Collections from 
Customers and 
Others $58.8 
Proceeds from 
Disposition of Investment 
Assets $2.4 
' Pinanciuji 11"' 
Proceeds from 
Debt $6.7 
I n v e s t m e n t in Plant a n d O t h e r P r o p e r t y 
tincludes Effect of Exchange Rate Changes 
on Cash and Cash Equivalents 
Payments to Suppliers and 
Employees $46.81 
Interest Paid $1.6 
Income Taxes Paid $3.1 
Payments for Plant, 
Rental Machines and 
Other Property $ 6.4 
Investments in Software $ i .7 
Purchase of 
Marketable Securities and 
Other Investments $1.4 
Payments to Settle Debt $2.8 
Capital Stock Purchased 
and Retired $1.8 
Cash Dividends $2.8 
Although improved production techniques and 
productivity gains have resulted in reduced manu-
facturing sites, continuous upgrading of facilities 
is essential to achieve objectives to maintain techno-
logical leadership, improve productivity and meet 
customer demand. Over the past five years, the 
company has invested approximately $24 billion 
in land, buildings, machinery and equipment, 
and internally installed IBM manufactured equip-
ment. These recent additions represent 54 percent 
of the gross asset value of plant and other 
property as of December 31,1989. 
$ 28,000 
(In millions) 
2 4 , 5 0 0 
2 1 , 0 0 0 
1 7 , 5 0 0 
1 4 , 0 0 0 
1 0 , 5 0 0 
7 , 0 0 0 
3,500 
o 
1985 
'86 
'87 
'88 
1989 
Annual I S Cumulative for five-year period 


===== PAGE 31 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
1987 
Stockholders' Equity, January 1,1987 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(1,766,488 shares) 
Purchases (6,275,092 shares) and 
sales (6,692,196 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee and stockholder plans — net 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(11,252,000 shares) 
Unrealized loss on marketable equity securities. . 
Conversion of debentures (197,203 shares). . . . 
Tax reductions — employee plans 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, D e c e m b e r 31,1987 
1988 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(1,321,697 shares) 
Purchases (8,140,101 shares) and 
sales (8,117,596 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee and stockholder plans — net 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(8,611,396 shares) 
Tax reductions — employee plans 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1988 
1989 
Net earnings 
Cash dividends declared 
Capital stock issued under employee plans 
(824,026 shares) 
Purchases (8,202,058 shares) and 
sales (8,423,155 shares) of treasury stock 
under employee and stockholder plans — net 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(16,085,900 shares) 
Tax reductions — employee plans 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, December 31,1989 
Capital Stock 
Retained 
Earnings 
Translation 
Adjustments 
Treasury Stock 
Total 
$ 
6 , 3 2 1 
1 3 9 
(120) 
1 7 
3 0 
3 0 
6 , 4 1 7 
9 2 
( 9 3 ) 
26 
6 , 4 4 2 
60 
( 1 7 7 ) 
16 
$ 6 , 3 4 1 
2 7 , 8 3 4 
5 , 2 5 8 
( 2 , 6 5 4 ) 
( 1 1 7 ) 
( 1 , 3 0 5 ) 
2 9 , 0 1 6 
5 , 8 0 6 
( 2 , 6 0 9 ) 
(128) 
( 8 9 9 ) 
3 1 , 1 8 6 
3 , 7 5 8 
( 2 , 7 5 2 ) 
( 1 3 3 ) 
( 1 , 5 8 2 ) 
$ 3 0 , 4 7 7 
$ 
3 0 7 
2 , 5 5 8 
2 , 8 6 5 
( 9 4 8 ) 
1 , 9 1 7 
( 2 1 9 ) 
$ 1 , 6 9 8 
$(88) 
5 3 
( 3 5 ) 
(1) 
( 3 6 ) 
2 9 
$ 
( 7 ) 
$ 
3 4 , 3 7 4 
5 , 2 5 8 
( 2 , 6 5 4 ) 
1 3 9 
( 6 4 ) 
( 1 , 4 2 5 ) 
1 7 
3 0 
3 0 
2 , 5 5 8 
3 8 , 2 6 3 
5 , 8 0 6 
( 2 , 6 0 9 ) 
9 2 
( 1 2 9 ) 
( 9 9 2 ) 
26 
( 9 4 8 ) 
3 9 , 5 0 9 
3 , 7 5 8 
( 2 , 7 5 2 ) 
60 
( 1 0 4 ) 
( 1 , 7 5 9 ) 
16 
( 2 1 9 ) 
3 8 , 5 0 9 


===== PAGE 32 =====
Results of Operations 
In 1989, demand for IBM's products and 
services continued to be good and the company 
made steady progress on its strategy of trans-
forming itself into a more market-driven and 
efficient company. 
Worldwide revenue increased 5.1 percent in 
1989 to $ 62.7 billion. While there was growth in 
all major geographic areas, the rate of growth 
continued to be stronger outside the United States. 
Revenue from non-U.S. operations was $37.0 
billion, an increase of 7.6 percent over 1988. Non-
U.S. revenue, as a percent of total revenue, has 
grown from 42.9 percent in 1985 to 58.9 percent 
in the current year. Revenue from U.S. operations 
grew for the first time in four years, increasing 
1.7 percent over the previous year. Additional infor-
mation on revenues and other financial data 
by geographical area can be found in the note 
on page 4 4 . 
Net earnings for the year were $ 3.8 billion 
compared with $5.8 billion in 1988. Both 1989 
and 1988 contained the effects of unusual actions. 
In December 1989, the company announced a 
series of restructuring initiatives, investment 
revaluations and other actions which resulted in a 
pre-tax charge of $ 2 . 4 billion against 1989 
earnings. Earnings before tax in 1988 include an 
$870 million charge related to the costs of 
manufacturing and headquarters consolidations 
announced in June 1988. The company imple-
mented the Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS) 96, "Accounting for Income 
Taxes," in 1988.This change in accounting 
principle resulted in additional net earnings in 
1988 of $315 million. 
Revenue and earnings in 1989 were unfavor-
ably impacted by a stronger U.S. dollar and 
by an increase in operating lease activity primarily 
in the U.S. While the increase in operating 
leases has an unfavorable impact on short-term 
results, it will benefit IBM in the longer term 
as the company realizes increased revenue and 
profit from future rental receipts. 
Revenue from sales was $41.6 billion, an 
increase of 4.1 percent compared to a 9.7 percent 
increase in 1988. Sales revenue in the United 
States declined 2.3 percent reflecting the higher 
levels of operating lease activity in 1989. World-
wide revenue from support services increased 6.2 
percent in 1989 after an essentially flat year 
in 1988. Growth in the other services category 
was 43.8 percent in 1989 and 20.6 percent in 
1988. Maintenance services, which is the largest 
component of support services, had declines 
of 3.8 percent in 1989 and 4.5 percent in 1988. 
Software revenue was up 6.3 percent in 
1989 following increases of 16.0 percent and 24.0 
percent in 1988 and 1987, respectively. The 
1988 software revenue included payments made 
by Fujitsu to IBM as a result of arbitration 
between the two companies. The rate of growth 
in the United States was greater in 1989 than that 
of 1988. Rentals and financing revenue in-
creased 13.2 percent in 1989 reflecting the success 
of our leasing operations around the world. 
Revenue from rentals, which includes amounts 
from operating leases, increased from the 
prior year for the first time since 1982. 
Information on industry segments and 
classes of similar products or services is presented 
on page 43-
Revenue from processors increased 6.7 per-
cent in 1989. The increase is attributable to strong 
sales of IBM's largest computers, the ES/3090 
family, and the Application System/4oo. New 
models of the ES/3090, introduced in 1989, con-
tain IBM's new 4-million-bit memory chip. 
Revenue increases for both the ES/3090 and the 
AS/4-00 were strong in the U.S. and overseas. 
In workstations, revenue from personal 
systems increased 18.9 percent worldwide and 23.1 
percent in the U S . The decline in other 
workstations is primarily attributable to display 
terminals. During 1989, IBM was the first 
in the industry to use Intel's powerful new i486 
microprocessor in a product when an upgrade 
to the PS/2 Model 70-A21 was announced. 
Revenue 
$ 7 0 , 0 0 0 
(In millions) 
5% 
6 0 , 0 0 0 
5% 
4% 
13% 
13% 
5 0 , 0 0 0 
1 1 9% 
8% 
7% 
10% 
12% 
17% 
16% 
16% 
4 0 , 0 0 0 
15% 
17% 
3 0 , 0 0 0 
6 8% 
66% 
66% 
67% 
66% 
2 0 , 0 0 0 
1 0 , 0 0 0 
1985 
'86 
'87 
Rentals and Financing 
Software 
Support Services 
Sales 


===== PAGE 33 =====
Revenue from peripherals declined 17.5 per-
cent in the U.S. and increased 8.8 percent in 
the non-U.S. operations. The decline in the U.S. 
revenue is primarily attributable to a substantial 
increase in operating leases of storage products 
in 1989 over 1988 and a transfer of telecommuni-
cations revenue as a result of the completion 
of the agreement with Siemens AG to establish 
joint activities in the field of telecommunications. 
In the fourth quarter of 1989, IBM began ship-
ments of the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage 
Device, the industry's most advanced disk storage 
product. 
Gross profit margins in 1989 declined 1.2 
percentage points to 55.8 percent. Continued 
efficiencies in manufacturing activities were offset 
by declines in gross profit margins in support 
services and software. The decline in the gross 
profit margin of support services is primarily the 
result of a proportionately greater amount 
of other services whose lower margins are exacer-
bated by start-up activities and, to a lesser 
degree, continued declines in gross profit margins 
of maintenance service. The gross profit 
margin comparison of software was adversely 
impacted by the inclusion of costs associated 
with the actions taken in December 1989 to im-
prove the company's competitiveness and 
the revenue benefit from the Fujitsu settlement 
in 1988. 
Selling, general and administrative expenses 
for 1989, as reported, showed an increase of 
lo.o percent over 1988. Both years were marked by 
unusual charges. If adjusted for the restructur-
ing expenses in 1989 and the manufacturing and 
headquarters consolidations in 1988, selling. 
general and administrative expense would have 
increased 5.2 percent. These actions are a con-
tinuation of the strategy designed to transform 
the IBM company to be the best in providing 
offerings that meet the needs of customers 
and to do so more quickly, efficiently, and cost 
effectively. 
Today's competitive environment and the 
ever quickening pace of technology require a 
continued investment in research, development 
and engineering. To this end, IBM invested $6.5 
billion in 1989 after adjusting for the one-time 
charge included in the restructuring actions 
announced in December 1989. This represents an 
8.9 percent increase over 1988. Management 
expects to continue to make those investments 
essential to assure the company's ability to 
participate in the future growth of the industry. 
Other income declined 26.9 percent. 
The decrease is primarily the result of gains in 
1988 on the sale of MCI stock and the sale of 
the Science Research Associates subsidiary, which 
were only partially offset by a gain in 1989 on 
the sale of IBM's interest in Discovision Associates. 
Interest expense increased 37.6 percent 
in 1989 following a 46.3 percent increase in 1988. 
The increases in both years are primarily the 
result of high interest rates on short-term borrow-
ings in subsidiaries whose economic environ-
ment is hyperinflationary.The high interest rates 
in those operations are mitigated by the effects 
of inflation on the funds borrowed. 
The effective tax rate for 1989 of 43.4 
percent was higher than the 39.2 percent in 1988 
primarily due to the impact of the restructur-
ing charge taken in the fourth quarter of 1989 and, 
as anticipated, lower tax credits this year com-
pared to 1988. 
For the quarter ended December 31,1989, 
worldwide net earnings were $.6 billion, 
compared with $2.3 billion for the same period 
in 1988. Fourth-quarter revenue was $20.5 
billion, compared with $ 2 0 . 0 billion for the 1988 
period. IBM's fourth-quarter results include 
$ 2 . 4 billion in 1989 and $.3 billion in 1988 for 
charges stemming from the previously mentioned 
efforts to improve competitiveness. 
During 1989, IBM continued its efforts to 
become a more market-driven company, one that 
makes customer satisfaction the number-one 
priority. As customers pursue their own competi-
tive requirements, the need for solutions rather 
than individual products becomes increasingly 
important. This growing focus is evident by 
the growth in systems integration activities and 
other professional service offerings. Manage-
ment expects continued growth in this activity. 
The company has reduced its employee 
population every year since 1985. Worldwide, this 
reduction exceeded twenty-two thousand 
people including more than twenty-six thousand 
in the United States. The restructuring initia-
tives announced in December are expected to 
further reduce IBM's U.S. population by ten 
thousand people in 1990. 
Management believes that the initiatives it 
has taken, coupled with the continuing drive 
to reduce the company's cost and expense struc-
ture, will enable it to take advantage of the 
growth opportunities seen for its business while 
enhancing shareholders' value. 


===== PAGE 34 =====
Financial Condition 
During 1989, IBM continued to make 
essential investments in its drive for more com-
petitive products and services, delivered on 
ever shorter cycles. As a result, the company was 
able to announce a series of significant new 
products in 1989. A m o n g these were OfficeVision, 
a family of applications that allows customers to 
boost their office productivity and efficiency, 
A i y C y c l e , a series of IBM and Business Partner 
products, tools and services that will enhance 
productivity, the IBM Personal Systern/2 Model 
70 486 which gives advanced processor perform-
ance to users of numerically intensive applications, 
and the IBM 3390 Direct Access Storage Device, 
the industry's most advanced disk storage product. 
Over the past five years, IBM invested 
approximately $ 2 4 billion in plant and other 
property, including $5.1 billion in 1989.These 
investments contributed significantly to improved 
production techniques and productivity gains, 
which enabled the company to add to its compet-
itiveness. Much of this investment was directed 
to maintaining the company's position in the 
forefront of semiconductor technology. Man-
agement intends to continue to make substantial 
investments in plant and other property in 
order to assure the company's technological 
competitiveness. 
In addition to software development costs 
included in research, development and engineer-
ing expense, IBM invested $1.7 billion in capital-
ized production costs of software products in 
1989. Amortization of capitalized software costs 
amounted to $ 1.2 billion in the year. 
Investments and sundry assets increased 18.9 
percent in 1989 to $13.6 billion.The increase 
is primarily due to IBM's growing participation 
in the financing of products purchased by its 
customers. IBM's long-term net investment in sales-
type leases increased 29.5 percent to $8.4 billion 
at year-end 1989. The increase in investments and 
sundry assets also reflects increased investments 
in business alliances, as IBM joins with other com-
panies whose strengths complement and extend 
its own. These increases were partially offset 
by the valuation of special investments and the 
change in the amortization periods for goodwill 
from twenty years to five years. 
Working capital decreased 21. i percent 
in 1989 to $ 1 4 . 2 billion. Increases in accounts 
receivable reflected higher levels of shipments 
in December 1989 compared to the same period 
in 1988 and increased amounts due on current 
sales-type lease investments. These amounts were 
offset by declines in cash and marketable securi-
ties. Current liabilities increased $4.3 billion due 
primarily to increased accruals resulting from 
the restructuring and other actions taken in the 
fourth quarter. Current liabilities also increased 
as a result of the maturing in 1990 of previ-
ously issued long-term debt used to finance cus-
tomers' leases of IBM equipment. 
The increase in long-term debt is also 
primarily attributable to financing of customers' 
long-term leasing of IBM equipment. 
In September and November 1989, the Board 
of Directors authorized the company to purchase 
shares of its capital stock in amounts not to exceed 
$ 1 , 0 0 0 million and $ 4 , 0 0 0 million, respectively. 
There is no specific date to complete these pur-
chases. At December 31,1989, $4,887 million of 
these authorizations remained. Shares purchased 
under these programs have been and will con-
tinue to be retired and restored to the status of 
authorized but unissued shares. Also during 
1989, the company continued open-market acquisi-
tion of shares to meet most requirements of 
IBM's stockholder and employee stock plans. 
Management expects that the funds required 
to continue the level of investments necessary 
to ensure the company's competitiveness, as well 
as funds used to purchase IBM capital stock 
from time to time, will be largely generated from 
normal operations. To the extent that amounts 
generated from operations need to be supple-
mented by borrowings, it will be done consistent 
with management's intent to continue 
to maintain the highest quality rating of the 
company's indebtedness. 
Management continues to have confidence 
in the information industry and its prospects 
for growth as well as the ability of IBM to partici-
pate fully in that growth. 
Research, Development and 
Engineering Expenses 
6 , 0 0 0 
5 , 0 0 0 
4 , 0 0 0 
3 , 0 0 0 
2 , 0 0 0 
1 , 0 0 0 
0 
1985 
'86 
'87 
'88 
1989 


===== PAGE 35 =====
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles 
of Consolidation: 
Translation of 
Non-U. S. Currency Amounts: 
The consohdated financial statements include the accounts of International Business Machines Corporation and its U.S. 
and non-U.S. subsidiary companies. Investments in joint ventures and other companies in which IBM does not have 
control, but has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and financial policies (generally greater than 
20% ownership) are accounted for by the equity method. Other investments are accounted for by the cost method. 
For non-U. S. subsidiaries which operate in a local currency environment, assets and liabilities are translated to U. S. 
dollars at year-end exchange rates. Income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year. Translation adjustments are accumulated in a separate component of stockholders' equity. For non-U. S. 
subsidiaries and branches which operate in U. S. dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, invento-
ries and plant, rental machines and other property are translated at approximate rates prevailing when acquired. All 
other assets and liabilities are translated at year-end exchange rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales and depreciation 
are remeasured at historical rates. All other income and expense items are translated at average rates of exchange 
prevailing during the year. Gains and losses which result from remeasurement are included in earnings. 
Revenue: 
Revenue is recognized from sales or sales-type leases when the product is shipped, from software when the program 
is shipped or as monthly license fees accrue, from support services (primarily maintenance services) over the contractual 
period or as the services are performed, from rentals under operating leases in the month in which they accrue, and 
from financing at level rates of return over the term of the lease or receivable. 
Software: 
Depreciation: 
Costs related to the conceptual formulation and design of licensed programs are expensed as research and development. 
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of technological feasibility to produce the finished product are generally 
capitalized. The annual amortization of the capitalized amounts is the greater of the amount computed based on the 
estimated revenue distribution over the products' revenue-producing lives or the straight-line method, but not 
in excess of six years. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged against income as incurred or when 
related revenue is recognized, whichever occurs first. 
Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using 
the straight-line method. 
Goodwill: 
G o o d w i l l is amortized on a straight-line basis over the periods estimated to be benefited, currently not exceeding 
five years. 
Retirement Plans and 
Other Postretirement Benefits: 
Selling Expenses: 
Current service costs of retirement plans are accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting from improvements in 
the plans are amortized over the average remaining service period of employees expected to receive benefits. 
Postretirement health care and life insurance benefits are fully accrued, principally at retirement. 
Selling expenses are charged against income as incurred. 
Income Taxes: 
Inventories: 
Income tax expense is based on reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the impact of 
temporary differences between the amount of assets and liabilities recognized for financial reporting purposes and such 
amounts recognized for tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. 
In years prior to 1988, deferred taxes were accounted for at the tax rates in eflfect when the asset or liability was recorded, 
with no adjustment for subsequent rate changes. Deferred investment tax credits are being amortized as a reduction 
of income tax expense over the average useful life of the applicable classes of property. 
Raw materials, finished goods and work in process are stated at the lower of average cost or market. 
Cash Equivalents: 
All highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less at date of purchase are considered to be 
cash equivalents. 


===== PAGE 36 =====
IMon-U.S. Operations 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1987 
At end of year: 
N e t assets e m p l o y e d 
C u r r e n t assets 
$ 
2 0 , 3 6 1 
$ 
2 0 , 0 0 5 
$ 
2 0 , 7 7 7 
C u r r e n t liabilities 
1 2 , 1 2 4 
1 1 , 4 8 1 
9 , 8 1 8 
W o r k i n g capital 
8 , 2 3 7 
8 , 5 2 4 
1 0 , 9 5 9 
Plant, rental m a c h i n e s a n d o t h e r property, net 
9 , 8 7 9 
9 , 3 5 4 
9 , 4 1 1 
I n v e s t m e n t s a n d o t h e r assets 
6 , 8 2 2 
5 , 2 5 1 
4 , 6 2 6 
2 4 , 9 3 8 
2 3 , 1 2 9 
2 4 , 9 9 6 
L o n g - t e r m debt 
3 , 3 5 8 
2 , 3 4 0 
1 , 5 7 5 
O t h e r liabilities 
2 , 6 0 7 
2 , 5 0 5 
2 , 6 6 8 
D e f e r r e d i n c o m e taxes 
1 , 8 1 4 
1 , 5 8 0 
1 , 5 4 0 
7 , 7 7 9 
6 , 4 2 5 
5 , 7 8 3 
N e t assets e m p l o y e d 
$ 
1 7 , 1 5 9 
$ 
1 6 , 7 0 4 
$ 
1 9 , 2 1 3 
N u m b e r o f employees 
1 6 7 , 2 9 1 
1 6 3 , 9 0 4 
1 6 1 , 3 9 9 
For the year: 
R e v e n u e 
$ 
3 6 , 9 6 5 
$ 
3 4 , 3 6 1 
$ 
2 9 , 7 5 2 
E a r n i n g s before i n c o m e taxes 
$ 
7 , 4 9 6 
$ 
7 , 0 8 8 
$ 
5 , 6 8 0 
Provision f o r i n c o m e taxes 
3 , 3 8 8 
3 , 0 0 9 
2 , 3 7 1 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
$ 
4 , 1 0 8 
$ 
4 , 0 7 9 t 
$ 
3 , 3 0 9 
I n v e s t m e n t in plant, rental m a c h i n e s a n d other p r o p e r t y 
$ 
2 , 5 1 4 
$ 
2 , 3 8 9 
$ 
1 , 8 4 7 
11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes. 
Non-U.S. subsidiaries which operate in a 
local currency environment account for approxi-
mately 9 0 % of the company's non-U. S. revenue. 
T h e remaining 1 0 % of the company's n o n - U S . 
revenue is from subsidiaries and branches which 
operate in U.S. dollars or whose economic 
environment is highly inflationary. 
As the value o f the dollar weakens, net assets 
recorded in local currencies translate into more 
U.S. dollars than they would have at the previous 
year's rates. Conversely, as the dollar becomes 
stronger, net assets recorded in local currencies 
translate into fewer U.S. dollars than they would 
have at the previous year's rates. T h e translation 
adjustments, resulting from the translation of net 
assets, amounted to $ 1 , 6 9 8 million at December 
3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , $ 1,917 million at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , 
and $2,865 million at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 7 . T h e 
changes in translation adjustments since the end 
of 1987 are a reflection o f the strengthening of 
the dollar in 1988 and in 1989. 
Undistributed earnings of n o n - U S . subsid-
iaries included in consolidated retained earnings 
amounted to $ 1 3 , 2 0 7 million at December 31, 
1989, $ 1 2 , 3 7 4 million at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 , and 
$ 1 3 , 0 7 6 million at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 7 . T h e s e 
earnings, which reflect full provision for non-
U S . income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested in 
n o n - U S . operations or will be remitted sub-
stantially free of additional tax. Accordingly, no 
material provision has been made for taxes 
that might be payable upon remittance of such 
earnings. It is extremely improbable that all 
these earnings would be remitted to the U.S. 
Nevertheless, SFAS 96, ' A c c o u n t i n g for Income 
Taxes," requires disclosure of the amount of 
withholding taxes that would be payable were 
this unlikely event to occur. Therefore in 
response to that requirement, it is estimated that 
such withholding taxes would be as much as 
$ 1 , 1 0 0 million. 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Restructuring and Other A c t i o n s 
In December 1989, the company announced 
a series of actions to reduce costs, expenses, and 
structure. 
As a result, a charge of $2,420 million 
($1,500 million after tax or $2.58 per share) was 
recorded in the fourth quarter. $ 1,335 million 
of this relates to the costs of facility consolida-
tions and capacity reductions and changes 
in the valuation and recovery periods of special 
investments. This amount is included in 
selling, general and administrative expense. Costs 
of $500 million associated with employee 
separations and relocations are also included in 
selling, general and administrative expense. 
Costs of $585 million represent a charge 
related to the adoption of new guidelines 
to provide for the earlier recognition of costs 
in both hardware and software due to the 
pace of technological change and the company's 
success in shortening its product cycles. 
These charges are included in research, develop-
ment and engineering expenses and in cost 
of software. 
In 1988, $870 million was included in 
selling, general and administrative expense for 
manufacturing and headquarters consolidations. 
Marketable Securities 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1989 
December 31, ic 
U.S. Government securities 
Time deposits and other bank obligations 
Non-U. S. government securities and other fixed-term obligations 
Total 
Market value 
201 
4 1 9 
6 4 1 
$ 
1,261 
$ 
1 , 2 6 3 
6 4 2 
5 0 4 
802 
$ 
1 , 9 4 8 
$ 
1 , 9 4 4 
Inventories 
(Dollars in millions) 
December 31,1989 
December 31,1988 
Current inventories: 
Finished goods 
Work in process 
Raw materials 
Total current inventories 
Work in process and field service parts included in 
plant, rental machines and other property . 
Total inventories 
$ 
2 , 9 1 5 
6 , 3 9 4 
1 5 4 
9 , 4 6 3 
1 , 3 6 4 
$ 1 0 , 8 2 7 
$ 
2 , 9 7 2 
6 , 4 4 4 
1 4 9 
9 , 5 6 5 
1,108 
$ 
1 0 , 6 7 3 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Plant, Rental M a c h i n e s and Other Property 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 8 
L a n d a n d land i m p r o v e m e n t s 
$ 
1 , 5 0 7 
$ 
1 , 4 9 3 
B u i l d i n g s 
1 2 , 3 3 3 
1 1 , 5 9 0 
Plant, l a b o r a t o r y a n d office e q u i p m e n t 
3 1 , 0 6 4 
2 8 , 6 7 8 
4 4 , 9 0 4 
4 1 , 7 6 1 
Less: A c c u m u l a t e d depreciation 
2 2 , 0 1 7 
1 9 , 7 1 1 
2 2 , 8 8 7 
2 2 , 0 5 0 
R e n t a l m a c h i n e s a n d parts 
3 , 5 0 6 
3 , 1 2 1 
Less: A c c u m u l a t e d depreciation 
1 , 4 5 0 
1 , 7 4 5 
2 , 0 5 6 
1 , 3 7 6 
Total 
$ 2 4 , 9 4 3 
$ 2 3 , 4 2 6 
Investments and Sundry A s s e t s 
(Dollars in millions) 
D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
D e c e m b e r 31, ic 
N e t investment in sales-type leasest 
Less: C u r r e n t p o r t i o n classified as notes a n d accounts receivable—trade. 
I n s t a l l m e n t p a y m e n t receivables 
I n v e s t m e n t s in business alliances 
Prepaid pension cost 
M o r t g a g e investments . . . 
G o o d w i l l , less a c c u m u l a t e d a m o r t i z a t i o n (1989, $ 2 8 3 ; 1988, $ 1 8 4 ) " 
O t h e r investments a n d s u n d r y assets** 
Total 
$ 1 2 , 7 2 8 
4 , 3 3 2 
8 , 3 9 6 
9 1 2 
660 
6 5 5 
5 0 9 
3 9 2 
2 , 0 9 9 
$ 1 3 , 6 2 3 
$ 10,121 
3 , 6 4 0 
6 , 4 8 1 
1 , 0 3 6 
3 9 6 
5 5 1 
4 6 0 
7 1 7 
1,818 
$ 1 1 , 4 5 9 
tThese leases relate to IBM equipment and 
are for terms generally ranging f r o m three to 
five years. 
*In 1989, amortization o f g o o d w i l l was 
changed from a 20-year period to periods not 
exceeding five years. 
"Includes, at cost, the investment in 1988 of $ 4 0 0 
million in 7.35% preferred stock of MCI C o m m u n i c a -
tions Corporation, which is not convertible, nor is 
it planned to be publicly traded. MCI has the option 
to redeem all or part of the new issue at any time. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Long-Term Debt 
(Dollars in millions) 
U.S. dollars: 
7%% convertible subordinated debentures due 2oo4t 
8%% debentures due 2019 
6%% notes due 1990 
ioV4% notes due 1995 
9% notes due 1998 
8%% notes due 1992 
7%% notes due 1992 
8%% notes due 1992 
9%% debentures due 2004 (with sinking fund payments to 2003) 
71/8% notes due 1989 
8%% notes due 1990 
7^4% notes due 1991 
91/2% notes due 1992 
9%% notes due 1992 
8%% notes due 1991 
878% notes due 1991 
9% notes due 1992 
9.32% notes due 2000 
6%% notes due 1989 
10% notes due 1992 
8% notes due 1990 
12^4% notes due 1992 
Medium-term note program, payable 1990-2008 (7.5%-i5.o%) 
Other U.S. dollars, due 1990-2012 (7.3%) 
Other (average interest rate at December 31,1989, in parentheses), payable in: 
European currency units, due 1990-1994 (8.6%) 
Australian dollars, due 1990-1993 (14.4%) 
Japanese y e n , d u e 1 9 9 0 - 2 0 1 9 (5.3%) 
French francs, due 1990-2002 (10.2%) 
Canadian dollars, due 1991-1994 (10.1%) 
Swiss francs, due 1992-1996 (5.0%) 
Other currencies, due 1990-2010 (9.8%) 
Less: Net unamortized discount 
Less: Current maturities 
Total 
December 31,1989 
December 31,1988 
$ 
1,254 
750 
500 
500 
500 
450 
400 
400 
300 
300 
250 
250 
250 
250 
250 
250 
203 
200 
200 
1,057 
948 
9,462 
599 
539 
489 
486 
443 
317 
379 
12,714 
6 
12,708 
1,883 
$ 10,825 
$ 1 , 2 5 4 
5 0 0 
5 0 0 
5 0 0 
4 5 0 
3 6 3 
3 0 0 
3 0 0 
2 5 0 
2 5 0 
2 5 0 
2 0 5 
200 
200 
200 
6 6 7 
9 5 4 
7 , 3 4 3 
1 7 6 
5 0 9 
3 5 5 
5 1 3 
261 
2 3 2 
261 
9 , 6 5 0 
U 
9 , 6 3 7 
1 , 1 1 9 
$ 8 , 5 1 8 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on 
long-term debt outstanding at December 31,1989, are as follows: 
1 9 9 0 , $ 1 , 8 8 3 ; 1 9 9 1 , $ 1,598; 1 9 9 2 , $ 3 , 2 6 1 ; 1 9 9 3 , $ 1 , 2 0 3 ; 1 9 9 4 , $ 5 7 8 ; 1995 a n d b e y o n d , $ 4 , 1 9 1 -
t T h e 7^8% convertible subordinated debentures 
are unsecured subordinated obligations o f 
IBM, which are convertible into IBM capital stock 
at a conversion price o f $153.6563 per share. 
They are redeemable, at the option of the 
company, as of November 1989 at a price of 
103.938% of the principal amount, and at 
decreasing prices thereafter. Sinking fund pay-
ments starting in 1994 are intended to retire 
75% of the debentures prior to maturity. During 
1989, conversions of debentures resulted in 
the issuance of 106 shares of IBM capital stock. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
1987 
E a r n i n g s before i n c o m e taxes: 
U. S. operations 
$ 
( 8 5 1 ) 
$ 
1 , 9 4 5 
$ 
2 , 9 5 0 
N o n - U . S. operations 
7 , 4 9 6 
7 , 0 8 8 
5 , 6 8 0 
Provision f o r i n c o m e taxes: 
$ 
6 , 6 4 5 
$ 
9 , 0 3 3 
$ 
8 , 6 3 0 
U. S. operations 
$ 
( 5 0 1 ) 
$ 
5 3 3 
$ 
1 , 0 0 1 
N o n - U . S . operations 
3 , 3 8 8 
3 , 0 0 9 
2 , 3 7 1 
2 , 8 8 7 
3 , 5 4 2 
3 , 3 7 2 
S o c i a l Security, real estate, personal p r o p e r t y a n d other taxes 
2 , 5 6 2 
2 , 5 2 8 
2 , 3 7 0 
Total 
$ 
5 , 4 4 9 
$ 
6 , 0 7 0 
$ 
5 , 7 4 2 
T h e c o m p o n e n t s o f the provision f o r i n c o m e taxes are as follows: 
U . S . Federal: 
C u r r e n t 
$ 
4 7 6 
$ 
7 9 
$ 
( 1 2 3 ) 
D e f e r r e d 
( 1 , 2 4 7 ) 
( 8 6 ) 
1 7 7 
N e t deferred investment tax credits 
( 1 0 1 ) 
( 1 2 5 ) 
( 1 5 0 ) 
N o n - U . S . : 
( 8 7 2 ) 
( 1 3 2 ) 
( 9 6 ) 
C u r r e n t 
3 , 0 2 5 
3 , 5 6 2 
3 , 0 1 3 
D e f e r r e d 
8 2 4 
8 7 
3 2 0 
3 , 8 4 9 
3 , 6 4 9 
3 , 3 3 3 
U. S. State and local: 
3 , 8 4 9 
3 , 6 4 9 
3 , 3 3 3 
C u r r e n t 
1 0 7 
1 2 
2 3 
D e f e r r e d 
( 1 9 7 ) 
1 3 
1 1 2 
( 9 0 ) 
2 5 
1 3 5 
Total provision 
$ 
2 , 8 8 7 
$ 
3 , 5 4 2 
$ 
3 , 3 7 2 
In 1988, the company implemented Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96. 
This standard calls for adjustment o f deferred tax 
assets and liabilities whenever there is a change 
in enactcd tax rates, with a corresponding 
adjustment being reflected in income tax expense 
for that period. Previous rules called for 
recording these assets and liabilities at the current 
rate, with n o subsequent adjustment for tax 
rate changes. 
T h e cumulative effect o f adopting SFAS 96 
for periods ending prior to January i, 1988, 
which amounted to a benefit o f $315 million, has 
been included in 1988 net earnings. T h e effect 
on the 1988 provision for income taxes was not 
material. Income taxes for 1987 have not been 
restated for this change. 
Deferred income taxes reflect the impact 
o f temporary differences between the a m o u n t of 
assets and liabilities recognized for financial 
reporting purposes and such amounts recognized 
for tax purposes. T h e principal items making up 
the deferred tax provision in 1989 included 
$ 9 0 4 million related to the restructuring charge 
taken in the U.S. and $ 159 million for deferred 
inventory overhead, offset by $339 million 
for sales-type leases and installment sales and 
$ 2 3 0 million for deferred software costs. 
In 1988, these principal items included $283 mil-
lion for sales-type leases and installment sales 
and $ 175 million for deferred software costs, par-
tially offset by $ 182 million of deferred tax 
credits associated with the alternative m i n i m u m 
ta)^. In 1987, the principal item was $535 million 
for depreciation. N o other individual item 
was material. 
Under the rules of SFAS 96, no financial 
recognition is allowed for net deferred tax assets 
in excess of the amount that could be recovered 
as income tax refunds through existing loss 
carryback or carryforward provisions. Conse-
quently, at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , the company had 
unrecognized deferred tax assets of approxi-
mately $ 1 0 0 million, most of which have 
carryforwards for substantial periods. In addition, 
the company has $ 2 8 7 million of deferred 
investment tax credits for financial reporting 
purposes, which will reduce tax expense in 
future years. For tax purposes, the company has 
available tax credit carryforwards of approxi-
mately $ 4 0 0 million, the majority of which are 
available indefinitely and may be used to offset 
future taxes. 
T h e consolidated effective income tax rate 
was 43.4% in 1989, 39.2% in 1988, and 39.1% 
in 1987. In 1989 and 1988, the higher effective tax 
rate on earnings of non-U.S. operations 
accounted for 12.6 and 6.6 percentage points, 
respectively, of the difference between the 
effective rate and the U.S. federal statutory rate 
of 34.0%. In 1987, there were no individually 
significant items which caused the effective rate 
to differ from the U S . federal statutory rate. 


===== PAGE 41 =====
Research, Development and Engineering 
Research, development and engineering expenses 
amounted to $ 6 , 8 2 7 million in 1989, $5,925 
million in 1988 and $ 5 , 4 3 4 million in 1987. 
Included in these amounts were expendi-
tures o f $ 5 , 2 0 1 million in 1989, $ 4 , 4 1 9 million 
in 1988 and $ 3 , 9 9 8 million in 1987 for a broad 
program o f research and development covering 
basic scientific research in a variety o f fields 
and the application o f scientific advances to the 
development o f new and improved products 
and their uses. T h e 1989 a m o u n t includes $375 
million associated with the U.S. restructuring. 
In addition, expenditures for product-related 
engineering a m o u n t e d to $ 1,626 million, 
$ 1 , 5 0 6 million and $ 1 , 4 3 6 million for the same 
three years. 
Interest C o s t 
Interest on borrowings o f the company and 
its subsidiaries amounted to $ 1,853 million in 
1989, $ 1 , 3 2 1 million in 1988 and $ 1 , 0 8 4 
million in 1987. O f these amounts, $ 1 4 2 million 
in 1989, $ 9 3 million in 1988 and $ 1 3 4 million 
in 1987 were capitalized. T h e remainder was 
charged to cost o f rentals and 
financing 
and 
interest expense. 
Lines of Credit 
A t December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , the company and its 
subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit 
with a number of U.S. and n o n - U S . banks per-
mitting borrowings, primarily short-term, up 
to an aggregate of $ 6 , 2 0 0 million. Interest rates 
on borrowings would vary f r o m country to 
country depending on local market conditions. 
Rental Expense and Lease C o m m i t m e n t s 
Rental expense, including amounts charged to 
inventories and fixed assets, amounted to $ i ,765 
million in 1989, $ 1 , 5 6 6 million in 1988 and 
$1,515 million in 1987 M i n i m u m rental commit-
ments, in millions of dollars, under noncancelable 
leases for 1 9 9 0 and thereafter are as follows: 
1990, $ 1 , 5 3 6 ; 1 9 9 1 , $ 1 , 3 2 7 ; 1992, $ 1 , 1 1 9 ; 1993, 
$ 9 6 2 ; 1994, $ 8 1 2 ; and after 1994, $3,803. 
These leases are principally for the rental o f 
office premises. 
Other Liabilities 
Other liabilities consist principally o f indemnity 
and retirement plan reserves for non-U. S. 
employees. 
Finance Subsidiaries 
T h e company's wholly owned finance sub-
sidiaries consist o f I B M Credit C o r p o r a t i o n and 
several non-U. S. finance subsidiaries. IBM Credit 
C o r p o r a t i o n offers lease financing of selected 
IBM products, finances receivables resulting from 
installment sales by IBM o f its products, and 
finances 
selected n o n - I B M equipment in the 
U S. T h e non-U. S. finance subsidiaries offer lease 
financing 
o f selected IBM products and in some 
cases finance installment receivables. 
T h e accompanying schedule depicts the 
combined financial information for these 
finance 
subsidiaries, o f which IBM Credit C o r -
poration accounts for m o r e than 8 0 % of 
the net earnings. These wholly o w n e d subsid-
iaries are consolidated in the accompanying 
financial 
statements. Financing activity in coun-
tries in which the company does not have a 
finance 
subsidiary is not included. 
Additional information is available in the 1989 
A n n u a l R e p o r t o f the IBM Credit Corporation. 
Copies may be obtained by writing to: 
First Chicago Trust C o m p a n y o f N e w York 
P.O. B o x 7896, Church Street Station, 
N e w York, N.Y. 1 0 2 4 2 - 7 8 9 6 . 
Financial position at December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
Assets: 
Cash and cash 
equivalents 
$ 
3 1 5 
$ 
5 3 6 
Receivables —net 
2,796 
2 , 2 8 1 
Net investment in 
capital leases 
7 , 3 5 0 
6 , 3 5 1 
Equipment under 
operating leases — net 
2,030 
758 
Other 
246 
1 8 4 
Total Assets 
$ 1 2 , 7 3 7 
$ 1 0 , 1 1 0 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
Liabilities and 
Stockholder's Equity: 
Short-term debt 
$ 
3,482 
$ 
3,007 
Deferred taxes 
and accruals 
1 , 2 1 4 
1 , 0 9 2 
Due to IBM and 
affiliates 
2 , 2 1 0 
1 , 7 1 4 
Long-term debt 
4,729 
3,300 
Stockholder's equity . . . 
1 , 1 0 2 
997 
Total Liabilities and 
Stockholder's Equity . 
$ 1 2 , 7 3 7 
$ 1 0 , 1 1 0 
Earnings for the years ended December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
1987 
Financing and other income 
Interest and other expenses 
Provision for income taxes 
$ 1 , 3 3 2 
1,098 
75 
$ 
9 1 4 
7 9 1 
26 
$ 
876 
744 
27 
Net earnings 
$ 
1 5 9 
$ 
97t 
$ 
1 0 5 
11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of accounting change for income taxes. 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Retirement Plans 
T h e company and its subsidiaries have retire-
ment plans covering substantially all employees. 
T h e total cost o f all plans for 1 9 8 9 , 1 9 8 8 and 
1987 was $ 3 2 8 million, $ 4 6 0 million and $ 2 8 9 
million, respectively. 
Pension cost in 1989 was lower than in 1988 
principally due to changes in actuarial assump-
tions in the U.S. and several non-U.S. plans, 
partially offset by amendments to the U.S. plan. 
Pension cost in 1988 was higher than in 1987 
principally due to the g r o w t h in service and 
interest cost exceeding the g r o w t h in the expected 
return on plan assets, and the refinement o f 
translation techniques for n o n - U S . plans in highly 
inflationary economic environments. These 
increases in cost were partially offset by actuarial 
assumption changes in several non-U.S. plans. 
A n n u a l cost is determined using the Pro-
jected Unit Credit actuarial method. Prior 
service cost is amortized on a straight-line basis 
over the average remaining service period o f 
employees expected to receive benefits. A n 
assumption is made for modified career average 
plans that the average earnings base period 
will be updated to the years prior to retirement. 
It is the company's practice to f u n d 
amounts for pensions sufficient to meet the 
m i n i m u m requirements set forth in applicable 
employee benefit and tax laws, and such addi-
tional amounts the c o m p a n y may determine to 
be appropriate from time to time. T h e assets 
o f the various plans include corporate equities, 
government securities, corporate debt securities 
and income-producing real estate. 
T h e tables provide information on the 
status o f the U.S. retirement plan, and selected 
non-U.S. plans which represent approximately 
98% o f the total n o n - U S . accumulated benefit 
obligations. 
U.S. Plan: U.S. regular and part-time 
employees are covered by a noncontributory plan 
which is f u n d e d by c o m p a n y contributions 
to an irrevocable trust f u n d , which is held for the 
sole benefit o f employees. M o n t h l y retirement 
benefits generally represent the greater o f a fixed 
a m o u n t per year o f service, o r a percent o f 
T h e funded status at December 31 was as follows: 
U.S. Plan 
Non-U.S. Plans 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
1989 
1988 
Actuarial present value of benefit obligations: 
Vested benefit obligation 
$ 
( 1 1 , 6 4 2 ) 
$ 
( 1 0 , 1 3 5 ) 
$ 
(6,892) 
$ 
(6,017) 
Accumulated benefit obligation 
$ 
( 1 1 , 7 0 8 ) 
$ (10,473) 
$ 
(8,056) 
$ 
(6,898) 
Projected benefit obligation 
Plan assets at fair value 
$ 
( 1 5 , 4 5 1 ) 
22,867 
$ (15,466) 
19,598 
$ 
( 1 1 , 5 8 2 ) 
1 1 , 2 3 1 
$ (10,676) 
9,835 
Projected benefit obligation (in excess of) 
less than plan assets 
Unrecognized net (gain) loss 
Unrecognized prior service cost 
Unrecognized net asset established at January 1,1986 . . 
7 , 4 1 6 
(4,902) 
1,092 
(2,951) 
4 , 1 3 2 
( 1 , 2 7 2 ) 
846 
( 3 , 1 5 5 ) 
( 3 5 1 ) 
( 1 , 1 0 8 ) 
2 4 1 
( 1 6 3 ) 
(841) 
( 5 3 1 ) 
2 3 9 
(176) 
(Accrued) prepaid pension cost recognized 
in the statement of financial position 
$ 
6 5 5 
$ 
5 5 1 
$ 
( 1 , 3 8 1 ) 
$ 
(1,309) 
Net periodic pension cost for the years ended December 31 included the following components: 
US. Plan 
Non-U.S. Plans 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
1988 
1987 
1989 
1988 
1987 
Service c o s t -
benefits earned during 
the period 
Interest cost on the 
projected benefit 
obligation 
Return on plan assets-
Actual 
Deferred 
Net amortizations 
Net periodic pension cost 
$ 
( 1 5 4 ) 
Total net periodic pension 
cost for all non-U.S. plans 
562 
1 , 1 9 4 
(3,950) 
2 , 2 1 4 
( 1 7 4 ) 
579 
1,120 
(2,058) 
456 
( 1 5 2 ) 
(55) 
545 
1 , 0 1 5 
(846) 
(697) 
(159) 
$ 
( 1 4 2 ) 
5 0 1 
679 
; i , 3 1 5 ) 
564 
2 
4 3 1 
482 
482 
648 
(1,003) 
340 
5 
4 7 2 
5 1 5 
445 
639 
( 1 3 5 ) 
(572) 
(8) 
369 
4 3 1 
career compensation. For plan purposes, annual 
compensation before January i , 1991 is defined 
as the average annual compensation paid for the 
years 1981 through 1990. Effective January i, 1989, 
benefits become vested u p o n the completion 
of five years of service. Prior to January i , 1989, 
benefits became vested u p o n completion o f 
1 0 years of service. T h e number of individuals 
receiving benefits at December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
and December 31,1988 was 4 4 , 7 0 1 and 40,567, 
respectively. 
T h e expected long-term rate of return on 
plan assets used in the calculation o f net 
periodic pension cost was 9% for 1 9 8 9 , 1 9 8 8 
and 1987. Measurement of the projected benefit 
obligation was based on a discount rate of 
8^2% in 1989 and 8% in 1988 and a 5% long-
term rate of compensation increase for both 
1989 and 1988. 
Non-U.S. Plans: Most subsidiaries and 
branches outside the U.S. have retirement plans 
covering substantially all employees, under 
which funds are deposited under various 
fiduciary-
type arrangements, annuities are purchased 
under group contracts, or reserves are provided. 
Retirement benefits are based on years of service 


===== PAGE 43 =====
and the employee's compensation, generally 
during a fixed number o f years immediately prior 
to retirement. 
T h e ranges o f assumptions used for the 
non-U.S. plans reflect the different economic 
environments within the various countries. T h e 
expected long-term rates o f return on plan assets 
used in the calculation of net periodic pension 
cost ranged f r o m 5% to 1 2 % in 1989, f r o m 5% to 
1 1 % in 1988, and f r o m 6% to 1 1 % in 1987. Measure-
ment o f the projected benefit obligation was 
based on discount rates ranging f r o m 
to 
1 0 % in both 1989 and 1988, and long-term 
rates o f compensation increase ranging f r o m 3% 
to 81/2% in both 1989 and 1988. 
Postretirement Benefits 
T h e company and its U.S. subsidiaries have med-
ical, dental and life insurance plans for retirees, 
the estimated cost o f which is fully accrued, 
principally at retirement.This cost amounted to 
$ 3 0 3 million, $ 1 0 5 million and $ 5 0 million 
in 1 9 8 9 , 1 9 8 8 and 1987, respectively. 
C o s t in 1989 was higher than in 1988 
primarily because o f amounts recorded for 
employees w h o will retire in 1 9 9 0 as a result o f 
the announced U.S. restructuring. C o s t in 
1988 was higher than in 1987 primarily because 
o f an increased number of retirees, resulting 
from the m a n u f a c t u r i n g and headquarters con-
solidations in 1988. For more information, 
see the note on page 36. 
It is the company's practice to f u n d amounts 
for postretirement benefits, with an independent 
trustee, as deemed appropriate from time to time. 
Certain o f the company's n o n - U S . sub-
sidiaries have similar plans for retirees. However, 
many retirees outside the U S . are covered 
by government sponsored and administered pro-
grams. As a result, the cost o f company sponsored 
programs outside the U.S. is not significant. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
T h e employees stock purchase plan enables 
employees w h o are not participants in a stock 
option plan to purchase IBM's capital stock 
through payroll deductions o f up to 1 0 % o f eli-
gible compensation. T h e price an employee 
pays for a share o f stock is 85% o f the average 
market price on the date the employee has accu-
mulated enough money to buy a share. 
D u r i n g 1989, employees purchased 
7,292,894 shares, all of which were treasury 
shares, for which $ 6 8 7 million was paid to IBM. 
A t December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , 2,379,443 shares 
remain available for purchase. 
Long-Term A w a r d Plans 
In April 1989, the stockholders approved the 
IBM long-term performance plan, which provides 
for incentive awards to be made to officers and 
other key employees. T h e plan is administered by 
the Executive C o m p e n s a t i o n C o m m i t t e e of the 
B o a r d of Directors. T h e C o m m i t t e e determines 
the type of award to be granted, which may 
include a stock option, stock appreciation right 
(SAR), capital stock, cash or any combination 
thereof A l l future stock options will be granted 
under this plan. 
Options allow the purchase o f IBM's 
capital stock at 1 0 0 % o f the market price on the 
date of grant and have a m a x i m u m duration 
of 10 years. Payment by the optionee u p o n exercise 
o f an option may be made using I B M stock 
as well as cash. 
SARs offer optionees the alternative of 
electing not to exercise the related stock option, 
but to receive payment in cash a n d / o r stock, 
equivalent to the difference between the option 
price and the average market price o f I B M stock 
on the date o f exercising the right. 
T h e following table summarizes stock option 
and long-term performance plan transactions 
during 1989: 
Number of Shares 
Under 
Available 
Option 
for Option 
Balance at 
January 1,1989 . . . . 
1 7 , 6 7 4 , 6 4 5 
2 , 2 8 1 , 3 8 8 
Options granted 
4 , 6 2 9 , 5 3 7 
(4,629,537) 
Options terminated . . 
( 5 5 1 , 6 7 5 ) 
1 4 , 8 0 3 
Options cancelled — 
SARs exercised 
(77,659) 
— 
Options exercised . . . . 
( 7 6 5 , 3 0 1 ) 
— 
Options expired 
— 
( 1 , 4 5 3 , 6 3 8 ) 
Shares available 
under long-term 
performance plan . . 
— 
5 , 0 1 2 , 7 9 4 
Shares distributed 
under long-term 
performance plan . . 
— 
( 1 1 , 7 0 0 ) 
Balance at 
December 31,1989 • 
20,909,547 
1 , 2 1 4 , 1 1 0 
Exercisable at 
December 31,1989 • 
1 2 , 4 0 4 , 4 5 6 
T h e options exercised during 1989 were at 
an average option price o f $ 6 4 . 6 6 per share. T h e 
20,909,547 shares under option at December 31, 
1989, are at option prices ranging f r o m $55.25 
to $ 159.50 per share. 
Stock Repurchase Programs 
Under programs for purchasing IBM stock, 
16,085,900 shares were purchased during 1989 
at a cost of $1,759 million, 8,611,396 shares 
were repurchased during 1988 at a cost of $ 9 9 2 
million and 1 1 , 2 5 2 , 0 0 0 shares during 1987 at a 
cost o f $ 1 , 4 2 5 million. T h e repurchased 
shares were retired and restored to the status 
of authorized but unissued shares. 
In late 1989, the B o a r d o f Directors 
authorized the company to purchase f r o m time 
to time shares of its capital stock not to 
exceed $ 5 , 0 0 0 million. A t December 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 , 
$ 4 , 8 8 7 million of that authorization remained. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
S e g m e n t Information 
I B M is in the field o f advanced information 
technology. T h e company operates primarily in 
the single industry segment which offers 
customers solutions that incorporate information 
processing systems, software, communica-
tions systems and other products and services. 
This segment represents more than 9 0 % 
of consolidated revenue, operating profit and 
identifiable assets. T h e schedule below shows 
revenue by industry segments and by classes of 
similar products or services within the informa-
tion technology segment. 
Financial information by geographic area 
is summarized on the next page to provide a 
better understanding of IBM's operations. Material 
interdependencies and overlaps exist a m o n g 
IBM's operating units and, therefore, the informa-
tion may not be indicative of the financial 
results of, or investments in, the reported areas 
were they independent organizations. 
Revenue by Industry S e g m e n t s and Classes of Similar Products or Services 
(Dollars in millions) 
Consolidated 
U.S. Only 
(Dollars in millions) 
1989 
I988t 
1987 + 
1989 
I988t 
1987I 
I n f o r m a t i o n T e c h n o l o g y : 
Processors* 
$ 1 6 , 0 8 7 
$ 1 5 , 0 7 7 
$ 1 3 , 9 8 3 
$ 
5 , 8 0 0 
$ 
5 , 5 8 6 
$ 
5 , 5 0 9 
Workstations: 
Personal Systems* . 
. . 
8 , 2 4 2 
6 , 9 3 4 
6 , 0 3 4 
3 , 6 9 8 
3 , 0 0 4 
3 , 1 1 4 
O t h e r Workstations . 
. 
4 , 0 1 9 
4 , 5 5 0 
4 , 4 0 5 
1 , 4 2 9 
1 , 7 4 5 
1 , 8 6 2 
Peripherals 
1 1 , 0 2 1 
1 1 , 2 8 0 
1 0 , 1 8 6 
3 , 9 3 2 
4 , 7 6 4 
4 , 6 5 6 
S o f t w a r e 
8 , 4 2 4 
7 , 9 2 7 
6 , 8 3 6 
3 , 1 3 9 
2 , 9 2 5 
2 , 8 1 7 
M a i n t e n a n c e Services 
.
.
.
. 
7 , 0 7 0 
7 , 3 4 7 
7 , 6 9 1 
2 , 9 5 9 
3 , 1 0 2 
3 , 6 8 8 
O t h e r 
5 , 8 4 1 
4 , 4 7 0 
3 , 8 1 6 
2 , 7 8 2 
2 , 1 0 3 
1 , 5 6 2 
6 0 , 7 0 4 
5 7 , 5 8 5 
5 2 , 9 5 1 
2 3 , 7 3 9 
2 3 , 2 2 9 
2 3 , 2 0 8 
Federal S y s t e m s 
2 , 0 0 6 
2 , 0 6 5 
2 , 2 3 8 
2 , 0 0 6 
2 , 0 6 5 
2 , 2 3 8 
O t h e r Business 
— 
3 1 
6 7 
— 
26 
58 
T o t a l 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
$ 5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 2 5 , 7 4 5 
$ 2 5 , 3 2 0 
$ 2 5 , 5 0 4 
tReclassified to conform with 1989 presentation. 
*Excludes peripheral functions not embedded, software and maintenance. 
W h i l e I B M operates primarily in a single 
industry segment and manages its worldwide 
business as such, revenue has been categorized 
into major classes of product. 
For purposes o f classifying similar infor-
mation technology products, user programmable 
equipment having the capability o f manipulat-
ing data arithmetically or logically and m a k i n g 
calculations, in a manner directly addressable 
by the user through the operation o f a stored 
p r o g r a m , has been classified as Processors, 
except that Personal Systems are included under 
Workstations. Workstations also include 
typewriters and other display based terminals. 
Peripherals include printers, storage and 
telecommunication devices. 
Peripheral functions embedded in processors are 
classified with Processors. Software includes 
both applications and systems software. Mainte-
nance Services consist o f separately billed 
charges for maintenance. Other consists princi-
pally o f customer solution services, financing 
revenue and supplies. 
S o m e products logically fit in more than 
one class and are assigned to a specific class 
based on a variety of factors. Over time, products 
tend to overlap, merge into or split from 
existing classes as a result of changing technolo-
gies, market perceptions, and/or customer 
use. For example, market demand may create 
requirements for technological enhancements to 
permit a peripheral product (e.g., printer). 
to be functionally integrated with a display, 
a telecommunication device and a processor to 
form a workstation. Such interchangeability and 
technological progress tend to make year-to-year 
comparisons less valid than they would be in 
an industry less subject to rapid change. 
Federal Systems consists of specialized 
information technology products and services 
primarily for the United States defense, space and 
other agencies. 
Other Business consists of training and 
testing materials for school, home and industrial 
use offered by Science Research Associates, 
which was sold by I B M in 1988. 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Geographic A r e a s 
(Dollars in millions) 
U n i t e d States 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
E u r o p e / M i d d l e E a s t / A f r i c a 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
A s i a / P a c i f i c 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
A m e r i c a s 
R e v e n u e - C u s t o m e r s 
Interarea transfers 
Total 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
A s s e t s at D e c e m b e r 31 
E l i m i n a t i o n s 
R e v e n u e 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
A s s e t s 
C o n s o l i d a t e d 
R e v e n u e 
N e t e a r n i n g s 
A s s e t s at D e c e m b e r 31 
11988 net earnings before cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes. 
1 9 8 9 
I 9 8 8 t 
1987 
$ 2 5 , 7 4 5 
5 , 4 7 6 
$ 
3 1 , 2 2 1 
( 3 2 5 ) 
4 1 , 6 3 5 
$ 2 3 , 1 7 0 
1 , 1 0 1 
$ 2 4 , 2 7 1 
2 , 6 7 6 
2 4 , 7 3 2 
$ 
9 , 2 0 2 
1 , 6 7 3 
$ 
1 0 , 8 7 5 
1 , 2 9 6 
7 , 6 6 6 
$ 
4 , 5 9 3 
1 , 4 6 1 
$ 
6 , 0 5 4 
1 7 3 
5 , 3 9 5 
$ 
( 9 , 7 1 1 ) 
(62) 
$ 
( 1 , 6 9 4 ) 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
$ 
3 , 7 5 8 
$ 7 7 , 7 3 4 
$ 2 5 , 3 2 0 
4 , 9 5 1 
$ 3 0 , 2 7 1 
1 , 4 0 8 
3 9 , 2 4 5 
$ 21,600 
9 5 5 
$ 2 2 , 5 5 5 
2 , 3 4 9 
2 2 , 7 4 5 
$ 
8 , 8 2 4 
1 , 8 3 7 
$ 1 0 , 6 6 1 
1 , 3 9 4 
7 , 6 3 3 
$ 
3 , 9 3 7 
1 , 2 9 0 
$ 
5 , 2 2 7 
3 2 8 
4 , 9 1 5 
$ 
( 9 , 0 3 3 ) 
12 
( 1 , 5 0 1 ) 
$ 5 9 , 6 8 1 
$ 
5 , 4 9 1 
$ 7 3 , 0 3 7 
$ 2 5 , 5 0 4 
3 , 9 9 4 
$ 2 9 , 4 9 8 
1 , 9 3 6 
3 6 , 0 2 6 
$ 1 9 , 5 8 8 
1,008 
$ 2 0 , 5 9 6 
2 , 2 0 9 
2 4 , 6 2 5 
$ 
6 , 9 1 0 
1 , 4 3 1 
$ 
8 , 3 4 1 
7 8 0 
6 , 8 4 0 
$ 
3 , 2 5 4 
8 5 0 
$ 
4 , 1 0 4 
3 4 1 
4 , 1 8 8 
$ 
( 7 , 2 8 3 ) 
(8) 
( 1 , 6 5 0 ) 
$ 5 5 , 2 5 6 
$ 
5 , 2 5 8 
$ 7 0 , 0 2 9 
N o n - U . S. subsidiaries which operate in a local 
currency environment account for approxi-
mately 9 0 % o f the company's n o n - U S. revenue. 
T h e remaining 1 0 % is f r o m subsidiaries and 
branches, predominantly in the Americas, 
which operate in U. S. dollars or whose eco-
n o m i c environment is highly inflationary. 
In the E u r o p e / M i d d l e East/Africa area, 
E u r o p e a n operations accounted for approximately 
95% o f revenue in 1 9 8 9 , 1 9 8 8 and 1987. 
Interarea transfers consist principally of 
completed machines, subassemblies and parts, 
and software. These transfers are generally priced 
at cost plus an appropriate service charge. 
T h e cost and service charges that relate to fixed 
asset transfers are capitalized and depreciated or 
amortized by the i m p o r t i n g area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the u n a m o r t i z e d portion o f 
service charges, and the net change during the 
year in u n a m o r t i z e d service charges have been 
eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
For the year: 
Revenue 
$ 62,710 
$ 59,681 
$ 55,256 
$52,160 
$50,718 
Net earnings before cumulative 
effect of accounting change 
3,758 
5,491 
5,258 
4,789 
6,555 
Per share 
6.47 
9.27 
8.72 
7.81 
10.67 
Cumulative effect of change in 
accounting for income taxes 
— 
315 
— 
— 
— 
Per share 
— 
.53 
— 
— 
— 
Net earnings 
3,758 
5,806 
5,258 
4,789 
6,555 
Per share 
6.47 
9.80 
8.72 
7.81 
10.67 
Cash dividends paid 
2,752 
2,609 
2,654 
2,698 
2,703 
Per share 
4.73 
4.40 
4.40 
4.40 
4.40 
Investment in plant, rental machines 
and other property 
6,410 
5,431 
4,312 
4,644 
6,434 
Return on stockholders' equity 
9.6% 
14.9% 
14.5% 
14.4% 
22.4 
At end of year: 
Total assets 
$ 77,734 
$ 73,037 
$70,029 
$63,020 
$ 56,983 
Net investment in plant, rental 
machines and other property 
24,943 
23,426 
22,967 
21,310 
19,713 
Working capital 
14,175 
17,956 
18,430 
15,546 
14,958 
Long-term debt 
10,825 
8,518 
7,108 
6,923 
6,368 
Stockholders' equity 
38,509 
39,509 
38,263 
34,374 
31,990 
Selected Quarterly Data 
Gross 
Net 
(Dollars in millions cxcept per share and stock prices) 
Revenue 
Profit 
Earnings 
1989 
First Quarter 
$ 12,730 
$ 
7,212 
$ 
950 
Second Quarter 
15,213 
8,481 
1,340 
Third Quarter 
14,305 
7,900 
877 
Fourth Quarter 
20,462 
11,416 
591 
Total 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
$ 3 5 , 0 0 9 
$3,758 
1988 
First Quarter 
$ 12,058 
$ 
6,853 
$ 1,248$ 
Second Quarter 
13,907 
7,936 
964 
Third Quarter 
13,714 
7,826 
1,247 
Fourth Quarter 
20,002 
11,418 
2,347 
Total 
$ 59,681 
$ 34,033 
$ 5,806 
tlncludes $ 315 million, or $.53 per share, cumulative effect of change in accounting for income taxes. 
There were 815,580 stockholders of record 
The regular quarterly cash dividend payable 
at December 31,1989. During 1989, stockhold- 
March 10,1990 will be at the rate of $1.21 
ers received $ 2,752 million in cash dividends. 
per share.This dividend will be IBM's 300th 
consecutive quarterly cash dividend. 
Per Share 
Stock Prices 
Earnings 
Dividends 
H i g h 
L o w 
$1.61 
$1.10 
2.31 
1.21 
1.51 
1.21 
1.04 
1.21 
$6.47 
$4.73 
$130.88 
115.75 
119.38 
109.75 
$107.63 
106.25 
107.75 
93.38 
2 . 1 0 $ 
1.63 
2.10 
3.97 
$ 1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
1.10 
124.00 
128.38 
129.50 
125.00 
$9.80 
$4.40 
$ 104.50 
105.63 
109.50 
112.75 
The stock prices reflect the high and low 
prices for IBM's capital stock on the New York Stock 
Exchange composite tape for the last two years. 


===== PAGE 47 =====
I B M Corporation 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Board of Directors: Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Bechtel Group, Inc., San Francisco, C a l i f -
engineering and construction 
Harold Brown 
Chairman, Foreign Policy Institute,The Johns Hopkins University, Washington, D.C. 
James E. Burke 
Chairman, Strategic Planning Committee, Johnson & Johnson, N e w Brunswick, N . J . -
health care products 
FrankT. C a r y 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
WilliamT. Coleman, Jr 
Partner, O'Melveny & Myers, Washington, D.C.-attorneys at law 
Thomas F. Frist, Jr. 
Chairman of the Board, Hospital Corporation of America, Nashville, Tenn.-health services 
Fritz Gerber 
Chairman of the Boards of F. Hotfrnann-La Roche, Ltd., Basel, Switzerland-health care, 
and Zurich Insurance C o m p a n y , Zurich-insurance 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM; Partner, Riker, Danzig, Scherer & Hyland, 
Morristown, N . J - a t t o r n e y s at law 
Nannerl O. Keohane 
President, Wellesley College, Wellesley, Mass. 
Jack D. Kuehler 
President, IBM 
Richard W. Lyman 
Director, Institute for International Studies, Stanford University, Stanford, C a l i f 
J. Richard M u n r o 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, T i m e Warner Inc., 
N e w York, NY.-broadcasting and publishing 
Thomas S. Murphy 
Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer, Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., 
N e w York, N.Y.-broadcasting and publishing 
John R . O p e l 
Chairman of the Executive C o m m i t t e e , IBM 
Helmut Sihier 
President and Chief Executive Officer, Henkel K G a A , Dilsseldorf, West G e r m a n y -
chemical products 
John B. Slaughter 
President, Occidental College, L o s Angeles, C a l i f 
Edgar S. Woolard, Jr. 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, E.I. du Pont de Nemours & C o . , Inc., 
W i l m i n g t o n , Del.-chemical products 
BOARD COMMITTEES: 
Executive Committee: 
John R. Opel, Chairman 
John F. Akers 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
James E. Burke 
FrankT. C a r y 
Jack D. Kuehler 
J. Richard M u n r o 
Retirement Plans Committee: 
Jack D. Kuehler, Chairman 
Harold Brown 
William T. Coleman, Jr. 
Fritz Gerber 
Edgar S. Woolard, Jr. 
Compensation Committee: 
James E. Burke, Chairman 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
Thomas F. Frist, Jr 
J Richard M u n r o 
T h o m a s S. Murphy 
Audit Committee: 
Richard W. L y m a n , C h a i r m a n 
Nicholas deB. Katzenbach 
Nannerl O. Keohane 
Helmut Sihier 
John B. Slaughter 
A d v i s o r y Board: 
George B. Beitzel 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Kaspar V.Cassanit 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
John M . Fox 
Retired Chairman of the Board, S C A Services, Inc., Boston, Mass. 
G. Keith Funston 
Retired President, N e w York Stock Exchange, N e w York, N.Y. 
George L. H i n m a n 
Partner, H i n m a n , Howard & Kartell, Binghamton, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
John N. Irwin II 
Counsel, Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler, N e w York, N.Y. -attorneys at law 
Gilbert E. Jones 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President Emeritus, Columbia University, N e w York, N.Y. 
Allen J. Krowe 
Retired Executive Vice President, IBM; Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, Texaco Inc., White Plains, N.Y. 
T. Vincent Learson 
Retired Chairman of the Board, IBM 
Jacques G. Maisonrouge 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
William M c C h e s n e y M a r t i n , Jr 
Retired Chairman, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C. 
Dean R. M c K a y 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Maersk Mc-Kinney Moller 
Chief Executive Officer, A . P Moller, Copenhagen, Denmark 
William H. M o o r e 
Retired Chairman of the Board, Bankers Tmst C o m p a n y , N e w York, N.Y. 
Dean P Phypers 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Emanuel R. Piore 
Retired Vice President, IBM 
Paul J. R i z z o 
Retired Vice Chairman of the Board, IBM; Dean, Graduate School of Business Administration, 
University of N o r t h Carolina at Chapel Hill 
William W. Scranton 
Former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations; former Governor of Pennsylvania, Scranton, Pa. 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner, Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom, W i l m i n g t o n , Del.-attorneys at law 
Cyrus R. Vance 
Partner, Simpson Thacher & Bartlett, N e w York, N.Y.-attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman Emeritus, IBM 
Officers: 
Chairman of the Board 
John F. Akers 
President 
Jack D. Kuehler 
Senior Vice Presidents 
C. Michael Armstrong 
Walton E. Burdick 
George H . Conrades 
Carl J. Conti 
Donato A. Evangelista, 
General Counsel 
Terry R. Lautenbach 
David E. M c K i n n e y 
Frank A. Metz, Jr., 
Finance and Planning 
Patrick A.Toole 
Vice Presidents 
Richard T. Gerstner 
David E. McDowell 
John A. Armstrong 
Victor J. Goldberg 
Charles E. McKittrick, Jr. 
Michael J. Attardo 
William 0 . Grabe 
Ennio Presutti 
James A. Cannavino 
Joseph M . Guglielmi 
M . Bernard Puckett 
Ralph W. Clark 
Lutz F. H a h n e 
Michael J. Quinlan 
Robert J Corrigan 
Ellen M . H a n c o c k 
Renato Riverso 
John P C u n n i n g h a m 
Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. 
Edward F. Rogers* 
Kenneth W. D a m 
Hans-Olaf Henkel 
Peter R. Schneider 
James E. Dezell, Jr 
John J Higgins* 
Stephen B. Schwartz 
Nicholas M . D o n o f r i o 
H a r r y L. Kavetas 
Takeo Shiina 
Gerald W. Ebker 
Edward J. K f o u r y 
Robert M . Stephenson 
Howard G. Figueroa 
Robert J L a B a n t 
Nancy H . Teeters 
Lucie J Fjeldstad 
Ned C. Lautenbach 
David M . T h o m a s * 
L a r r y J. Ford 
Paul R. L o w 
John M . T h o m p s o n 
James J. Forese 
Edward E. Lucente 
JamesT. Vanderslice 
Heinz K. Fridrich 
M a r v i n L. M a n n 
Earl E Wheeler 
Secretary 
William W.K. Rich 
Treasurer 
Robert Ripp 
Controller 
Michael H . Van Vranken* 
Assistant Treasurers 
Joe Grills 
Ira D . H a l l 
Robert N. Mattson 
John H . Stewart 
tEffective i / s / 9 0 
'Elected i / 3 0 / 9 0 


===== PAGE 48 =====
I B M W o r l d Trade 
Sir Roderick Carnegie 
Former President, Business Council of Australia, Melbourne, Australia 
A s i a Pacific Board: 
Neil R. Clark 
Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer, National Australia Bank, Ltd., Melbourne, Australia 
Jill K . C o n w a y 
Visiting Scholar, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass.; 
former President of Smith College, Northampton, Mass. 
Kenneth W. D a m 
Vice President, IBM 
David A.GIedhill 
Chairman, John Swire & Sons (H.K.), Ltd., H o n g Kong 
Douglas Hsu 
President, Far Eastern Textile, Ltd.,Taiwan 
David K. P Li 
Director and Chief Executive,The Bank of East Asia, Ltd., H o n g Kong 
Edward E. Lucente 
Vice President, IBM; President, IBM Asia Pacific 
Nobuyuki Nakahara 
President,Toa Nenryo K o g y o Co., Ltd.,Tokyo, Japan 
Mohamed Noordin Sopiee 
Director General, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
Kenichi Ohmae 
Managing Director, McKinsey & Company, Inc.,Tokyo, Japan 
Ralph A. Pfeifter, Jr 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
Takeo Shiina 
Vice President, IBM; President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM Japan Ltd. 
Tan Chok Kian 
Executive Chairman, Stock Exchange of Singapore; Singapore's Trade Representative to Taiwan 
Dr. Snoh Unakul 
Chairman,Thailand Development Research Institute Foundation, Bangkok,Thailand 
Jiro Ushio 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Ushio, Inc.,Tokyo, Japan 
I B M W o r l d Trade 
Eric Bourdais de Charbonniere . . . . Executive Vice President, Morgan Guaranty Trust C o m p a n y of N e w York, Paris, France 
Europe/Middle East/Juan Antonio Garcia Diez 
Attorney; Chairman, URALITA S.A., Madrid, Spain 
A f r i c a Corporation 
Pierre L. Gousseland 
Honorary Chairman, AMAX, Inc., Greenwich, Conn. 
Board of Directors: 
Lutz F. Hahne 
Vice President, IBM; Assistant General Manager, IBM U.S. Financial Analysis 
Hans-Olaf Henkel 
Vice President, IBM; President, IBM Germany 
Jacc]ues G. Maisonrouge 
Retired Senior Vice President, IBM 
David E. M c K i n n e y 
Senior Vice President, IBM; President Directeur General, IBM Europe, S. A.; 
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, IBM WorldTrade E u r o p e / M i d d l e East/Africa Corporation 
Umberto Nordio 
Chairman, Overseas Partners, Inc., N e w York, N.Y.; 
Retired Chairman, Alitalia, S.p. A., Rome, Italy 
Renato Riverso 
Vice President, IBM; Directeur General des Operations, IBM Europe, S. A. 
B o Rydin 
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Svenska Cellulosa AB, Sundsvall, Sweden 
Sir Philip Shelbourne 
Chairman, Henry Ansbacher Holdings F I X , London, England 
O t t o Sturzenegger 
Chairman of the Board, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Ardsley, N.Y 
Nancy H. Teeters 
Vice President and Chief Economist, IBM 
Patrick A.Toole 
Senior Vice President, IBM; General Manager, IBMTechnology Products 
Kurt Werner 
Chairman, Maschinenfabrik GOEBEL G m b H , Darmstadt, Germany 
IBM W o r l d Trade 
Manuel F. Ayau 
President Emeritus, Universidad Francisco Marroquin, Guatemala City, Guatemala 
Latin A m e r i c a 
Roberto Konder Bornhausen 
Vice Chairman, Unibanco, Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Board: 
William A. Etherington 
Vice President and Assistant General Manager, IBM Latin America 
James J. Forese 
Vice President, IBM; Group Executive, IBM WorldTrade Americas Group 
Jaime Garcia Parra 
President, Acerias Paz del Rio, S. A., Bogota, Colombia 
Julio J. G o m e z 
Vice President and General Manager, Banco Shaw, S. A,, Buenos Aires, Argentina 
Claudio X. Gonzalez 
Chairman of the Board and Director General, Kimberly-Clark de Mexico, Mexico City, Mexico 
R o d r i g o Guerra B 
President and General Manager, IBM Mexico 
Rudolf Hohn 
President and General Manager, IBM Brazil 
Robeli J. Libero 
PresicJent and General Manager, IBM Latin America 
Eliodoro Matte L 
Vice Chairman, Compania Manufacturera de Papeles y Cartones, S. A., Santiago, Chile 
Paulo D Villares 
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer, Industrias Villares, S. A., Sao Paulo, Brazil 
Gustavo J. Vollmer 
Chairman, Banco Mercantil, S. A., Caracas, Venezuela 
Richard Webb 
Chairman, Cuanto, S.A., L i m a , Peru 


===== PAGE 49 =====
The following information is provided as a convenient reference for IBM stockholders: 
The 1990 Annual Meeting 
of stockholders will be held on Monday, 
April 30, at 10 a.m., at the Phoenix Civic Plaza 
Convention Center, Phoenix, Ariz. 
Notice of Annual Meeting, 
Proxy Statement and Proxy Voting Card 
are mailed to each stockholder in March. The 
Proxy Statement describes the items of business 
to be voted on at the Annual Meeting and 
provides biographies of the Board's nominees 
for director and their principal affiliations 
with other companies or organizations, as well 
as other information about the company. 
The Report of the IBM Annual Meeting, 
mailed to each stockholder in June, summarizes 
the activities at the Annual Meeting, including 
a report on the company, questions and answers 
of general interest, and the results of voting 
on items of business. 
IBM Stockholder Records 
For information on your stockholder account, 
call First Chicago Trust Company of New York, 
(212) 735-7000. 
Stockholders wishing to write should use the 
following addresses: 
Account Questions: 
First Chicago Trust Company of New York 
P.O. Box 7896 
Church Street Station 
New York, N Y 10242-7896 
Transfer of Stock: 
First Chicago Trust Company of New York 
30 West Broadway 
New York, N.Y 10007-2192 
Stock certificates are valuable and should be 
safeguarded since replacement takes time and 
requires payment of a surety bond premium by 
the stockholder If a stock certificate is lost, 
stolen or destroyed, First Chicago Trust Company 
of New York should be notified. Registered mail 
should be used whenever stock is mailed. 
The following information may be obtained 
without charge from First Chicago Trust Company 
of New York, P.O. Box y8p6, Church Street Station, 
New York, N.Y. io242-y8p6. Call (212) j^^-yooo. 
The Form 10-K Annual Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission 
provides further details on IBM's business, 
including a list of subsidiaries, summarized in 
the Annual Report. Form 10-K is available 
in April. 
The Form 10-Q Quarterly Report 
to the Securities and Exchange Commission is 
available in May, August and November. 
A Transcript of the Annual Meeting 
is available in June. 
IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan Booklet 
explains how stockholders may automatically 
reinvest dividends toward the purchase of 
additional shares of IBM stock, as well as make 
optional additional investments for that purpose. 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines 
is a booklet sent to IBM employees worldwide 
describing the ethical and business principles that 
the company sets for the conduct of its business. 
Equal Opportunity, Affirmative 
Action and Community Programs 
in IBM are outlined in a document that describes 
programs in the United States for women, 
minorities and handicapped persons, and reviews 
IBM's affirmative action efforts in the community. 
IBM Annual Report Translations 
and Recordings 
are available. The report is translated into 
French and Japanese. An audiocassette recording 
in English is available for the blind. 
A Service for Hearing-Impaired Stockholders 
provided by First Chicago Trust Company of 
New York enables hearing-impaired stockhold-
ers who have access to a telecommunications 
device to communicate with First Chicago Trust 
Company of New York. Stockholders who wish 
to use this service should call (212) 571-0022. 
IBM Investor Relations 
I B M Corporation, Investor Relations, 
Old Orchard Road, Armonk, N.Y. 10504. 
Call (914) 765-7777 
IBM Stock is Traded 
on the New York Stock Exchange, other 
exchanges in the United States, and exchanges 
in Austria, Belgium, Canada, England, 
France, Germany, Japan, Switzerland and 
the Netheriands. 
For Information 
General questions about IBM 
from within the continental U.S., 
call (800) 426-3333. 
Outside the continental U. S., 
call (201) 329-7113. 
International Business Machines 
Corporation 
Corporate Headquarters 
Armonk, NY. 10504 
* A I X , A p p l i c a t i o n S y s t c m / ^ 0 0 , I n f o W i n d o w , PS/2 
a n d Personal S y s t c n i / 2 arc registered t r a d e m a r k s o f 
the I n t c r n a t i o n a i Business M a c i i i n c s C o r p o r a t i o n . 
A i y C y c i c , A S / 4 0 0 , C I M A d v a n t a g e , S A A , S y s t e m s 
A p p l i c a t i o n A r c h i t e c t u r e , S y s t e m / s y o , a n d 3 0 9 0 , 
are t r a d e m a r k s o f the I n t e r n a t i o n a l Business M a c h i n e s 
C o r p o r a t i o n . 
* U N 1 X is a registered t r a d e m a r k o f A m e r i c a n T e l e p h o n e 
a n d Telegraph C o . 
386 a n d i 4 8 6 are t r a d e m a r k s o f Intel C o r p o r a t i o n . 
4 8 
IBM 1989 Annual Report 
G505-1989-00 PRINTED IN USA 


===== PAGE 50 =====


===== PAGE 51 =====
> 
o 
Z 
P ? = 
•TD 
O 
n ryi 
GO 
5- 2 
2 
n o 
O 
2 
^ 
^ 
o W 
ri 
^ 
