

===== PAGE 1 =====
1991 Annual Report 


===== PAGE 2 =====
IBM is in the business of helping people solve problems 
through the use of advanced information technologies. IBM 
creates value by offering products and services that help 
customers succeed. These offerings include: services, software, 
systems, products, and technologies. 
Through its worldwide marketing and services companies, 
business partners, and strategic alliances, IBM offers unique 
solutions and skills to address each customer s individual 
needs. IBM manufacturing and development businesses and 
key alliances provide timely and competitive offerings to 
meet the demands of the markets IBM serves. 
1 
Letter to Stocldiolders 
6 
Questions and Answers 
8 
Introduction 
10 
Partnerships 
12 
Services 
14 
Alliances 
16 
Products 
18 
Technology 
20 
Employees 
21 
Community 
22 
Financial Report 
54 
Directors and Officers 
Organization 
Stockholder Information 


===== PAGE 3 =====
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
For the Year: 
Revenue 
Earnings before ineome taxes 
Income taxes 
Net earnings before change in accounting principle . . . . 
Per share 
Transition effcct of changc in accounting for 
nonpension postretiremcnt benefits 
Per share 
Net earnings 
Per share 
Cash dividends paid 
Per share 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property. 
Average number of shares outstanding (in millions) . . . . 
Return on stockholders' equity 
1991 
1990 
6 4 , 7 9 2 
$ 69.018 
1 2 1 
$ 10,203 
6 8 5 
$ 4 , 1 8 3 
(564) 
$ 6.020 
(.99) 
$ 10.51 
( 2 , 2 6 3 ) 
$ 
— 
(3.96) 
$ 
-
( 2 , 8 2 7 ) 
$ 6.020 
(4.95) 
$ 10.51 
2 , 7 7 1 
$ 2.774 
4.84 
$ 
4.84 
6 , 5 0 2 
$ 6.548 
5 7 2 
573 
Financial Highlights 
14.8% 
At End of Year: 
Total assets 
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
Working capital 
Long-term debt 
Stockholders' equity 
Number of regular, full-time employees 
Number of stockholders 
$ 9 2 , 4 7 3 
$ 2 7 , 5 7 8 
$ 
7 , 3 4 5 
$ 1 3 , 2 3 1 
$ 3 7 , 0 0 6 
3 4 4 , 3 9 6 
7 7 2 , 0 4 7 
$ 87.568 
$ 2 7 , 2 4 1 
$ 13.644 
$ I 1.913 
$ 42.832 
3 7 3 , 2 8 9 * 
789,046 
^Restated to conform with 1991 presentation; refer to page 29. 
Revenue 
87 
88 
89 
90 
91 
I Dividends 
• Net Earnings 
87 
89 
90 
91 
Earnings per Share 
87 
88 
89 
90 
9! 
Cover: 
IBM is e m e r g i n g as a 
s])ectrum of com|)atiies 
and businesses more 
responsive to customers 
and more aggressive 
in p u r s u i n g op|)ortuni-
ties for growth and 
prolitabililv. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
Nineteen ninety-one was a difficult year for the computer industry and 
a disappointing year financially for IBM. Even after taking into 
account the effects of war and a recession-weakened global economy, 
we did not achieve the results we wanted. 
The product transition of our higher-margin, large-computer business 
was slower than expected; we did not see the returns we anticipated 
from our investments in marketing resources; and we continued to 
experience severe pricing pressures, especially in our storage systems, 
personal computer, printer, and display businesses. As a result, 
revenue declined, gross profit margins were adversely affected by both 
product mix and volumes, and operating profits were off dramatically. 
In the fourth quarter, we took charges against earnings in excess 
of $3 billion to rellect restructuring costs. 
While the pace of our business improved in the final quarter of the 
Moving to increase 
year, global economic conditions remain weak and unsettled, and there 
competitiveness 
is a great deal of uncertainty. In this environment, we continue to 
take aggressive actions to make IBM more competitive and efficient, and 
we begin 1992 resolved to increase revenues, gain market share, and 
improve cash flow and returns. 
The portions of our revenue that are less subject to year-to-year fluc-
tuations - services, software, and rentals and financing - continue to grow. 
They accounted for 43 percent of 1991 revenue, with growth led by non-
maintenance services, whose 35 percent growth rate outpaced the industry. 
In total, IBM's operations during the year generated close to $4 billion 
in earnings before taxes, restructuring charges, and a one-time charge as 
a result of an accounting change. 
P2 
c 
< 


===== PAGE 5 =====
cc 
3 
C c 
< 
Our product line is much improved. The RISC System/6000 advanced 
workstation gained market share, the Application System/400 
midrange system remains popular, and our new Enterprise System/9000 
processors have been well-received. We broadened our alliances to 
expand our business opportunities; worldwide, we ended 1991 with more 
than 300 equity alliances and 20,000 business partnerships. 
In 1991, our direct operational expenses were essentially flat, and our 
capital investments declined. IBM's worldwide work force declined 
by about 29,000 and will continue to decline in 1992. Across the board, 
the IBM company is a leaner, tougher, and smarter competitor than 
it was a year ago. 
Redefining IBM 
As we begin 1992, we have set in motion comprehensive changes that 
are redefining IBM from a single, centralized company into a network of 
more competitive businesses. 
Our manufacturing and development businesses and our marketing 
and services companies will be increasingly free-standing: each 
more independent, fast, and focused on the markets it serves; respon-
sive to its customers and accountable for its results. At the same 
time, these businesses and companies will remain linked and able to 
draw upon the full range of IBM's technological and financial resources. 
In countries around the world, the value we bring to customers will 
come increasingly from our marketing and services companies. 
They will focus more on market selection and consulting services and 
will combine the best product and service offerings from IBM and. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
Jolin F. Akors, chaicman of 
the l)oar(l (cenlcr). with 
Jack I). Kuohlcr. president 
(right), and Frank A. Metz. Jr., 
senior vice president, 
finance and planning. 
as appropriate, from other companies to provide integrated solutions that 
are truly tailored to customer needs. 
IBM s manufacturing and development businesses will optimize product 
manufacturing, as well as development, on a worldwide basis. As they 
become increasingly autonomous, these M&D businesses will sell their 
products not only to IBM marketing and services companies but also to 
other manufacturers. 
Business 
units more 
autonomous 
A s a first step, we have established a new company. Pennant Systems, 
for our midrange and high-end printers. Our Storage Systems operation 
becomes a line of business in its own right. And our Personal Systems 
and Application Business Systems, as well as our high-end System/390, 
businesses are all moving toward greater autonomy. 
cd 


===== PAGE 7 =====
Pursuing new 
opportunities 
The role of corporate management will be to oversee our portfolio 
of businesses, pursue new opportunities for business growth, and disen 
gage from declining or less profitable businesses to maximize IBM's 
financial returns. 
Putting a premium on autonomy will unleash the full creativity of 
our people to achieve greater speed, agility, and ingenuity in delivering 
the right products, services, and solutions. 
We expect our marketing and services companies to generate more 
revenue and profit, and to improve market share. We expect our manu-
facturing and development businesses to provide the best products 
and bring them to market faster and faster. And we expect to improve 
our financial performance and to enhance the value of our stock-
holders' investments. 
Bringing the 
best to customers 
In 1992, IBM is on the offensive. We offer the most competitive customer 
solutions in our history, including hardware, software, and services. We are 
open to new ways of doing business to bring customers the best choices 
in technology, products, and the most comprehensive services in the indus-
t r y - to deliver the market-driven quality and satisfaction they expect. 
IBM's financial position remains strong. We will continue to improve 
our operating efficiency as we implement the restructuring actions 
initiated in 1991. We will continue to drive down costs and operational 
expenses; our total R&D expenditures will be equal to last year's; 
capital investments will decline; and we are moving into markets that 
offer improved return on investment. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
Underpinning our efforts in 1992 is the continuing dedication of skilled 
SkiJled and 
and empowered IBM employees. Increasinoly, they will be motivated 
empoweied 
' 
^ 
. 
. 
o y 
^ 
^ 
employees 
by compensation more directly linked to the performance of the specific 
company, subsidiary, or business in which they work. 
Our company's greatest strength is the quahty of our relationships 
witli customers all over the world. We pledge to those customers that we 
will continue to strengthen IBM's unsurpassed ability to integrate 
products, services, and educational support - total solutions - all 
through the talents of our people and our business partners. 
We have confidence in the future of this industry and in the many 
new business opportunities we see opening before us. We will continue 
to capitalize on these opportunities for the benefit of our customers, 
our employees, and our stockholders. 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 
January 28, 1992 


===== PAGE 9 =====
Questions and Answers 
Q 
Q 
A 
Each year, IBM receives questions from stock-
holders on a range of topics. Following are 
responses from IBM Chairman John F. Akers. 
Is the dividend in any danger of being cut? 
We have no plans, nor do we see any need, to 
cut the dividend. 
Q 
A 
You have said you are restructuring IBM's 
businesses into increasingly autonomous com-
panies over time. Is this a breakup? 
We are not breaking up the IBM company. 
But we are fundamentally changing the 
company by creating a spectrum of different 
businesses and companies that will have 
varying degrees of independence and auton-
omy over time. Each will be clear about 
precisely what business it is in. Each will 
be fast and focused on the markets it chooses 
to serve. We have started the process, but 
there is much more to do. 
Will the public be able to buy shares in these 
newly independent or autonomous companies? 
IBM may acquire and divest itself of compa-
nies as new products and services rise and 
others fade away. There may be variable IBM 
ownership across a range of product busi-
nesses, and marketing and services companies 
- from wholly owned, majority owned, or 
minority owned to no ownership at all. It is 
possible that some of the businesses and 
companies will go public eventually and sell 
their own stock. 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
IBM needs to improve both market 
share and profits. Is it possible to do both 
simultaneously? 
Yes. Winning market share and managing for 
profitability are not mutually exclusive. 
Our worldwide sales team is on the ofiensive 
this year to gain market share. This focus, 
plus having more offerings that more custom-
ers want, is the best way to improve mar-
ket share. At the same time, we are cutting 
our overhead structure and reducing 
our level of capital expenditures further. 
As we start 1992, IBM is resolved to gain 
market share and improve prohts. 
What are you doing to increase the efficiency 
of the company and its cash (low ? 
We are continuing to reduce our costs, 
operational expenses, and capital expenditures. 
We have sold oH nonstrategic businesses; we 
have, in recent years, rcmissioned and closed 
plants. By the end of 1992, our employee 
population will have been reduced by approxi-
mately 80,000 people from a high of 
407,000 in 1986 - a 20 percent reduction. Key 
to improving cash flow is revenue growth. 
We think our product and service offerings, 
plus the fundamental changes we have 
made in the company, will produce revenue 
growth in 1992 and the years to come. 
Q
DO you intend to maintain your practice of 
full employment? 
A 
We believe full employment reinforces 
pride and morale in our work force. However, 
it is intrinsically connected to individual 
performance and business success. If further 
significant reductions are required, we 
will reassess full employment and do what 
is best for IBM. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
In reducing your work Force, how are you 
retaining the best people? 
Tlie work force reductions under way are 
being done in places where they make the 
best business sense/Fo retain the best people, 
we are emphasizing better rewards for higher 
contributors. On a broader scale, we are 
focusing more on performance planning, 
counseling, and employee evaluations, and 
we've raised performance requirements 
for all our employees worldwide. 
1BM still spends more money than any 
other company on research and development. 
Are vou getting vour moneys worth? 
We have the best R&D teams in the world, 
bar none.'l'hat doesn't mean we don't 
scrutinize the money we invest in them. 
We do. In the future, as our general managers 
take a strategic look at their newly struc-
tured businesses, I expect that there will be 
some changes and some rebalancing in 
RCKD spending. 
V)u've said vou'd like to get back to a return 
on equity of 18 percent for IBM. I low will 
vou do that? 
I B.M todav is a much better balanced com-
pany. I n our high-end computer business, we 
have good margins. Fhe midrange is gen-
erating appropriate returns. Our workstation 
business is improving, and the high end of 
the personal computer business is attractive. 
Our storage systems and printer businesses 
require improved returns, and our new 
structure addresses this. Networking systems 
is an attractive opportunity; systems soft-
ware is a strong business; services is growing 
rapidly, as is our financing business. Our 
partnerships and relationships with other 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
Q 
A 
companies as an original equipment manu-
facturer allow us to manage our assets toward 
this goal, and we continue to invest in mar-
kets that will achieve the best returns. Given a 
reasonable economic environment, we believe 
we can achieve our 18 percent ROE objective 
in the next three years or so. 
What is IBM doing about the possibility that 
its credit rating, currently the highest rating a 
company can get, will be lowered? 
Credit ratings are based on a company's over-
all financial performance and prospects. 
We have taken significant actions to improve 
IBM's performance and maintain its pre-
eminence in the industry. 
You've been working on improving quality for 
two years now. What are the results? 
IBM has long earned its reputation as one 
of the world leaders in quality. We have made 
significant strides, but we are not satisfied 
with where we are. Market-driven quality at 
IBM is not a program - it's a way of life. 
Our aim, through our marketing and product 
companies and businesses, is to be the 
premier supplier of information technologies, 
products, and comprehensive services. 
Do you think senior IBM executives, including 
yourself, should take pay cuts in view of the 
1991 results? 
I feel very strongly that senior management's 
compensation should be tied to the perform-
ance of the business. Since a large portion 
of IBM executive pay is based on performance, 
1991 payments will reflect significant reduc-
tions. While my 1991 compensation is yet to be 
determined by the Board of Directors, I am 
anticipating a reduction of about 40 percent. 
PS 


===== PAGE 11 =====
Open to new ways of business 
IBM is emerging from 1991 a leaner, more aggressive, more efficient 
company. In early December, the outlines of IBM's future were drawn 
with the announcement of a historic shift to an array of increas-
ingly autonomous businesses and independent companies/I 
^ future 
IBM, which has already begun to take shape through the formation 
of several new companies and realigned operations, will be a 
fast and focused competitor in the markets it serves. 
IBM businesses will become increasingly accessible and responsive 
to customers and partners. As the premier provider ot comprehensive 
services, IBM will build new alliances, develop and manufacture 
competitive products, be a pacesetter in technology, and develop and 
empower its talented employees. The following pages provide a look 
at these initiatives, many launched in 1991. 
Underlying all these plans and prospects are the fundamental values 
of IBM and its Basic Beliefs of respect for the individual, excellence, and 
superior customer service.They will continue to serve as IBM's 
compass to steer by in the exciting years ahead. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
Through a joint mulliinillion-dollar alliance, Siemens and IBM employees are working together to produce 16-million-bit memory 
chips - the densest memory chips in production - at I BiM s semiconductor production facility in Corbeil-Essonnes, France. 
PS 
3 c c 


===== PAGE 13 =====
Joining hands with customers 
a 
CO 3 
C 
C 
< 
Kloster Cruise Ltd. has a reputation for pampering travelers. Its 
Norwegian Cruise Line, Royal Cruise Line, and Royal Viking Line are 
considered among the best in the world - also among the most 
automated. As an IBM customer, Kloster Cruise Ltd. looks for the kind 
of assistance that will not only improve current operations but map 
strategies for future ones. For example, when a recent passenger survey 
highlighted the need for improvements in Kloster s shore excursion 
process, IBM recommended a multimedia solution that gives passengers 
a video, sound, and graphics preview tour. 
This is the kind of customer partnership that IBM is forging with com-
panies, both large and small, all over the world. All of these partnerships 
work from an in-depth knowledge of the customers operations and 
industry. All of them have tomorrow as much in mind as today. 
For example, IBM worked with Nabisco Foods Croup on automating a 
graham cracker production line in Houston, Texas. The pilot project 
resulted in better process and quality controls, and improved communi-
cation between the people working on the production line and plant 
and corporate managers. 
In another example of a close working relationship with a customer, 
IBM has helped Tokyo-based Canon Inc. link its business strategy 
together with a global information system that connects Canons 54,000 
employees in more than 130 countries. The camera and office equip-
ment manufacturer relies on IBM hardware and software for such activi-
ties as computer-integrated manufacturing, inventory, market 
forecasting, and corporate planning. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
Also in 1991, IBM increased its efforts not only to meet but to sur-
pass customer expectations. The new marketing and services companies 
will be increasingly self-sufficient, which will enable them to bring 
together the most innovative and competitively priced products, services, 
and technologies. The integrated offerings they provide will be 
tailored to each customer s needs, whether those needs are national or 
international in scope. 
In all of these plans and programs, the overriding aim is to capitalize 
on the quality of the relationships that IBM and its employees enjoy with 
customers around the world. 
Kloster Cruise 
Ltd.s ships operate 
in the Caribbean 
and ports through-
out the world. 
Kloster s manage-
ment counts on its 
partnership with 
IBM to develop 
strategies to garner 
the competitive 
edge by providing 
the finest passenger 
service. 
02 


===== PAGE 15 =====
Broadening the spectrum of offerings 
Customers are turning to services for much more than the traditional 
tasks of maintenance and repair. They are now looking to IBM for leader-
ship ideas and implementation in everything from application devel-
opment and information technology strategies to systems integration and 
network operations. And the more of that kind of help they get, the 
more they can get from their information systems. 
IBM is combining skills and technology to become the foremost full-
services provider. With a wide assortment of offerings in basic systems 
support and specialized fee services, the company is already a world 
leader in professional information services. The aim now is to strengthen 
that leadership. 
The current IBM services strategy is formed around three types of 
offerings: business consulting, application and system development, and 
operational management.There are now more than 100 IBM applica-
tion and system centers worldwide, as well as a worldwide services council 
for ensuring consistency and quality in IBM's key services offerings. 
In 1991, Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation (ISSC) was set up as 
a wholly owned subsidiary in the United States. The ISSC goal: to establish 
IBM market leadership as a world-class supplier of systems management 
services to both external and internal customers. 
IBM also expanded the career paths for its services specialists by adding 
five categories of professions: client executive, consultant, architect, 
project manager, and opportunity manager - and by setting tough pro-
fessional certification criteria to ensure customer satisfaction. 


===== PAGE 16 =====
Part of the shift to services includes teaming up with others. In 1991, 
IBM Canada and two other Canadian companies - Westbridge Computer 
and STM Systems corporations - formed a new systems management 
services company, Information Systems Management Corporation. 
The accent on services is opening up new opportunities for profit-
ability. IBM Japan and IBM Italy, for example, have created solutions 
factories to develop and deploy new services, including specialized 
skills and application development. 
The array of new services grows each year - and so does demand. 
Nonmaintenance services have become one of the fastest growing mar-
kets in the industry. IBM intends to continue increasing its profes-
sional services revenue at a substantially greater rate than the services 
industry is growing. 
In an ambitious pro-
gram to become interna-
tionally competitive, 
Poland's Bank Slaski 
is equipping its 42 
branches, including the 
Czgstochowa branch 
shown here, with 
the latest computer 
technology. IBM,acting 
as prime contractor, 
is helping the bank plan, 
develop, and deliver 
world-class customer 
services with /\S/400 
computers and the 
first automated teller 
machines to operate 
online in Eastern 
Europe. 
OS 


===== PAGE 17 =====
Gaining strength by reaching out 
On July 3,1991, the computer industry - and millions of computer 
users - learned that two longtime rivals, IBM and Apple Computer Inc., 
had agreed to work together with Motorola Inc. on future personal 
computing technology. The next day, IBM and Siemens AG announced a 
joint manufacturing venture to produce the world s most advanced 
memory chips. 
The two announcements provided strong evidence of IBM s 
belief that no single company today can provide all the technologies, 
products, and services being demanded by customers. Accord-
ingly, IBM has stepped up the pace of forming new alliances, including 
joint ventures, marketing and product licensing agreements, 
and equity investments. 
By teaming up with other world-class companies, IBM gains access 
to new markets, leading technologies, and specialized skills. Such 
alliances also enable the company to share major research and develop-
ment costs and, most important, speed solutions to its customers. 
A decade ago, a partnership with microprocessor maker Intel Cor-
poration produced the first IBM personal computer. In 1991, IBM and 
Intel entered into a new agreement. Together, they will develop more 
efficient and powerful microprocessors. 
- 
The year also was marked by the formation of affiliate companies, 
f 
In Japan, IBM established services companies that provide translation, 
I 
maintenance, manufacturing engineering, and other services. IBM 
^ 
United Kingdom has invested in an IBM-formed property management 


===== PAGE 18 =====
company. And IBM Canada holds equity in a company that services 
personal computer components in Canada. 
Early in 1991, Lexmark International, Inc., an independent company, 
was formed from IBM's former typewriter and office printer business. IBM 
holds a 10 percent equity interest in the company. And in December, 
an agreement was signed forming General Business Machines Corpora-
tion, an alliance company that will sell and service IBM's product line 
in Belize, Costa Rica, EI Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, and 
Panama. GBM is majority-owned by a Latin American investors' group. 
Apple Computer and 
I BM employees are 
teaming up to develop 
new technologies 
that both companies 
will use in their 
products and will 
market to others. 
The goal of all these new affiliations is the same: to take advantage 
of the strengths of IBM and each alliance partner to bring solutions to 
customers more quickly and efficiently. 
Pi 
« 
3 
C 
C 
< 


===== PAGE 19 =====
Competing with better products 
In 1991, IBM announced a wide range of offerings that bolstered its 
competitiveness around the world. 
The popular RISC System/6000* workstation line was strengthened 
by new software, memory, disk storage, and color-graphics products. New 
high-end, midrange, and low-end models provide even more perform-
ance and flexibility to customers. 
For IBM's Application System/400 (AS/400)* hne of computers, the year 
brought 12 new processors, which offer performance improvements of up 
to 60 percent over previous models, as well as a new version of the 
AS/400 operating system and support for open systems standards. Easy-
to-install Plug'n'Go* solutions allow a customer to begin running 
an application about 10 minutes after plugging in the computer system 
and turning it on. 
In the 10th anniversary year of the IBM Personal Computer, the 
Personal System/2 (PS/2)* family was strengthened with new models and 
microprocessors with increased performance. IBM introduced its first 
personal computer with built-in multimedia features, boosting IBM's posi-
tion in that growing market. IBM entered the laptop market with the 
IBM Personal System/2 L40 SX and, from IBM Japan, a notebook-sized 
computer that can use software in both Japanese and English. 
On a single day in September, the company announced more than 
100 products and services for enterprisewide computing that build on 
the strengths of the System/390* family and reinforce IBM's com-
mitment to open systems environments. New hardware included seven 


===== PAGE 20 =====
models of IBM's Enterprise System/9000 (ES/9000)* processor 
and the broadest range of storage products ever announced, headed by 
a new model of IBM s largest disk storage unit. High-end operating 
systems were enhanced to support the newly announced products, and 
Advanced Interactive Executive (AIX*), IBM's implementation of 
UNIXf * was expanded to support the System/390 line of processors. 
IBM pledged to provide new products, services, and architectures 
to help customers connect and manage the many different computers in 
their businesses. These include open networking software and the 
IBM Information Warehouse,* a framework for IBM and non-IBM software 
products that will help customers access, use, and manage data -
regardless of its location, format, or operating system. 
For many visitors 
and new residents of 
Australia, the rela-
tive ease with which 
they applied for visas 
or immigration 
permits was a warm 
welcome. Australian 
Department of 
Immigration, Local 
Government, and 
Ethnic Affairs offices 
in nearly 100 coun-
tries use I BM RISC 
System/6000 work-
stations to process 
visa and immigration 
applications. 
fC 
3 C c 
< 


===== PAGE 21 =====
Marketing new technologies 
K 
< 
IBM has long been an industry leader in research, development, 
and engineering. In 1991, approximately $6.6 billion was invested in 
these activities. 
The technical dividends of past investments continued to appear in 
1991. Innovations ranged from miniature lasers to a visualization system 
as powerful as some supercomputers. IBM scientists announced the 
development of an experimental computer chip that can move up 
to 8 billion bits of information in a single second - roughly the amount 
of information needed to fill a half-million computer screens. Called 
'Lightning," the chip could significantly boost the speed of future 
high-performance workstations, large processors, and supercomputers. 
There were other advances: a more than tripling of the speed of a 
transistor that could be useful in high-performance, energy-efficient 
computers; the first high-density, multichip package for work-
stations and personal computers that contributes to enhanced perfor-
mance; a prototype computer pointing device - which could be 
especially useful to laptop computer users - that can be operated from a 
keyboard using an index finger; and the first high-temperature, 
superconducting, magnetic gradiometer, a device that operates at liquid-
nitrogen temperature to measure extremely weak magnetic fields. 
In July, IBM announced the POWER Visualization System that helps 
scientists and technical professionals solve complex business and 
research problems through visualization. In September, the Networking 
Systems Laboratory opened in Rome. The laboratory has the world-
wide assignment of conducting research and developing software in the 


===== PAGE 22 =====
telecommunications area. And in December, IBM demonstrated a proto-
type archival system that can record, store, catalog, and reproduce 
very high-quality color images of paintings and other graphic artwork. 
A growing opportunity for IBM technologies and products is represented 
by the original equipment manufacturers (OEM) market. When IBM 
serves as an OEM supplier, it provides components, software, or finished 
systems to companies that either integrate IBM equipment into their own 
products or sell the equipment under their company name. IBM already 
has begun external sales of storage subsystems, high-density printed 
circuit boards, memory chips, and special-purpose semiconductors. 
I BiM is selling an 
advanced hard-disk 
storage device to 
c o m p a n i e s such 
as AcropoUs Systems 
of Milpitas, CaUfornia, 
which repackages 
the IBM c o m p o n e n t 
and sells it to c o m -
puter workstation 
manufacturers. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
Employees 
Empowering people to pursue new ideas 
IBM employees continue to be the company's most important resource. 
In 1991, IBM - despite constraints - added skilled people wherever 
they were needed for its worldwide work force. 
For their part, IBM employees performed with resourcefulness, creativity, 
and commitment. Through empowerment, employees took on respon-
sibility and decision making on an unprecedented scale. Trained to care 
about customers, they applied ingenuity and initiative in the search 
for more competitive offerings. For example: 
IBM Taiwan monitored responsiveness to customer calls by examining 
every business process. Since the program began two years ago, customer 
satisfaction has improved dramatically. In 1991, the company won the 
National Quality Leadership Award for outstanding total customer satis-
faction services management - for the second year in a row. Teams from 
Enterprise Systems and Technology Products business units and 
services successfully raised the performance levels of the ES/9000 system. 
IBM's Programming Systems Development Laboratory in Gary, North 
Carolina, analyzed its processes and then improved them. The result: a 
ten-times reduction in error rate for every new product shipped by 
the laboratory in 1991. In Fujisawa, Japan, IBM employees dramatically 
improved the quality level of components used to produce storage devices. 
They slashed the reject rate for these parts to only four per million. 
These examples can be multiplied by thousands. They demonstrate how 
employees around the world are helping IBM succeed by aggressively 
challenging the status quo with the power of new ideas. 


===== PAGE 24 =====
Contributing to the community 
With annual contributions averaging about 
$135 million, IBM is among the foremost 
providers for educational, environmental, health, 
social, and cultural programs. During 1991, 
significant projects were initiated around the 
world using IBM's skills and technology. 
Worldwide, nearly half of IBM's contributions 
each year go to education. In 1991, contributions included a multi-
year commitment of support to the United Negro College Fund, the estab-
lishment of the IBM Asia Fellowship program, and the initiation of a 
Junior Achievement program in Moscow. 
IBM continued to take its environmental responsibilities seriously. Among 
the new initiatives is a five-year, multimillion-dollar research program 
established for environmental studies at a number of universities. 
IBM has a long history of contributing to support programs for persons 
with disabilities and the economically disadvantaged. One of the 
most successful programs in the United States has been the establish-
ment of more than 130 centers that provide job training assistance. 
For more than five 
years, Nellie Bar-
ringer, an electronic 
funds transfer 
coordinator for 
IBM in Southbury, 
Connecticut, 
has been a"big 
sister" to 13-year-
old Kali Aubourg. 
Barringer was 
recognized for her 
volunteer efforts with 
Big Sisters of Amer-
ica by being named 
the 1991 National 
Big Sister and 
receiving the 1991 
National Hero Award. 
Also in the United States, where close to half of IBM's employees do 
volunteer work, equipment was donated in 140 communities to automate 
the process of matching volunteers to community needs. Around the 
world, IBM employees contributed time and energy to everything from 
cleanup projects in Australia to tutoring programs in Latin America 
and rice plantings in Korea. 
CC 
3 
C 
C 
< 


===== PAGE 25 =====
Report of Independent Accountants 
23 
Report of Management 
24 
Management Discussion 
30 
Consolidated Financial Statements 
Earnings 
Financial Position 
Cash Flows 
Stockholders' Equity 
34 
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
53 
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
53 
Selected Quarterly Data 
cd 
p 
c c 
< 
January 28,1992 
To the Stockholders and Board of Directors of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
In our opinion, the accompanying consolidated 
financial statements, appearing on pages 30 
through 52, present fairly in all material respects 
the financial position of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at 
December 31,1991 and 1990, and the results of their 
operations and their cash Hows for each of the 
three years in the period ended Deceml)er 31,1991, 
in conformity with generally accepted accounting 
principles.These linancial statements are the 
responsibility of the company's management; our 
responsibility is to express an opinion thereon 
based on our audits. We conducted our audits in 
accordance with generally accepted auditing 
standards which require that we plan and perform 
the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about 
whether such statements are free of material mis-
statement. An audit includes examining, on 
a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and 
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing 
the accounting principles used and signihcant 
estimates made by management, and evaluating 
the overall financial statement presentation. 
We believe that our audits provide a reasonable 
basis for the opinion expressed above. 
As discussed in the note on accounting changes on 
page 39, the company changed its method of 
accounting for nonpension postretirement bene-
fits in 1991. We concur with this change. 
Price Waterhousc 
153 East 53rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10022 


===== PAGE 26 =====
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity 
of the hnancial information presented in 
this Annual Report rests with IBM management. 
1lie accompanying financial statements have 
been prepared in conformity with generally 
accepted accounting principles, applying cer-
tain estimates atid judgments as required. 
IBM maintains an effective internal control 
structure. It consists, in part, of organizational 
arrangements w ith clearly defined lines of 
responsibility and delegation of authority, and 
comprehensive systems and control procedures. 
We believe this structure provides reasonable 
assurance that transactions are executed 
in accordance with management authorization, 
and that thev are appropriately recorded, 
in order to permit preparation of financial 
statements in conformity with generally accepted 
accounting principles and to adequately safe-
guard, verifv, and maintain accountability of 
assets. An important element of the control 
environment is an ongoing internal 
audit program. 
are distributed to employees throughout the 
world, and reemphasized through internal pro-
grams to assure that they are understood 
and followed. 
Price Waterhouse, independent accountants, 
are retained to examine IBM's financial statements. 
Their accompanying report is based on an 
examination conducted in accordance with gen-
erally accepted auditing standards, including a 
review of the internal control structure and tests 
of accounting procedures and records. 
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors 
is composed solely of outside directors, and is 
responsible for recommending to the Board the 
independent accounting firm to be retained 
for the coming year, subject to stoclcholder 
approval. The Audit Committee meets periodi-
cally and privately with the independent 
accountants, with our internal auditors, as well 
as with IBM management, to review account-
ing, auditing, internal control structure, and 
financial reporting matters. 
To assure the effective administration of inter-
nal control, we carefully select and train our 
employees, develop and disseminate written poli-
cies and procedures, provide appropriate com-
munication channels, and foster an environment 
conducive to the effective functioning of con-
trols. We believe that it is essential for the company 
to conduct its business affairs in accordance 
with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in 
the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These 
guidelines, translated into numerous languages. 
John F. Akers 
Chairman of the Board 
Frank A. Metz, Jr. 
Senior Vice President, 
Finance and Planning 


===== PAGE 27 =====
r—, 
ON 
5% 
15% 
11% 
13% 
66% 
7% 
10% 
9% 
14% 
64% 
11% 
16% 
57% 
89 
90 
91 
Revenue 
(in millions) 
• Rentals and Financing 
• Services 
• Maintenance 
• Software 
• Sales 
Pi 
c c 
< 
Results of Operations 
The financial results achieved in 1991 were 
disappointing. They reflect the adverse effects of 
protracted worldwide economic weakness, 
competitive pressures, and product transitions. 
Worldwide revenue in 1991 totalled $64.8 
billion, 6.1 percent below 1990. The highest 
rate of revenue decline was experienced in the 
United States. Revenue in the U.S. was $24.4 
billion, down 9.9 percent from 1990, following 
a 5.4 percent increase in 1990 over 1989. 
Non-U. S. operations generated revenue of $40.4 
billion, a decline of 3.6 percent from 1990, 
following a 13.3 percent increase in 1990 
over 1989. 
Notwithstanding a difficult year, the company's 
operations in 1991 generated close to $4 billion in 
earnings before taxes, restructuring charges, 
and the one-time charge as a result of an 
accounting change. 
Net earnings after taxes for the year, including 
restructuring charges and the one-time effect of 
adopting Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS) 106, "Employers' Accounting 
for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pen-
sions," were negative $2.8 billion. Net earnings 
after restructuring charges and before the 
effect of adopting SFAS 106 were negative $564 
million. Restructuring charges taken in the 
fourth quarter of 1991 resulted in a $3.4 billion 
charge against earnings before taxes, and 
$2.7 billion after taxes. Net earnings after taxes 
in 1990 were $6.0 billion. 
Revenue 
Overall, revenue was significantly 
impacted by weak economies throughout 
the world. 
Revenue from sales was $37.1 billion, a decrease 
of 15.6 percent from 1990. Sales revenue from 
U.S. operations declined 20.7 percent, compared 
to a slight increase in 1990 over 1989. Non-
US. operations rellected a decrease of 12.4 per-
cent, following a 9.0 percent increase in 1990 
over 1989. 
Information on industry segments and classes 
of similar products or services is included 
on page 51.The product revenue trends demon-
strated in that disclosure are indicative, in 
all material respects, of hardware sales activitv. 
Revenue from processors decreased 9.0 percent 
in 1991. In addition to economic weakness 
and general competitive pressures, high-end 
processor revenue in 1991 was impacted by 
product transition from the 3090 to the Enter-
prise System/9000 product line. Although less 
than expected, revenue increased for midrange 
models of the ES/90()() family of products 
and Application System/400 products. Further, 
the pace of shipments in high-end processors 
improved in the latter part of the year with 
dehveries of new ES/9000 models 820 and 900. 
Personal Systems workstation revenue declined 
II.8 percent, rellecting economic weakness 
and competitive pressures. However, revenue 
from the RISC System/6000 workstation 
increased significantly in 1991. Shijmients of this 
product began in mid-1990. 
The revenue generated from storage products 
decreased 19.9 percent in 1991. Decreases 
were experienced across most storage products, 
reflecting the same factors that impacted 
processors. Advanced-function printer 
revenue declined 20.0 percent from 1990 for 
similar reasons. 


===== PAGE 28 =====
Software revenue in 1991 was $10.5 billion. 
The 5.7 percent growth over 1990 was tempered 
by general economic weakness; the 1990 
growth rate was 18.1 percent over 1989. Software 
associated with shipments of AS/400 products 
and the new ES/9000 high-end models con-
tributed to the growth that was achieved in 1991. 
In 1991, for disclosure purposes, the former 
support services revenue category in the 
consolidated statement of earnings has been 
separated into maintenance and services, 
which have different business and growth char-
acteristics. Maintenance revenue was $7.4 
billion in 1991, an increase of 3.0 percent over 
1990. Services revenue increased to $5.6 
billion in 1991, a growth of 35.3 percent; 1990 
exceeded 1989 by 34.5 percent. The services 
business includes a wide assortment of offerings 
in basic systems support and specialized fee 
services. Services revenue growth reflects the 
implementation of the company's strategy 
to further strengthen its position in this rapidly 
growing market. 
Rentals and hnancing revenue was $4.2 billion 
in 1991, an increase of 10.4 percent over 1990. 
rhe increase was primarily driven by growth in 
the company's worldwide financing business. 
Gross Profit 
The overall gross profit margin 
was 49.9 percent, down 5.6 points from 
1990. Gross profit margins from sales decreased 
7.0 points to 48.9 percent, resulting from 
lower volumes, product mix, the effects of com-
petitive pressures on revenue, and other 
charges taken in the year. 
Software gross profit margin decreased 
5.5 points to 63.1 percent in 1991. This decrease 
resulted from a decline in the pace of revenu e 
growth and higher amortization of capital-
ized software costs associated with new products. 
The gross profit margin on maintenance was 
54.4 percent in 1991, up slightly from 1990. 
Services gross profit margin, which declined 
moderately to 18.8 percent in 1991, reflects the 
transition to new services offerings, such as 
facilities management and systems integration. 
Rentals and financing gross profit margin was 
58.7 percent in 1991, a slight increase over 1990. 
Operating Expenses and Other 
Selling, 
general and administrative expense amounted 
to $24.7 billion in 1991, an increase of 19.4 per-
cent over 1990. The increase is attributable to 
charges incurred to streamline and restructure 
the business. This expense category includes 
the majority of $3.4 billion in restructuring 
charges recorded in the fourth quarter of 1991, 
and other restructuring charges taken during 
the year. These charges resulted from actions to 
reduce the work force, consolidate facilities, 
reduce capacity, and reevaluate some venture 
operations. Direct operational selling, general 
and administrative expense declined in 1991. 
Selling, general and administrative expense in 
1989 included $1.8 billion of restructuring 
charges recorded in that year. 
Research, development and engineering 
expense was $6.6 billion in 1991, an increase of 
1.4 percent over 1990. These investments are 
vital to maintain technological leadership in a 
highly competitive business environment. 
The nominal increase over 1990 reflected the 
company's actions to scrutinize research, 
development and engineering expenditures to 
ensure the highest possible return on these 
7% 
15% 
37% 
41' 
7% 
14% 
40% 
39% 
14% 
40% 
89 
90 
91 
Revenue by 
Geographic Ai'ea 
(in millions) 
Americas 
Asia Pacific 
Europe/Middle 
East/Africa 
United States 
05 


===== PAGE 29 =====
89 90 91 
Research, 
Ucvelopmenl 
and Engineering 
Expense 
(in millions) 
fc; 
investments. Expenses in 1989 were 4.0 percent 
higher than in 1990 because they inchided a 
portion of the 1989 restructuring charge. 
The provision for income taxes was $685 
million in 1991, and $4,183 million in 1990. This 
decline related to significantly lower earnings 
before taxes in 1991.The unusually high eflective 
tax rate in 1991 was a function of negative earn-
ings before taxes in the tlS. and positive earnings 
before taxes in the non-tJ.S. geographies. In 
the U.S., the tax rate for 1991 was 26.9 percent, 
reflecting negative earnings before taxes of 
$3,382 million and a corresponding negative tax 
provision of $909 million. In the non-U.S. 
geographies, the overall 1991 effective tax rate 
was 45.5 percent on earnings before taxes 
of $3,503 million. 
rhe relatively low rate of tax beneht ascribed to 
negative earnings in the U.S. of 26.9 percent is 
attributable to limitations imposed by Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96, 
'Accounting for Income Taxes," whicli restricts 
the amount of tax benehts that can be recorded. 
SFAS 96 is currently being amended; this may 
result in the future recognition of currently 
unrecognized tax benefits. 
Change in Accounting Principle 
I n the 
first quarter of 1991, the company imple-
mented Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SFAS) 106, "Employers'Account-
ing for Postretirement Benefits Other 
Than Pensions," on the immediate recogni-
tion basis eflective as of January 1,1991. 
The transition effect of adopting this state-
ment, which is discussed further on page 48, 
resulted in a one-time charge of $2,263 
million (net of approximately $350 million of 
income tax effects). Most of this charge 
was included in U.S. operations; amounts inchided 
for non-U.S. plans were not significant. 
Fourth Quarter 
For the quarter ended 
December 31, 1991, worldwide revenue was $22.1 
billion, down 4.2 percent from the prior year's 
$23.1 billion. Worldwide net earnings for the 
three months were negative $1.1 billion in 1991, 
compared with positive $2.5 billion in 1990. 
rhe rate of decline in reveiuie in the fourth quar-
ter was less than the full year rate of 6.1 percent, 
rellectingthe increased pace of business in 
the fourth quarter of 1991. Negative earnings 
of $1.4 billion in the fourth quarter resulted from 
the $2.7 billion aftertax impact ol the restruc-
turing charge. Fhe majority of this charge 
was included in U.S. results. 
Financial Condition 
Investments 
During 1991, the company 
continued to make the investments necessary 
to maintain a steady How of iiniovative new-
customer solutions that provide the basis for 
future growth, riie company ciu rcntly otters 
the most competitive customer solutions in its 
history. In 1991, the company strengthened 
its K1S(^ System/600() workstation line, introduced 
12 new Application System/lOO |)rocessors, 
added new models and microprocessors with 
increased performance to its Personal Systems 
line, and introduced many [)rodu('ts and services 
associated with the System/39() family. 
Over the past three years, the company has 
invested more than $16 billion in plant and other 
property, including more than $5 billion in 
1991.This was a decline from 1990. In addi-
tion to software development costs included in 
research, development and engineering 


===== PAGE 30 =====
expense, the company invested $2.0 billion 
in 1991 in capitalized software production costs, 
an increase of 6.4 percent over 1990. Amor-
tization of capitalized software costs amounted 
to $1.6 billion in 1991, an increase of $.5 billion 
over 1990, which is mainly due to new soft-
ware olferings that complement the host of new 
customer solutions offered in 1991. 
Investments and sundry assets increased 
12.3 j)ercent to $19.1 billion in 1991.The growth 
resulted from the (^ontituied success of the 
company's worldwide litiancing business and the 
related long-term investment in sales-type 
leases, rhe long-term portion of these leases 
increased $2.7 billion in 1991 over 1990. Much of 
this increase stemmed from IBM Japans 
acquisition, in the third quarter of 1991, of the 
remaining interest in (Computer Systems 
I.easing, l.td. ((iSI>), a linance company that 
leases IBM equipment to customers.These 
increases were j)artially olfset by the sale of IBM 
(Credit (Corporation's mortgage investment 
portfolio. 
Working Capital 
Working capital, which 
represents tlie excess of current assets over cur-
rent liabilities, declined from $13.6 billion at 
December 31, 1990, to $7.3 billion at December 
31, 1991. 
(Current assets increased $2.0 billion, largely 
a rellection of growth in the current portion of 
sales-ty])e leases receivable. 
In previous years, the company's consolidated 
statement of linancial position combined 
current sales-type leases receivable with 
accounts receivable, riiese are now presented 
separately to more clearly demonstrate the 
dynamics of the company's customer hnancing 
business.The $1.8 billion increase in sales-
type leases receivable was due primarily to the 
acquisition of CSL. 
Current liabilities increased $8.3 billion to 
$33.6 billion at December 31,1991. Of this 
increase, $6.1 billion was attributable to growth 
in short-term debt, reflecting a $2.7 billion 
increase in current maturities of long-term 
debt, the addition of CSL short-term debt, 
and new debt, which was obtained at favorable 
interest rates. 
Other accrued expenses and habilities increased 
$2.2 billion to $7.8 billion at December 31,1991. 
rhe increase related to the liability for employee 
separations and relocations included in the 
fourth quarter restructuring charge. 
Noncurrent Liabilities 
Long-term debt 
increased from $11.9 billion at December 31, 
1990, to $13.2 billion at December 31,1991. 
The increase was largely attributable to CSL debt. 
Other liabilities increased $3.0 billion to 
$6.7 billion at December 31,1991, reflecting the 
liability recorded in the first quarter of 1991 
from the transition effect of adopting Statement 
of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 106, 
•'Employers' Accounting for Postretirement 
Benefits Other Than Pensions." 
Deferred income taxes decreased from $3.9 
billion at December 31,1990, to $1.9 billion 
at December 31, 1991. The partial recognition of 
deferred tax benefits related to the fourth 
quarter 1991 restructuring charges contributed 
to this decline. I.imitations imposed by State-
ment of Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 
96, "Accounting for I ncome Taxes," precluded 
the recognition of additional deferred tax assets. 


===== PAGE 31 =====
Liquidity 
Management expects that the funds 
required to continue the level of investments 
necessary to ensure the company's competitive-
ness, as well as funds used to pay dividends, 
and to purchase IBM capital stock from time to 
time, will be largely generated from normal 
operations. To the extent that amounts generated 
from operations need to be supplemented by 
new capital sources and borrowing, it will 
be done consistent with managements intent to 
continue to maintain a strong capital structure. 
The company believes that its strong balance 
sheet and positive cash flow can sustain the cur-
rent dividend level. 
At December 31,1991, the company and its 
subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit 
with a number of U.S. and non-U. S. banks, 
permitting borrowings, primarily short-term, up 
to an aggregate of approximately $6.9 billion. 
Finance Strategy 
Customer financing activity 
is an important part of the company's total solu-
tion to its customers. The company's customer 
financing activity operates in 12 countries through 
subsidiaries specializing in customer financing. 
These companies have $20.7 billion of assets and 
$15.0 billion of debt at December 31,1991. The 
company also executes customer financing activ-
ities in other countries, such as Germany, Italy, 
and Canada, through its normal operating sub-
sidiaries. Total worldwide customer financing 
assets are $31.7 billion at December 31,1991. 
The customer financing assets should be match-
funded with debt in order to minimize interest 
rate and currency risk exposures. If customer 
financing assets in countries where the company 
does not maintain a financing subsidiary were 
leveraged at the same ratio as the financing sub-
sidiaries, this would yield $70 of debt for every 
$100 of assets, a ratio that supports the highest 
credit rating. A key business issue relates to 
where borrowings should be obtained. In order 
to minimize borrowing and tax costs, the com-
pany may borrow in one country when the assets 
reside in another. This results in an assignment 
of debt of $7.2 billion, at December 31,1991, to 
support the worldwide customer financing assets. 
The following table illustrates the impact of 
match-funding customer financing assets with 
appropriate levels of debt, and the resulting assign-
ment of total company debt between the cus-
tomer financing and nonfinancing businesses. 
At End of Year: 
(Dollars in billions) 
Worldwide customer 
financing assets 
Total company debt 
Worldwide customer linancing 
debt (subsidiaries) 
Assigned debt 
Total customer financing debt . 
1991 
$ 31.7 
$26.9 
$ 15.0 
7.2 
$22.2 
1990 
$ 26.0 
$ 10.5 
$ 10.7 
7.1 
$ 1 8 . 1 
The assignment of debt to customer financing 
assets significantly reduces the amount of debt 
that is, therefore, in support of the nonfinancing 
business. At December 31, 1991, debt for the 
nonfinancing business is imputed to be $4.7 
bilhon of the total $26.9 billion. 
For internal purposes, the company focuses on 
available nonfinancing free cash flow as well as 
total free cash flow.The company defines free cash 
flow as that which is available for return to stock-
holders; it includes all sources of cash and is 
reduced by all uses, such as capital expenditures. 


===== PAGE 32 =====
For the Year: 
(Dollars in billions) 
1991 
1990 
Nonfinancing free cash flow . . 
$ 2.1 
$4.3 
Customer financing assets: 
(Net uses) 
(5.7) 
(4.6) 
Customer financing debt: 
Net sources 
4.1 
2.8 
Net customer financing 
(1.6) 
(1.8) 
Net free cash fiow 
$ 
.5 
$2.5 
The table above illustrates that the company's 
nonfinancing free cash flow was $2.1 billion 
in 1991, and $4.3 billion in 1990, reduced by $1.6 
and $1.8 billion, respectively, to support the 
customer financing business. Because the growth 
of worldwide customer financing is conserva-
tively leveraged, the nonfinancing cash flow 
provides financial resources for that growth. The 
company believes the returns and strategic 
importance of the hnancing business justify the 
investment of nonfinancing cash flow. 
Employees 
At December 31,1991, IBM and wholly owned 
subsidiaries employed 344,396 persons 
on a regular, full-time basis, down 28,893 from 
1990, 38,824 from 1989, and more than 62,000 
from the peak level reached in 1986. In addition, 
the company established various entities in 
1991 intended to enhance efficiency. Some of 
these entities, while not wholly owned, are fully 
consolidated into the company's financial 
statements. The number of regular, full-time 
employees of these consolidated entities, not 
included in the numbers above, amounted to 157 
at December 31,1991. IBM wholly owned sub-
sidiaries and other fully consolidated entities have 
varying terms and conditions of employment. 
IBM complements its work force by the use of 
students and various other temporary, part-time, 
and limited-term employment arrangements 
designed to meet specific business needs in a 
flexible and efficient manner. These employment 
arrangements included the equivalent of 
approximately 33,000 persons in 1991, down 
1,000 from 1990, and up 1,000 from 1989. 
Some limited-term employment arrangements 
were included in the number of employees 
reported in the IBM 1990 Annual Report. The 
1990 regular, full-time employee count has been 
restated to conform with the current presentation. 
Looking Forward 
The company took aggressive actions in 1991 to 
improve competitiveness and efficiency. Work 
force reduction goals were exceeded, the product 
line continued to be strengthened, and alh-
ances were broadened. At the end of the year, the 
company announced its intention to further 
reduce work force levels. By the end of 1992, the 
work force will have been reduced by approx-
imately 80,000 employees from the peak in 1986. 
In addition, comprehensive management sys-
tem changes were announced that will transform 
IBM's units into increasingly independent and 
accountable businesses and companies. 
Assuming some improvement in the current 
difficult and uncertain economic environment, 
the company expects to increase revenue and 
improve cash flow and returns as the year goes on. 
86 91 
Employees 
Regular, Full-Time 
1986 = Peak During Year 
1991 = December 31 
05 


===== PAGE 33 =====
(Dollars in millions 
exccpt per share amounts) 
For the year ended December 31: 
Revenue: 
Sales 
Software 
Maintenance 
Services 
Rentals and financing 
Cost: 
Sales 
Software 
Maintenance 
Services 
Rentals and financing 
Gross Profit 
Operating Expenses: 
Sclline, aencral and administrative 
o' b 
Research, development and engineering 
Operating Income 
Other Income, principally interest 
Interest Expense 
Earnings before Income Taxes 
Provision for Income Taxes 
Net Earnings before Change in Accounting Principle 
Transition Effect of Change in Accounting 
for Nonpension Postretirement Benefits 
Net Earnings 
Per Share Amounts: 
Before Change in Accounting Principle 
Transition Effect of Change in Accounting for 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefits 
Net Earnings 
Average Number of Shares Outstanding: 
f99]-572,003,382 
199()_572,647,906 
1989-581,102,404 
1991 
1990 
1989 
37,093 
$ 43.^5^) 
$ 41.586 
10,524 
Q.952 
8.424 
7,414 
7.198 
6.79 1 
5,582 
1.124 
3.067 
4,179 
3.785 
2.842 
64,792 
6<).()18 
62.710 
18,949 
l<).40l 
18.001 
3,888 
3.126 
2.691. 
3,379 
3.302 
3.221 
4,531 
3.315 
2.477 
1,727 
1.57^) 
1.305 
32,474 
30.723 
27.701 
32,318 
38.295 
35.009 
24,732 
20.70<) 
21.289 
6,644 
6.551 
6.827 
31,376 
27.263 
28.1 l() 
942 
1 1.032 
().893 
602 
495 
728 
1,423 
1.32 1 
970 
121 
1(1.203 
6.()15 
685 
4,183 
2.887 
(564) 
().02() 
3.758 
(2,263) 
— 
— 
1 (2,827) 
$ 6.020 
$ 3.758 
$ 
(.99) 
$ 10.51 
$ 6.17 
(3.96) 
— 
— 
$ (4.95) 
$ 1 0.5 1 
$ 6.17 


===== PAGE 34 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
At D c c c m b c r 31: 
Assets 
C u r i e lit Assets: 
Cash 
(^ash equivalents 
Vlai ketahle securities, at cost, which approximates market 
Motes and accounts leceivahle—trade, net of allowances 
S a l e s - t v p e leases receivable 
Other accou nts rcccivahlc 
I nveiUorics 
Prepaid expenses and othei" current assets 
Plant, Kental iVlachines and Other Property 
Less: Accumulated depreciation 
Investments and Other Assets: 
Software, less accumulated amortization (IWl. $6,950; IWO, $5,873) 
lnv(\stm(Mits anil sundrv assets 
I>iabilities and Stockholders' Pxjuity 
Current I>iabilities: 
'I axes 
Short -term del)l 
\ c c o u n l s pavable 
Compensation and henellts 
I)("lerre(l income 
Other accrued expenses and liabilities 
Long-rerni Debt 
Other [.labilities 
I )eferrecl 1 neonie I'axes 
lotal Liabilities 
Sto ckho Iders' Lc| u ity: 
(iapital stock, par value $1.25 per share—sliares authorized: 750,000,000 
Issued: 1991—571.349.32 L 1990 - 571,618.795 
Retained earninus 
Translation adjustments 
Treasury slock, at cost (shares: 1 9 9 1 - 3 3 1 , 6 6 5 ; 1990-227,601.) 
1991 
$ 
LI71 
2,774 
1,206 
15,391 
7,435 
1,491 
9,844 
1,657 
40,969 
55,678 
28,100 
27,578 
4,483 
19,443 
23,926 
$ 92,473 
2,449 
13,716 
3,507 
3,241 
2,879 
7,832 
33,624 
13,231 
6,685 
1,927 
55,467 
6,531 
27,339 
3,167 
(31) 
37,006 
$ 92,473 
1990 
$ 
L 1 8 9 
2,664 
698 
15,306 
5,682 
1.656 
10,108 
1 , 6 1 7 
38,920 
53,659 
26,418 
27,241 
4,099 
17.308 
21,407 
$ 87,568 
3,159 
7,602 
3.367 
3,014 
2.506 
5.628 
25,276 
I 1,943 
3,656 
3,861 
44,736 
6,357 
33.234 
3,266 
(25) 
42.832 
$ 87,568 


===== PAGE 35 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
For the year ended December 31: 
1991 
1990 
1989 
Cash Flow from Operating Activities: 
Net earnings 
$ (2,827) 
$ 6.020 
$ 3.758 
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to 
cash provided from operating activities: 
Depreciation 
5,150 
4.217 
4.240 
Amortization of software 
1,630 
1.086 
1.185 
(Gain) loss on disposition of investment assets 
(94) 
32 
(74) 
Other changes that provided (used) cash — 
Receivables 
(886) 
(2.077) 
(2.647) 
Inventories 
(36) 
17 
(29) 
Other assets 
865 
(3.136) 
(1.674) 
x\ccounts pavable 
384 
293 
870 
Other liabilities 
2,539 
1.020 
1.743 
Net cash provided from operating activities 
6,725 
7.172 
7.372 
Cash Flow from Investing Activities: 
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property 
(6,497) 
(6.509) 
(6.1.14) 
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines 
and other property 
645 
804 
541 
Investment in software 
(2,014) 
(1.892) 
(1.679) 
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments 
(4,848) 
(1.234) 
(1.391) 
Proceeds from marketable securities and other investments 
5,028 
1.687 
1.860 
Net cash used in investing activities 
(7,686) 
(7. M l ) 
(7.080) 
Cash Flow from Financing Activities: 
Proceeds from new debt 
5,776 
4.676 
6.47 1 
Payments to settle debt 
(4,184) 
(3.683) 
(2.768) 
Short-term borrowings less than 90 days — net 
2,676 
1.966 
228 
Proceeds from (payments to) employee stock plans — net 
67 
(76) 
(29) 
Payments to purchase and retire capital stock 
(196) 
(415) 
(1.759) 
Cash dividends paid 
(2,771) 
(2.774) 
(2.752) 
Net cash provided from (used in) financing activities 
1,368 
(306) 
(609) 
Effect of Exchange Rate Changes on Cash and Cash Equivalents 
(315) 
131 
(158) 
Net Change in Cash and Cash Equivalents 
92 
153 . 
(475) 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at January 1 
3,853 
3.700 
4.175 
Cash and Cash Equivalents at D e c e m b e r 31 
$ 3,945 
$ 3.853 
$ 3.700 
Supplemental Data: 
Cash paid during the year for: 
Income taxes 
$ 2,292 
$ 3.315 
$ 3.071 
$ 2,617 
$ 2,165 
$ 1.605 


===== PAGE 36 =====
Capital 
Retained 
(Dollars in millions) 
Stock 
E a r n i n g s 
1989 
Stockholders' Equity, J a i u i a r v 1, 1989 
$ 6,442 
$ 3 1 , 1 8 6 
Net e a r n i n g s 
3,758 
("asli dividends deelared 
(2,752) 
(-a|)ita] stoek issued u n d e r employee plans 
(824.026 shares) 
60 
P u r c h a s e s (8.202,058 shares) and sales 
(8.423.155 shares) of treasurv stock u n d e r 
employee and stockholder plans—net 
(133) 
Ca|)ilal stock |)urchased and retired 
(16.085.000 shares) 
(177) 
(1.582) 
Tax reductiotis—employee plans 
16 
'IVatislation adjustments 
Stockholders' K(|uity, D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 8 9 
6,341 
30,477 
1990 
Net e a r n i n g s 
6.020 
(^ash dividends declared 
(2-774) 
(;a|)ital stock issued u n d e r employee plans 
(686.150 shares) 
47 
Purchases (8.448.626 shares) and sales 
(8.206.715 shares) of treasury stock u n d e r 
employee and stockholder p l a n s — n e t 
C'"^) 
('a|)ltal stock |)urchased and retired 
(3.8 12.024 shares) 
(43) 
(372) 
Tax r e d u c t i o n s — e m p l o y e e |)lans 
12 
Translation adjustments 
Stockholders' Equity, D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 9 0 
6,357 
33.234 
1991 
Net e a r n i n g s 
(2,827) 
Cash dividends declared 
(2,771) 
(Capita! stock issued u n d e r employee plans 
( 1 . 8 5 Z 0 0 1 shares) 
1 7 2 
P u r c h a s e s (8.501.310 shares) and sales 
(8,487.210 shares) ol'treasury stock under 
employee and stockholder p l a n s — n e t 
( 1 2 5 ) 
Capital stock purchased and retired 
(2.127.1(10 shares) 
(24) 
( 1 7 2 ) 
Tax r e d u c t i o n s — e m p l o y e e plans 
26 
Tratislalion adjustments 
S t o c k h o l d e r s ' E q u i t y , D e c e m b e r 3 1 , 1 9 9 1 
$ 6 , 5 3 1 
$ 2 7 , 3 3 9 
Translation 
Treasury 
Adjustments 
Stock 
Total 
$ 1 . 9 1 7 
(219) 
1,698 
i.568 
3.266 
(99) 
$ (36) 
$ 39,509 
3,758 
(2,752) 
60 
29 
(7) 
(18) 
(6) 
(104) 
(1,759) 
16 
(219) 
38.509 
6,020 
(2.774) 
47 
(135) 
(415) 
12 
1.568 
(25) 
42,832 
(2,827) 
(2,771) 
172 
( 1 3 1 ) 
(196) 
26 
(99) 
$3,167 
$(31) 
$37,006 


===== PAGE 37 =====
Significant Accounting Policies 
Principles of Consolidation 
The consolidated 
financial statements include the accounts of 
International Business Machines Corporation 
and its U.S. and non-U.S. subsidiary companies. 
Investments in business entities in which IBM 
does not have control, but has the ability to exer-
cise significant influence over operating and 
financial policies (generally 20 percent ownership 
or greater), are accounted for by the equity 
method. Other investments are accounted for by 
the cost method. 
Translation of Non-U. S. Currency Amounts 
For non-U.S. subsidiaries that operate in 
a local currency environment, assets and liabili-
ties are translated to U.S. dollars at year-end 
exchange rates. Income and expense items are 
translated at average rates of exchange pre-
vailing during the year. Translation adjustments 
are accumulated in a separate component of 
stockholders' equity. For non-U.S. subsidiaries 
and branches that operate in U.S. dollars or 
whose economic environment is highly inflation-
ary, inventories and plant, rental machines and 
other property are translated at approximate rates 
prevailing when acquired. All other assets and 
liabilities are translated at year-end exchange 
rates. Inventories charged to cost of sales 
and depreciation are translated at historical rates. 
All other income and expense items are trans-
lated at average rates of exchange prevailing 
during the year. Gains and losses that result from 
translation are included in earnings. 
Revenue 
Revenue is recognized from sales 
or sales-type leases when the product is 
shipped; from software when the program is 
shipped or as monthIv license fees accrue; 
from maintenance and services over the con-
tractual period, or as the services are per-
formed; from rentals under operating leases in 
the month in which they accrue; and from 
financing at level rates of return over the term 
of the lease or receivable. 
Software 
Costs related to the conceptual 
formulation and design of licensed programs 
are expensed as research and development. 
Costs incurred subsequent to establishment of 
technological feasibility to produce the fin-
ished product are general Iv capitalized. 
The annual amortization of the capitalized 
amounts is the greater of the amount computed 
based on the estimated revenue distribution 
over the products' revenue-producing lives, or 
the straight-line method, but not in excess 
of six years. Costs to support or service licensed 
programs are charged against income as 
incurred, or when related revenue is recognized, 
whichever occurs first. 
Depreciation 
Plant, rental machines and 
other property are carried at cost, and depreci-
ated over their estimated useful lives using 
the straight-line method. 


===== PAGE 38 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
[nteniadoiial 
Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary 
Companies 
Goodwill 
Goodwill is amortized on a straight-
line basis over the periods estimated to be 
benefited, currently not exceeding five years. 
Retirement Plans and Nonpension 
Postretirement Benefits 
Current service 
costs of retirement plans and postretirement 
health-care and life insurance benefits are 
accrued currently. Prior service costs resulting 
from improvements in the plans are amor-
tized over the average remaining service period 
of employees expected to receive benefits. 
In years prior to 1991, the estimated costs of non-
pension postretirement benefits were accrued 
principally at retirement. 
Selling Expenses 
Selling expenses are charged 
against income as incurred. 
IncomeTaxes 
Income tax expense is based on 
reported earnings before income taxes. Deferred 
income taxes reflect the impact of temporary 
differences between the amounts of assets and 
liabilities recognized for financial reporting pur-
poses and such amounts recognized for tax 
purposes. In accordance with Statement of Finan-
cial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96, these 
deferred taxes are measured by applying cur-
rently enacted tax laws. 
Inventories 
Raw materials, work in process, 
and finished goods are stated at the lower of aver-
age cost or market. 
Cash Equivalents 
All highly hquid invest-
ments with a maturity of three months or less at 
date of purchase are considered to be cash 
equivalents. 
Information on Selected Businesses 
The information technology industry is chang-
ing in fundamental ways.These changes are 
characterized by rapid technological advances, 
shorter product life cycles, growth of soft-
ware and services, and increasing competition. 
As a result, IBM will change from a single, 
vertically integrated, very complex worldwide 
enterprise to one of increasingly autono-
mous businesses. Each business, empowered 
with varying degrees of independence, will be 
more focused and responsive to its market. 
New management and measurement systems 
will be designed and, over time, the company 
will publish information appropriate to 
each business. 
The financial performance of Federal Systems, 
which has traditionally operated as a rela-
tively independent business, and financing sub-
sidiaries, is reported on pages 36 and 37. 


===== PAGE 39 =====
Federal Systems This business offers special -
ized information technology products and 
services to the U. S. defense, space and other agen-
cies. Financial information on Federal Systems 
for 1991,1990, and 1989 is provided below. 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
1989 
At End of Year: 
Total assets 
$ 1,053 
$1,209 
$1,253 
For the Year: 
R e v e n u e * 
$ 1,989 
$ 1 , 9 6 5 
$ 2 , 0 2 7 
E a r n i n g s before 
income taxes 
141 
139 
134 
Net e a r n i n g s 
$ 
92 
$ 
91 
$ 
87 
Return on assets 
8.1% 
7.4% 
6.6% 
Funds provided^ 
$ 
250 
$ 
95 
$ 
268 
* I n c l u d e s i n t r a e o m p a n y transfers of $ 3 7 million for 1991, 
$42 million for 1990. and $ 3 7 million for 1989. 
''"Approximates cash provided based upon annual net 
earnings adjusted for changes in net assets employed at 
the end ol each period. 
In addition, the marketing and services business 
in the United States provides commercially 
available information technology products to 
various U.S. government agencies. Sales of these 
products have generated approximately $1 bil-
lion of revenue in each of the past three years. 
Financing Subsidiaries The primary focus of 
IBM's customer financing business is to provide 
financing support for IBM's products and services. 
This support is mainly provided through sepa-
rate financing subsidiaries, but is also provided 
in some countries in which the company does 
not maintain a separate financing subsidiary 
The schedule on page 37 depicts linancial 
information for the companv's financing subsid-
iaries of which IBM Credit Corporation accounts 
for more than 70 percent of the net earnings. 
These wholly owned subsidiaries are con-
solidated in the company's financial statements. 
Financing activity in countries in which the 
company does not have a financing subsidiary 
is not included in the following scliedule. 


===== PAGE 40 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary^ Companies 
(Dollars in millions) 
At December 31: 
Financing Subsidiaries: Financial Position 
Assets: 
Cash and cash equivalents 
Receivables — net 
Net investment in sales-tvpe leases 
Equi[)ment under operating leases—net 
Other 
Total Assets 
Liabilities and Stockholders Fquity: 
Short-term debt 
Deferred taxes and accruals 
Due to IBM and alliliatcs 
Long-term debt 
Stockholder s cquitv 
Total Liabilities and Stockholders Equity 
1991 
789 
3,741 
13,309 
2,220 
622 
$ 20,681 
$ 7,399 
1,359 
2,510 
7,631 
1,782 
$ 20,681 
1990 
307 
3,421 
9,702 
2,082 
499 
16.011 
$ 4,743 
1,355 
2,641 
6.006 
1,266 
$ 16,011 
(Dollars in millions) 
For the year ended December 31: 
1991 
1990 
Financing Subsidiaries: Earnings 
o 
o 
Financing and other income 
$2,361 
$1,992 
Interest and other expenses 
1,973 
1,649 
Provision lor income taxes 
144 
112 
Net earnings 
$ 
244 
$ 231 
1989 
$ 1,332 
1,098 
75 
$ 
159 
On September 30, 1991, IBM Japan acquired the 
remaining interest in Computer Systems Leasing, 
Ltd. (CSL), a finance company that leases IBM 
equipment to third-party users. CSL operates as a 
wholly owned subsidiary of IBM Japan. It has 
total assets of approximately $4 billion at Decem-
ber 31,1991, which are primarily net investments 
in sales-type leases. These assets, consistent 
with the leasing business, are substantially 
financed by short-term and long-term, third-party 
debt. CSL is fully consolidated in the accom-
panying hnancial statements at December 31,1991. 
However, only the fourth quarter earnings of 
this subsidiary are included in the above state-
ments, while the assets and liabilities reflect 
the total balances at December 31,1991. 
The acquired equity of CSL is reflected in the 
consolidated statement of cash flows as an 
addition to investments, and not as a change 
to individual asset and hability categories. 
In addition, the net earnings of the financing 
subsidiaries in 1991 were impacted by 
higher than normal provisions for receivable 
losses, reflecting the effects of weaken-
ing economic conditions on customers in 
certain countries. 
ed 
3 c c 
< 


===== PAGE 41 =====
N o n - U S . Operations 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
1989 
At E n d of Year: 
Assets: 
Current assets 
$ 25,871 
$ 24.337 
$ 20.361 
Plant, rental machines and other property, net 
12,231 
11.628 
Investments and other assets 
12,108 
9.077 
6.822 
50,210 
45.042 
37.062 
Liabilities: 
Current liabilities 
2 1 , 2 1 4 
15.917 
12.124 
Long-term debt 
7,420 
5.060 
3.358 
Other liabilities 
2,810 
2.600 
2.607 
Deferred income taxes 
1,784 
2.381 
1.814 
33,228 
26.057 
10.903 
Net assets employed 
$ 16,982 
$ 18.985 
$ 
17.159 
.Number of regular, full-time employees 
157,827 
167.868* 
167.291* 
For the Year: 
Revenue 
$ 40,358 
$ 41.886 
$ 3().965 
Earnings before income taxes 
3,503 
7.841 
7.496 
Provision for income taxes 
1,594 
3.270 
3.388 
Net earnings 
$ 
1,909' 
$ 
4.571 
$ 
1.108 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property 
$ 
3 , 1 2 2 
$ 
3.020 
$ 
2 . 5 1 1 
*Restated to conform with 1991 presentation. 
^Net earnings before transition ellect of change in accounting foi* nonpension |)ostretii"cment benefits. 
Non-U.S. subsidiaries that operate in a local 
in non-lJ.S. operations or will be remitted 
currency environment account for approxi- 
substantially free of additional tax. Accordingly, 
mately 90 percent of the company's non-US. rev- 
no material provision has been made for 
enue.The remaining 10 percent of the com- 
taxes that might be payable upon remittance of 
pany's non-US. revenue is from subsidiaries and 
such earnings. It is extremely improbable 
branches that operate in US. dollars or whose 
that all of these earnings would be remitted 
economic environment is highly inflationary. 
to the United States. Nevertheless, Statement of 
Financial Accounting Standards (SFAS) 96, 
Undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries 
"Accounting for Income Paxes," requires disclo-
included in consolidated retained earnings 
sure of the amount of withholding taxes that 
amounted to $13,991 million at December 31, 
would be payable were this unlikely event 
1991, $14,388 million at December 31, 1990, and 
to occur. Therefore, in response to that require-
$13,207 million at December 31,1989. These 
ment, it is estimated that such withholding 
earnings, which reflect full provision for non- 
taxes would be as much as $1,100 million. 
US. income taxes, are indefinitely reinvested 


===== PAGE 42 =====
Accounting Changes 
In the first quarter of 1991, the company im-
plemented Statement of Financial Accounting 
Standards (SI AS) 106,"Employers'Accounting for 
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions," 
on the inmiediate recognition basis effective 
as of January I, 1991. This statement requires that 
the cost of these benefits, which are primarily 
health-care benefits, be recognized in the finan-
cial statements during the employees active 
working career/Phe company's previous practice 
was to accrue these costs principally at retire-
ment/riie ongoing annual impact of this change 
did not have a material effect on 1991 and is not 
expected to have a material effect on future earn-
ings. Further discussion is included on page 48. 
In December 1991, the American Institute of 
Certified Public Accountants released a State-
ment of Position on software revenue recognition, 
which the company will implement in the first 
quarter of 1992. As required, prior years will be 
restated to rellect the change. I'he impact on 
the prior years' and 1992 consolidated financial 
statements is not expected to be material. 
Special Restructuring Actions 
In 1991, the company undertook a series of special 
actions to reduce costs, expenses, and structure. 
As a result, special charges totalling $3,398 
million ($2,676 million after taxes or $4.68 per 
share) were recorded in the fourth quarter, 
'i'hese charges included $2,216 million associ-
ated with employee separations and relocations, 
which are included in selling, general and 
administrative expense.The remainder relates to 
facility consolidations, capacity reductions. 
and reevaluation of some venture operations; 
this is also, for the most part, included in selling, 
general and administrative expense. 
In the hrst quarter of 1991, the company com-
pleted a transaction with Clayton & Dubilier, Inc., 
to create a new information products company, 
Lexmark International, Inc. (Lexmark). The 
related sale of assets, net of amou nts provided for 
costs associated with this transaction, did not 
result in a gain that was material to the company's 
linancial results. IBM retains a 10 percent equity 
interest in Lexmark and has entered into several 
manufacturing, marketing, and distribution 
agreements with the new company. Lexmark's 
line of computer workstation printers, type-
writers, and supplies continues to be sold under 
the IBM brand name through an established 
worldwide network of dealers and distributors, 
as well as direct to selected customers through 
IBM. Operating results from the group of prod-
ucts that now constitute Lexmark's business 
were not material to IBM's consolidated earnings. 
Additional charges were incurred during 
1991 resulting from the company's ongoing efforts 
to streamline the business. These charges, 
mainly related to worldwide work force reduc-
tions, were partially offset by the Lexmark gain, 
and are included in selling, general and 
administrative expense. 
In 1989, a charge of $2,420 million ($1,500 
million after taxes or $2.58 per share) was recorded 
in the fourth quarter. Of that charge, $1,335 
million related primarily to facility consolida-
tions and reductions, and $500 million was 
for employee separations and relocations. Both 
of these amounts are included in selling, 
general and administrative expense for that year. 
The remaining $585 million was included in 


===== PAGE 43 =====
Machines Corporation and Subsidiary 
Companies 
research, development and engineering expense 
and cost of software, reflecting changes in guide-
lines for recognition of costs. 
Marketable Securities 
At December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
U.S. government securities . . . 
$ 
359 
$ 
92 
Time deposits and other 
bank obligations 
501 
373 
Non-U.S. government 
securities and other 
fixed-term obligations . . . 
346 
233 
Total 
$ 
1,206 
$ 
698 
Market value 
$ 
1,206 
$ 
698 
Plant, Rental Machines 
and Other Property 
At December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
Land and land improvements . 
$ 
1,604 
$ 
1,645 
Buildings 
14,281 
13,792 
Plant, laboratory and office 
equipment 
36,490 
35,155 
52,375 
50,592 
Less: Accumulated 
depreciation 
26,617 
24,916 
25,758 
25,676 
Rental machines and parts . . . 
3,303 
3,067 
Less: Accumulated 
depreciation 
1,483 
1,502 
1,820 
1,565 
Total 
$ 27,578 
$ 27,241 
Inventories 
At Dccombcr 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
Current inventories: 
Finished goods 
$ 
2,568 
Work in process 
7,104 
Raw materials 
172 
Total current inventories . . . . 
9,844-
Work in process included 
in plant, rental machines 
and other property 
1,245 
Total 
$ 
1 1 , 0 8 9 
1990 
2.851 
7.051 
206 
10.108 
1.498 
$ 1 1.606 
Investments and Sundry Assets 
December 31: 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
Net investment in 
sales-type leases* 
$ 21,405 
$16,914 
Less: Current portion (net) 
. . 
7,435 
5.682 
13,970 
11.232 
Prepaid pension cost 
1,111 
1.045 
Installment payment 
receivables 
752 
896 
Investments in business 
alliances 
565 
703 
Goodwill, less accumulated 
amortization (1991, $865; 
1990, $406) 
236 
383 
Mortgage investments"^ 
— 
529 
Other investments and 
sundry assets 
2,809 
2.520 
Total 
$19,443 
$17,308 
*These leases relate to IBM equipment and are for terms 
generally ranging from three to live years. Net investment 
in sales-type leases includes unguaranteed residual 
values of approximately $1,470 million and $1,350 million at 
December 31,1991 and 1990, and is reflected net of unearned 
income at these dates of approximately $4,300 million 
and $3,600 million, respectively. Scheduled maturities of 
minimum lease payments outstanding at December 31, 
1991, expressed as a percentage of the total, are approxi-
mately as follows: 1992, 38 percent; 1993, 29 percent; 
1994,20 percent; 1995,10 percent; 1996 and after, 3 percent. 
''"Mortgage investment portfolio was sold during second 
quarter 1991. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
(Dollars in millions) 
At December 31: 
Maturities 
1991 
1990 
Long-Term Debt 
U.S. Dollars: 
Debentures— 
7%% convertible, subordinated* 
2004 
$ 1,254 
$ 1 , 2 5 4 
HW'A) 
2019 
750 
750 
()%% 
_ 
238 
Notes— 
5%% to 7%% 
1992-1994 
987 
354 
7%% to 8%% 
1992-1995 
1,820 
2,370 
9%tol0'/t% 
1992-2000 
2,299 
2,300 
Medium-term note program: 7.3% to 15.0% 
1992-2008 
1,026 
890 
Other U.S. dollars: 5.8% to 16.4% 
1992-2012 
674 
508 
, 
r' 
. 
i 
• 
8,810 
8,664 
Uther Currencies (average interest rate 
at December 31, 1991. in parentheses): 
.Japanese yen (6.7%) 
1992-2026 
3,367 
532 
Swiss francs (6.9%) 
1992-1996 
1,204 
1,125 
European currency units (9.1%) 
1992-1995 
1,086 
648 
Canadian dollars (10.7%) 
1992-1996 
1,038 
693 
Krench francs (10.1%) 
1993-2002 
734 
736 
Australian dollars (1.3.9%) 
1992-1996 
627 
580 
Other (11.3%) 
1992-2011 
745 
684 
17,611 
13,662 
Less: Net unamortized discount 
17 
15 
17,594 
13,647 
Less: Current maturities 
4,363 
1,704 
Total 
$13,231 
$11,943 
Annual maturity and sinking fund requirements in millions of dollars on long-term debt outstanding at December 31, 
1991. are as follows: 1992, $4,363; 1993. $3,377; 1994, $3,115; 1995, $2,024; 1996, $1,386; 1997 and beyond, $3,346. 
*The 7% percent convertible, subordinated debentures are 
percent of the principal amount, and at decreasing prices 
unsecured subordinated obligations of IBiM, which are 
thereafter. Sinking fund payments starting in 1994 are 
convertible into I BM capital stock at a conversion price of 
intended to retire 75 percent of the debentures prior to 
$153.6563 per share. They are redeemable, at the option 
maturity. During 1991, conversions of debentures resulted 
of the company, as of November 1991 at a price of 102.363 
in the issuance of 25 shares of IBM capital stock. 
CC 
3 C 
c 
< 


===== PAGE 45 =====
Taxes 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
1989 
Earnings before income taxes: 
U.S. operations 
Non-U.S. operations 
$ ( 3 , 3 8 2 ) 
3 , 5 0 3 
$ 
2 . 3 5 9 
7 . 8 4 4 
$ 
( 8 5 1 ) 
7 . 4 9 6 
$ 
121 
$ 1 0 , 2 0 3 
$ 6 . 6 4 5 
The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as follows: 
U.S. operations 
Non-U.S. operations 
$ 
( 9 0 9 ) 
1,594 
$ 
9 1 3 
3 . 2 7 0 
$ 
( 5 0 1 ) 
3 . 3 8 8 
Total provision for income taxes 
$ 
6 8 5 
$ 4 J 8 3 
$ 2 . 8 8 7 
The components of the provision for income taxes 
by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: 
U.S. federal: 
Current 
Deferred 
Net deferred investment tax credits 
$ 
2 2 6 
( 8 4 6 ) 
( 6 8 ) 
$ 
3 7 9 
(44) 
(95) 
$ 
4 7 6 
( 1 , 2 4 7 ) 
( 1 0 1 ) 
( 6 8 8 ) 
2 4 0 
( 8 7 2 ) 
U.S. state and local: 
Current 
Deferred 
2 9 
( 1 4 4 ) 
16 
106 
107 
( 1 9 7 ) 
( 1 1 5 ) 
122 
(90) 
Non-U. S.: 
Current 
Deferred 
1,787 
( 2 9 9 ) 
3 . 3 7 5 
4 4 6 
3 , 0 2 5 
821. 
1,488 
3.821 
3 , 8 4 9 
Total provision for income taxes 
$ 
6 8 5 
$ 
4 , 1 8 3 
$ 2 , 8 8 7 
Social security, real estate, personal property, and other taxes 
3 , 0 8 2 
3,01 7 
2 , 5 6 2 
Total taxes 
$ 3 , 7 6 7 
$ 
7 , 2 0 0 
$ 5 , 4 4 9 
Deferred income taxes reflect the impact 
of temporary differences between tlie amounts 
of assets and liabilities recognized for financial 
reporting purposes and such amounts recog-
nized for tax purposes. In accordance with 
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 
(SFAS) 96, the company uses the hability 
method for recording such taxes. 


===== PAGE 46 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements 
International 
Busbiess Machines Corporation and Suhsidiaiy 
Companies 
The principal items making up the deferred 
tax provision in 1991 included $1,297 million for 
the special restructuring charge and related 
items and $153 million for depreciation, offset by 
a $239 million reduction in the tax asset 
recorded for the alternative minimum tax and 
$151 million for deferred software costs. In 
1990, these items included $573 million related 
to the partial turnaround of deferred tax 
assets arising from the 1989 restructuring charge 
and $343 million for sales-type leases and 
installment sales. J'hese amounts were offset 
by $205 million of deferred tax benefits 
associated with the alternative minimum tax. 
In 1989, the principal items included $904 
million related to the restructuring charge 
taken in that year, offset by $339 million 
for sales-type leases and installment sales. 
Under the rules of SFAS 96, financial recognition 
is not allowed for net deferred tax assets and 
tax credit carryforwards in excess of the amount 
that could be recovered as income tax refunds 
through existing loss carryback provisions. 
Consequently, at December 31,1991, the company 
had unrecognized deferred tax assets and tax 
credit carryforwards for financial reporting pur-
poses of approximately $2,000 million, most 
of which can be carried forward for substantial 
periods.The company continues to evalu-
ate the potential realization of other deferred 
tax assets emanating from restructuring 
actions. SFAS 96 is currently being amended. 
Phis may result in the recognition of some 
of these unrecognized deferred tax assets. 
For tax purposes, the company has available 
tax credit carryforwards of approximately 
$f,850 milhon, many of which are available for 
substantial periods and may be used to offset 
future taxes. 
The consolidated effective income tax rate 
was 566 percent in 1991,41 percent in 1990, and 
43 percent in 1989. The high rate in 1991 was 
principally due to the company's inability 
to recognize certain deferred tax assets under 
SFAS 96 that resulted mainly from the special 
restructuring charge. A higher effective rate on 
non-U. S. earnings also contributed to the 
increase when measured in conjunction with 
the significantly reduced earnings before 
income taxes. 
Excluding the effects of the special restructuring 
charge, the effective tax rate on continuing 
operations was 40 percent. Of the 6 percentage 
point variation from the U.S. federal statutory 
tax rate of 34 percent, 10 percentage points were 
attributable to the higher effective tax rate on 
non-U.S. earnings offset by 2 percentage points 
for state and local taxes. 
In 1990 and 1989, the higher effective tax rate 
on non-U.S. earnings accounted for 6 percentage 
points and f3 percentage points, respectively, 
of the variance from the U.S. federal statutory 
rate of 34 percent. 
Research, Development and Engineering 
Research, development and engineering 
expenses amounted to $6,644 million in 1991, 
$6,554 million in 1990, and $6,827 million in 1989. 
Included in these amounts were expenditures of 
$5,001 million in 1991, $4,914 million in 1990, 
and $5,20f million in 1989 for a broad program of 
research and development activities covering 
basic scientific research in a variety of fields and 
the application of scientific advances to the 
cc 


===== PAGE 47 =====
development of new and improved products and 
their uses. The 1989 amount included $375 
million associated with the U.S. restructuring. 
In addition, expenditures for product-related 
engineering amounted to $1,643 million, $1,640 
million, and $1,626 million for the same three years. 
Interest Cost 
Interest on borrowings of the company and its 
subsidiaries amounted to $2,667 million in 
1991, $2,425 million in 1990, and $1,853 million 
in 1989. Of these amounts, $143 million in 1991, 
$122 million in 1990, and $142 million in 1989 
were capitalized. The remainder was charged to 
cost of rentals and financing, and interest expense. 
Other Liabilities 
Other liabilities consist principally of accruals 
for nonpension postretirement benefits, 
and indemnity and retirement plan reserves for 
non-U.S. employees. 
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments 
Rental expense, including amounts charged to 
inventories and fixed assets, amounted to 
$2,056 million in 1991, $1,903 miUion in 1990, and 
$1,765 million in 1989. Minimum rental com-
mitments, in millions of dollars, under non-
cancelable leases for 1992 and thereafter are as 
follows: 1992, $1,609; 1993, $1,371; 1994, $1,073; 
1995, $888; 1996, $801; and after 1996, $3,312. 
These leases are principally for the rental 
of office premises. 
Long-Term Performance Plan 
The IBM 1989 Long-Term Performance Plan 
provides for incentive awards to be made 
to officers and other key employees. The plan is 
administered by the Executive Compensation 
Committee of the Roard of Directors. The 
Committee determines the type of award to be 
granted, wliich may include stock, a stock 
option, a stock appreciation right (SAR), cash, or 
any combination thereof. The number of shares 
that are available for granting in eacli year 
is limited to .85 percent of IBM s outstanding 
capital stock as of December 31 of the preceding 
year. Any unused amount is carried forward 
and made available for granting in the subsequent 
year. In November 1991, the Board of Directors 
adopted an amendment to the plan effective 
January 1992, that aggregated the limit on the 
number of shares available to be granted 
through April 1994 , the duration of the plan. Prior 
to 1989, stock options were issued under the 
IBM 1986 and predecessor Stock Option Plans. 
Options allow the purchase of IBM's capital 
stock at 100 percent of the market price on the 
date of grant and have a maximum duration 
of 10 years. Payment by the optionee upon exer-
cise of an option may be made using 1BM 
stock as well as cash. 
SARs offer eligible optionees the alternative of 
electing not to exercise the related stock option, 
but to receive payment in cash and/or stock, 
equivalent to the difference between the 
option price and the average market price of 
IBM stock on the date of exercising the right. 


===== PAGE 48 =====
I'he following table summarizes option activity 
during 1991 and 1990: 
N u m b e r of Shares Under Option 
1991 
1990 
B a l a n c e at J a n u a r y 1 
24,985,819 
20,909,547 
Options granted 
4,606.352 
5,309,140 
Options exercised 
(1,861,832) 
(641,126) 
Options terminated 
(224,414) 
(498,977) 
Options e a n e e l l e d -
SARs exercised 
(123,659) 
(92,765) 
B a l a n c e at D e c e m b e r 31 
27,382,266 
24,985,819 
Exercisable at D e c e m b e r s ! 
. . 
17,084,143 
1 4 , 7 6 1 , 2 1 7 
llie options exercised were at an average option 
price of $91.24 per share and $64.02 per share 
in 1991 and 1990, respectively. The shares under 
option at December 31,1991, were at option 
prices ranging from $62.25 to $159.50 per share, 
rhe shares under option at December 31,1990, 
were at option prices ranging from $55.75 to 
$159.50 per share. 
rhere were 1,055,148 and 835,105 unused shares 
carried forward and made available for granting 
in the subsequent year as of December 31,1991 
and 1990, respectively. 
Stock Purchase Plan 
The IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan 
enables employees who are not participants in 
IBM's stock option programs to purchase 
IBM's capital stock through payroll deductions 
of up to 10 percent of eligible compensation. 
The price an employee pays for a share of stock 
is 85 percent of the average market price on 
the date the employee has accumulated enough 
money to buy a share. 
During 1991, employees purchased 7,033,123 
shares, all of which were treasury shares, for 
which $644 million was paid to IBM. At Decem-
ber 31,1991,40,175,347 shares remain available 
for purchase. 
Stock Repurchase Programs 
Under programs for purchasing IBM stock, 
2,127,400 shares were repurchased during 1991 at 
a cost of $196 million, 3,842,924 shares were 
repurchased during 1990 at a cost of $415 million, 
and 16,085,900 shares were repurchased during 
1989 at a cost of $1,759 million. The repurchased 
shares were retired and restored to the status 
of authorized but unissued shares. 
In 1989, the Board of Directors authorized the 
company to purchase from time to time shares of 
its capital stock not to exceed $5,000 million. 
At December 31,1991, $4,276 million of that authori-
zation remained. 


===== PAGE 49 =====
D5 
3 
C C 
C 
Retirement Plans 
The company and its subsidiaries have retire-
ment plans covering substantially all employees. 
The total cost of all plans for 1991,1990, and 1989 
was $527 miUion, $94 million, and $328 million, 
respectively. 
Increased cost in 1991 resulted primarily from 
increased interest cost on a higher projected 
benefit obligation and additional service cost 
due to the 1991 restructuring. Pension cost 
in 1990 was lower than in 1989 principally due to 
the growth in the expected return on plan 
assets exceeding the growth in annual interest 
and service cost. 
Annual cost is determined using the Projected 
Unit Credit actuarial method. Prior service 
cost is amortized on a straight-line basis over the 
average remaining service period of employees 
expected to receive benefits. An assumption 
is made for modified career average plans such 
that the average earnings base period will be 
updated to the years prior to retirement. 
It is the company's practice to fund amounts 
for pensions sufficient to meet the minimum 
requirements set forth in applicable employee 
benefit and tax laws, and such additional 
amounts as the company may determine to be 
appropriate from time to time. The assets 
of the various plans include corporate equities, 
government securities, corporate debt securi-
ties, and income-producing real estate. 
LI.S. Plan: 
U.S. regular, full-time, and part-time 
employees are covered by a noncontributory 
plan which is funded by company contributions 
to an irrevocable trust fund, which is held for 
the sole benefit of employees. Monthly retirement 
benefits generally represent the greater of a 
fixed amount per year of service, or a percent 
of career compensation. For plan purposes, 
annual compensation before January 1,1992, is 
defined as the average annual compensation 
paid for the years 1987 through 1991. Benefits 
become vested upon the completion of five 
years of service. The company introduced plan 
amendments in 1991 inchidingthe elimina-
tion of all retirement age reduction factors for 
employees who retire with 30 or more years 
of service, and a new provision that provides 
additional income in a tax-deferred manner to 
employees at retirement.The number of individ-
uals receiving benefits at December 31, 1991 
and 1990, was 60,905 and 52,895, respectively 
The expected long-term rate of return on 
plan assets used in the calculation of net periodic 
pension cost was 9 percent for 1991,1990, 
and 1989. Measurement of the 1991 and 1990 
projected benefit obligation was based on 
an 8.5 percent discount rate and a 5 percent 
long-term rate of compensation increase. 
Non-U. S. Plans: Most subsidiaries and branches 
outside the United States have retirement 
plans covering substantially all employees, under 
which funds are deposited under various 
fiduciary-type arrangements, annuities are pur-
chased under group contracts, or reserves 
are provided. Retirement benefits are based on 
years of service and the employees compen-
sation, generally during a fixed number of years 
immediately prior to retirement. 
The ranges of assumptions used for the non-U. S. 
plans reflect the different economic environ-
ments within the various countries. The expected 
long-term rates of return on plan assets used in 
the calculation of net periodic pension cost 


===== PAGE 50 =====
ranged from 5 percent to 12 percent in 1991,1990, 
and 1989. Measurement of the projected benefit 
obligation was based on discount rates ranging 
from 5 percent to 10.5 percent in 1991 and from 
4.5 percent to 10 percent in 1990, and long-term 
rates of compensation increase ranging from 
3 percent to 8.5 percent in both 1991 and 1990. 
The following tables provide information 
on the status of the U.S. retirement plan, and 
selected non-U.S. plans that represent 
approximately 98 percent of the total non-lI.S. 
accumulated benelit obligations. 
T h e f u n d e d status at D o c c m b c r 31 was as follows: 
U.S. Plan 
Non-U.S. Plans 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1900 
1991 
1990 
Actuarial |)r<>scnt value of benefit obligations: 
Vested benefit obligation 
$ ( 1 6 , 1 9 4 ) 
i ; ( 1 3 . 1 1 2 ) 
$ (10,481) 
$ 
(9,022) 
A c c u m u l a t e d benelit obligation 
$ ( 1 6 , 2 2 9 ) 
3 ; (13.146) 
$ (11,808) 
$ (10,347) 
Projected benelit obligation 
Plan assets at fair value 
$ ( 1 9 , 7 0 0 ) 
5 
25,196 
; (17,091) 
22.225 
$ ( 1 5 , 4 7 1 ) 
13,800 
$ (14,338) 
12.382 
Projected benefit obligation less than 
(in excess of) plan assets 
I nrecognized net (gain) loss 
Unrecognized prior service cost 
I nrecognized net asset established at J a n u a r y 1,1986 . . 
.5,496 
(3,732) 
1,890 
(2,543) 
5 , 1 3 4 
(2,665) 
1.323 
(2.747) 
( 1 , 6 7 1 ) 
2 1 2 
350 
(145) 
(1.956) 
459 
332 
(152) 
Prepaid (accrued) pension cost recognized in the 
statement of financial position 
$ 
1 , 1 1 1 
$ 
1,045 
$ 
(1,254) 
$ 
( 1 . 3 1 7 ) 
Net periodic pension cost tor the ye ars ended D e c e m b e r 31 in icluded the following components 
U.S. Plan 
Non-U.S. Plans 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
1989 
1991 
1990 
1989 
S e r v i c e cost — benefits e a r n e d 
d u r i n g the period 
$ 
691 
$ 
573 
$ 
562 
$ 
664 
$ 
575 
$ 
50! 
Interest cost on the projected 
benefit obligation 
1,488 
1.309 
1,194 
924 
837 
679 
R e t u r n on plan assets — 
Actual 
(4,044) 
(160) 
(3,950) 
(1,269) 
665 
( 1,315; 
Deferred 
1,961 
(1,859) 
2 . 2 1 4 
2 1 0 
(1,644) 
564 
Net amortizations 
(162) 
(253) 
(174) 
3 
(5) 
2 
Net periodic pension cost . . . . 
$ 
(66) 
$ 
(390) 
$ 
(154) 
$ 
532 
$ 
428 
$ 
431 
Total net periodic pension cost 
for all non-U.S. plans 
. . 
$ 
593 
$ 
484 
$ 
482 


===== PAGE 51 =====
Nonpension Postretirement Benefits 
The company and its U.S. subsidiaries have 
defined benefit postretirement plans that pro-
vide medical, dental, and life insurance for 
retirees and eligible dependents. In August f990, 
the company announced several changes to its 
retiree medical plans. Among these changes was 
the establishment of plan cost maximums in 
order to more effectively account for and control 
future medical costs. 
Effective January 1,1991, the company and 
its subsidiaries implemented on the immediate 
recognition basis Statement of Financial 
Accounting Standards (SFAS) f06, "Employers' 
Accounting for Postretirement Benefits Other 
Than Pensions." This statement requires that the 
cost of these benefits, which are primarily for 
health care, be recognized in the financial state-
ments during the employees active working 
career. The company's previous practice was to 
accrue these costs, principally at retirement. 
The transition effect of adopting SFAS f06 on 
the immediate recognition basis, as of January f, 
f99f, resulted in a charge of $2,263 million 
to ]99f earnings, net of approximately $350 mil-
lion of income tax effects. 
This charge includes a previously unrecog-
nized accumulated postretirement benefit obli-
gation of approximately $4.8 billion, offset 
by $2.2 billion related to plan assets and accruals 
under the company's previous accounting 
practice. This obligation was determined by 
application of the terms of medical, dental, and 
life insurance plans, including the effects of 
established maximums on covered costs, 
together with relevant actuarial assumptions 
and health-care cost trend rates projected 
at annual rates ranging ratably from 14 percent 
in f99f to 6 percent through the year 2007. The 
effect of a I percent annual increase in these 
assumed cost trend rates would increase the 
accumulated postretirement benefit obligation 
by approximately $300 million; the annual 
service costs would not be materially affected. 
Certain of the company's non-U. S. subsidiaries 
have similar plans for retirees. However, most 
retirees outside the United States are covered by 
government sponsored and administered 
programs, and the cost of these programs is 
not significant to the company. 
The total cost for all plans amounted to 
$394 million, $96 million, and $303 million in 
1991, 1990, and 1989, respectively. 
Cost in 1991 was higher than in 1990 principally 
due to the adoption of SFAS 106. Cost in 1990 was 
lower than in 1989 primarily because of amounts 
recorded in the 1989 restructuring charge. 
It is the company's practice to fund amounts for 
postretirement benefits with an independent 
trustee, as deemed appropriate from time to time. 
The plan assets include corporate equities 
and government securities. Fhe accounting for 
the plan is based on the written plan. 


===== PAGE 52 =====
T h e follow i n g tables provide i n f o r m a t i o n on the 
status of tlie plans. 
( D o l l a r s ill 
n i i l l i o t i . s ) 
I 
luiidcd >laUi> ill Decctiilx'f 31. 
was as follows: 
\( ( Uimi latcd posl I'clircmciU 
hcticllt ohlifialioii: 
K r l i i v c s 
$ ( 3 , 2 7 7 ) 
I ' l i l K c l i f i i b l c a c t i \ c p l a n |)arti( i j ) a r i t s . . 
( 3 0 3 ) 
O t h e r a ( i i \ c p l a n p a r l i c i p a n t s 
( I . 8 ( ) ' ) ) 
T o t a l 
( r ) . l l ( ) ) 
I M a n a > . s c i > at l a i r \ a l u ( ' 
I .(>32 
\( ( u m u l a l c ( l 
p o > t r ( i i r ( ' i n c i i t 
I x ' t i c l i t 
o l ) l i j i a t i ( n i ill c N c o , ^ o l p l a n a s s e t s 
( 3 . 8 1 7 ) 
I nrccofiiii/.cd net loss 
1 1 7 
\ c c r i i ( ' ( l p o s t r c t i r c i n c n l 
h c n c l i t 
c o s t r e c o g n i z e d 
in t h e 
s t a l e i i i e n t 
of linancial position 
$ (3.700) 
(I ) o l l a r s i n 
m i l l i o n > ) 
N e t p e r i o d i c p ( ) > t r e t i r e i i i e i i t 
b e n e l i t 
c o s t l o r 1001 i n c l u d e d t h e 
l o l l o w i n " ' : 
S e r \ i c e c o s t — h e i i e l i t s 
a t t r i b u t e d 
t o s e r \ i c e d u r i i i f i t h e p e r i o d 
I n l e r o t 
c o s t o n t h e 
a c c u m u l a t e d 
p o s t r e t i r e i i i c i i t 
b e n e l i t o b l i ^ a t i o n . . 
K c t u r i i o n p l a n 
a > s e l s — 
\ c l u a l 
l ) < - l e r r e ( l 
N e t p e r i o d i c p o s t r e t i r e i n c n t 
b e n e l i t 
c o s t 
$ 
132 
380 
(325) 
108 
$ 
304 
rfie assuinetl rate of return on the plaTi assets 
v\as 
peicent. \h^asurenient of the aecuiruilated 
|)()stretirenient benefit ol)ligation was based on 
ati 8.5 pereent assumed discount rate. 
Lines of Credit 
At December 31, 1991, the company and its 
subsidiaries had available unused lines of credit 
with a number of I .S. and non-U.S. banks, 
permitting borrow ings, primarily short-term, up 
to an aggregate of approximately $6,900 million. 
Interest rates on borrowings would vary from 
country to country depending on local market 
conditions. 
Financial Instrun^^nts 
I n the normal course of business, the company 
enters into a variety of forward contracts, options, 
and swaps in order to limit its exposure to loss 
resultino from adverse fluctuations in f o r e i g n cur-
o 
o 
rencv exchange and interest rates. 
The IliM Corporation receives significant divi-
d e n d s a n d i n tei'C o m pa ny rova 11 i es from i ts n on - U. S. 
subsidiaries. Due to the volatility of the cur-
rency markets, it is prudent to employ the use of 
linancial hedging instruments to minimize the 
company's potential exposure on these cash flows. 
I n addition, in order to raise funds on a more cost-
effective basis, the company centrally borrows 
to meet the consolidated financing requirements 
of its subsidiaries. The central finaricing facility 
in turn provides local currency denominated 
debt to the individual subsidiaries via currency 
and interest rate swap agreements. 
These instruments are executed with credit-
worthy financial institutions, and virtually 
all foreign currency contracts are denominated in 
currencies of major industrial countries. Gains 
and losses on these contracts serve as hedges in 


===== PAGE 53 =====
that they offset fluctuations that would otherwise 
impact the company's financial results. Costs 
associated with entering into such contracts are 
amortized over the life of the instruments and are 
not material to the company's financial results. 
Statement of Financial Accounting Standards 
(SFAS) 105 requires certain disclosures about 
financial instruments with off-balance-sheet 
risk. The following summary of contract or 
notional (face) amounts outstanding at year-
end merely provides an indication of the extent 
of the company's involvement in such instru-
ments and is being presented for informational 
purposes only.The company does not antici-
pate any material adverse effect on its financial 
position resulting from its involvement in 
these instruments, nor does it anticipate non-
performance by any of its counterparties. 
(Dollars in millions) 
1991 
1990 
Forward e x c h a n g e contracts 
. . . . 
$ 1,002 
$ 1.325 
Option contracts 
9 1 5 
103 
Interest rate and currency 
swap a g r e e m e n t s 
7 , 8 2 7 
5 3 6 7 
The company does not have any significant 
concentrations of credit risk. 
IBM has guaranteed certain loans and commit-
ments of various ventures to which it is a party. 
Additionally, the company is contingently 
liable for certain receivables sold with recourse. 
These commitments, which in the aggregate 
are approximately $1 billion, are not expected to 
result in a material adverse effect on the com-
pany's financial results. 
In 1992, pursuant to SFAS 107, "Disclosures 
about Fair Value of Financial Instruments," the 
company will disclose the fair value of all 
financial instruments. Fair value is not expected 
to be materially dilferent from carrving value. 
Segment Information 
IBM is in the business of helping people solve 
problems through the use of advanced informa-
tion technologies, riie companv operates 
primarily in the single industrv segment that 
creates value by offering services, software, 
systems, products, and technologies.This segment 
represents more than 90 percent of consoli-
dated revenue, operating proht, and identiliable 
assets. The schedule on the next page shows 
revenue by industry segments and by classes of 
similar products or services within the infor-
mation technology segment. 
Financial information by geographic area is 
summarized on page 52 to provide a better inider-
standing of the company's operations. Material 
interdependencies and overlaps exist among the 
company's operating units and, therefore, the 
information may not be indicative of the finan-
cial results of, or investments in, the reported 
areas were they independent organizations. 
While the company operates primarily in a 
single industry segment and has managed its 
worldwide business as such, revenue has 
been categorized into major classes of product. 


===== PAGE 54 =====
R e v e n u e bv Industry S e g m e n t s and Classes of S i m i l a r Products or S e r v i c e s 
Consolidated 
(Dollars in millions) 
1 9 9 1 
1990* 
1989^ 
1 nrormation technologv: 
IVocossors"'' 
$ 14,954 
$ 16.433 
$ 16.236 
Workstations'''- PcM-sonal systems. . . . 
8,5()S 
9.644 
8,409 
Other workstations . . 
3 , 2 1 6 
4,076 
3.876 
Peripherals'*' 
- S t o r a g e 
7,184 
8.967 
7.362 
Printers 
1,010 
1.263 
1.454 
Other peripherals . . . 
2,284 
2,960 
2.642 
S o f t w a r e 
10,524 
9.952 
8.424 
M a i n t e n a n c e 
7,414 
7.198 
6.791 
Other 
7,749 
6,602 
5.526 
62,840 
67.095 
60.720 
Federal Systems 
1,952 
1.923 
1.990 
Total 
$ 64,792 
$ 6 9 , 0 1 8 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
""Heclassified to conform with 199! presentation. 
+ 1 lardware only, excludes functions not enihedded, software, and maintenance. 
1 9 9 1 
4 , 7 1 7 
3 , 2 1 0 
1,040 
2,825 
308 
1,116 
3,767 
2,884 
2 , 6 1 5 
U.S. Only 
22,482 
1,952 
1990^ 
5.744 
3.887 
1,349 
3 . 4 1 3 
4 1 3 
1,353 
3.639 
2.886 
2.525 
25.209 
1.923 
1989^ 
5,941 
3.667 
1,323 
2,477 
5 1 9 
1 , 3 1 3 
3 . 1 3 9 
2.959 
2,417 
23,755 
1,990 
$ 2 4 , 4 3 4 
$ 2 7 , 1 3 2 
$ 25,745 
For purposes of classifying similar information 
lecfinology products, user programmable equip-
ment having the capabihty of manipulating data 
arithmetically or logically and making calcu-
lations, in a manner directly addressable by the 
user through the operation of a stored program, 
has been classified as processors. Processors 
include high-end and midrange products. Work-
stations include j)ersonal systems processors, 
technical workstations, and other display-based 
terminals. Peripherals include advanced-function 
printers, storage, and other peripherals, which 
consist of telecommunication devices and the com-
puter workstation printer product line sold in 
1991 to l.exmark International, Inc.The storage 
and advanced-function printer revenue categories 
closely correlate to the hardware content of the 
newly formed Storage Products line of business 
and Pennant Systems Company, respectively. 
tenance consists of separately billed charges 
for maintenance. Other is comprised principally 
of services and financing revenue. 
Some products logically fit in more than one 
class and are assigned to a specific class based 
on a variety of factors. Over time, products tend 
to overlap, merge into, or split from existing 
classes as a result of changing technologies, 
market perceptions, and/or customer use. For 
example, market demand may create require-
ments for technological enhancements to 
permit a peripheral product to be functionally 
integrated with a display, a telecommunication 
device, and a processor to form a workstation. 
Such interchangeability and technological prog-
ress tend to make year-to-year comparisons 
less vahd than they would be in an industry less 
subject to rapid change. 
Peripheral functions embedded in processors 
are classified with processors. Software includes 
both applications and systems software. Main-
Federal Systems consists of specialized informa-
tion technology products and services primarily 
for the U. S. defense,space and other agencies. 
-c 
c 
< 


===== PAGE 55 =====
G e o g r a p h i c A r e a s 
(Dollars in millions) 
United States 
R e v e n u e — C u s t o m e 
Interarea transfers. 
Total 
Net e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
E u r o p e / M i d d l e 
Elast/ACrica 
R e v e n u e — Customers 
Interarea transfers. . . 
'ibtal 
Net e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
Asia Pacific 
R e v e n u e — Customers 
Inteiarea transfers. . . 
Total 
Net e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
A m e r i c a s 
R e v e n u e — Customers 
Interarea transfers. . . 
'Jbtal 
Net e a r n i n g s 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 
i 9 9 r 
1990 
$ 
4 , 9 5 1 
3 , 9 3 2 
5.088 
1.61 5 
1989 
$ 24,434 
$ 2 7 , 1 3 2 
$ 25,745 
7,668 
6.195 
5.476 
$ 32,102 
$ 33,327 
$ 3 1 , 2 2 1 
( 2 , 3 9 4 ) 
1 . 4 5 9 
( 3 2 5 ) 
43,417 
43.542 
4 1 . 6 3 5 
$ 2 6 , 1 3 6 
$ 27,234 
$ 2 3 , 1 7 0 
838 
976 
1 . 1 0 ! 
$ 26,974 
$ 2 8 , 2 1 0 
$ 24,271 
1,264 
2.977 
2.676 
30,725 
30,689 
2 4 J 3 2 
$ 
9,271 
$ 
9.564 
$ 
9,202 
1,680 
1.496 
1.673 
$ 1 0 , 9 5 1 
$ 1 1 , 0 6 0 
$ 1 0 , 8 7 5 
4 4 6 
1.1 5 1 
1.296 
13,241 
8,646 
7.666 
1.593 
1.461 
$ 
8,883 
$ 
6.703 
$ 
6,051 
2 0 4 
420 
173 
7,121 
6,357 
5,395 
E l i m i n a t i o n s 
R e v e n u e 
$(14,118) 
$(10,282) 
$ ( 9 , 7 1 1 ) 
Net e a r n i n g s 
(84) 
13 
(62) 
Assets 
(2,031) 
(1,666) 
(1.694) 
Consolidated 
R e v e n u e 
$ 64,792 
$ 6 9 , 0 1 8 
$ 6 2 , 7 1 0 
Net e a r n i n g s 
(564) 
6.020 
3.758 
Assets at D e c e m b e r 31 . 
92,473 
87,568 
77,734 
* N e t e a r n i n g s before transition elfect of c h a n g e in 
a c c o u n t i n g for n o n p e n s i o n postretirement benefits. 
Non-U.S. subsidiaries that operate in a local 
curreiicv environment account for approxi-
mately 
percent of the compativ's n o n - l .S. 
revenue/riie remaining 10 percent is from 
subsidiaries and branches that Oj)erate in l l S . 
dollars or whose economic environment is 
highly inilationary. 
In the Furope/Middle East/XIrica area, Ktn-opean 
operations accounted lor approximatelv 
percent 
of revenue in 1991, I W t l a n d 1989. 
I nterarea transfers consist principally of c o m -
pleted machines, sui)assemblies atid parts, and 
software. ,\'1achines, subassemblies and parts 
transfers are generallv priced at cost j)lus 
an appropriate service charge. Software transfers 
represent license fees paid by the n o n - l l S . 
subsidiaries/llie cost and service charges that 
relate to fixed asset transfers are capitalized and 
depreciated by the importing area. Interarea 
accounts receivable, the unamortized portion of 
service charges, and the net change during 
the year in unamortized service charges have 
been eliminated in consolidation. 


===== PAGE 56 =====
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data 
Inlenidlioiuil 
Busiin^ss MdchiiK^s C.orporalioti and Siibsididry 
Companies 
(Dollars in millions except per share amounts) 
1991 
1990 
For the >ear: 
K(^vetuie 
$ 6 4 , 7 9 2 
$6<).()I8 
earnin<i;s before eil'eet ol'aeeounting changes 
(564) 
6.020 
I'er share 
(.99) 
10.51 
KM'ect of accountitig changes* 
(2,263) 
— 
I'er share 
(3.96) 
— 
Net earnings 
(2,827) 
6.020 
IVr share 
(4.95) 
10..5 I 
(iash dividends paid 
2,771 
2.774 
I'er share 
4.84 
1.81 
Investment in plant, rental machines and other |)ropertv 
6,502 
6.518 
Return on stockholders'eqiiitv 
— 
l4.8"/i) 
.At Fuel ()l ^ear: 
Total assets 
$ 9 2 , 4 7 3 
$ 87,568 
N("t in\(>stment in |)hint. rental macliines and other j)ropertv . . 
27,578 
27.241 
Working capital 
7,345 
1.•5.6 14 
Long-term del)t 
13,231 
I 1.0 
Stockholders'equity 
37,006 
t2.832 
*10<)l. notipcMision |)ostretireinent henelits: 1988. income taxes. 
1989 
1988 
1987 
$ 62.710 
3.758 
6.47 
3.758 
6.17 
2.752 
1.73 
6 . 1 1 0 
<).6"/i> 
$ 50.68 I 
5.101 
0.27 
31 5 
.53 
5.806 
0.80 
2.600 
1.1(» 
5.43 1 
1.|..0<!/ii 
55.256 
5.258 
8.72 
5.258 
8.72 
2.654 
1.10 
1.31 2 
14.5"/(i 
$ 77.73 1 
2 1 . 0 1 3 
I 1.175 
10.825 
38.5t»0 
$ 73.037 
$ 70.020 
23.1.26 
22.067 
17.056 
18.130 
8.518 
7.108 
30.500 
38.263 
Selected Quarterly Data 
ollars in millions except 
p(M' share and stock prices) 
1991 
Reveinie 
(^ross 
Profit 
Net 
Earninirs 
Per Share 
Karninu's Dividends 
Stock Prices 
Low 
Pirst (juarter 
$ 13,545 
$ 
7,208 
$ (1,731)+ 
$ (3.03)+ 
$ 1.21 
$ 139.75 
$ 105.50 
Second (piarter . . . . 
14,732 
7,551 
1 14 
.20 
1.21 
1 14.75 
96.63 
Third quarter 
14,433 
7,161 
172 
.30 
1.21 
106.38 
92.00 
Pourth (juarter . . . . 
22,082 
10,398 
(1,382) 
(2.42) 
1.21 
104.75 
83.50 
Total 
$ 64,792 
$ 32,318 
$ (2,827) 
$ (4.95) 
$ 4.84 
1990 
I'irst (|uart(M-
$ 1 1.185 
$ 
7.857 
$ 
1.037 
$ 
1.81 
$ 1.21 
$ 100.38 
$ 
04.50 
Second (piarter . . . . 
16.105 
0.107 
1 . 1 1 0 
2 . f 5 
1.21 
1--.., .> 5 
105.00 
Third quarter 
15.277 
8.600 
1 . 1 1 2 
1.05 
1.21 
123.13 
06.50 
I'ourtb (|uart(M' . . . . 
23.061 
12.731 
2.161 
1.30 
1.21 
1 16.00 
06.25 
Total 
$ 60.018 
$ 38.205 
$ 
6.020 
$ 10.51 
$ 4.84 
1 iicludes cbarge ol $2, .263 million, or $3.06 per share , transition elf ect ol change in accounting for tionpension 
Tliere were 772.017 stockholders ol record at December 
31. I99L During I99Lstockholders received $2,771 million 
in cash dix idiMids.The l egular quarterlv cash dividend 
payable Vlarcb 10. 1992. will be at the rate of $ 1.21 per share. 
Tins dividend will be IBM's 308th consecutive quarterly 
cash dividend.The stock prices rellect the high and 
low prices lor I B-Vl's capital slock on the \ew York Stock 
Kxcbange composite tape for the last two years. 


===== PAGE 57 =====
IBM C o r p o r a t i o n 
B o a r d of D i r e c t o r s : 
B o a r d C o m m i t t e e s : 
A d v i s o r y B o a r d : 
J o h n F. Akers 
C h a i r m a n of the B o a r d , IBM 
Stephen D. B e c h t e l , Jr. 
C h a i r m a n E m e r i t u s , 
Bcehtel Group, Inc., 
S a n Francisco, Calif. 
E n g i n e e r i n g and construction 
Harold B r o w n 
C h a i r m a n , 
Foreign Policy Institute, 
T h e J o h n s H o p k i n s University, 
Washington, D.C. 
J a m e s E. B u r k e , Retired 
C h a i r m a n of the B o a r d , 
J o h n s o n & J o h n s o n , 
New B r u n s w i c k , N.J. 
Health care products 
T h o m a s F. Frist, Jr. 
C h a i r m a n , President, and 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Hospital Corporation of A m e r i c a , 
Nashville, Tenn. 
Health services 
Fritz Cerber, C h a i r m a n and 
Chief Executive Officer, 
R o c h e H o l d i n g Ltd., 
B a s e l , Switzerland - health care; 
Executive C h a i r m a n , 
Z u r i c h I n s u r a n c e C o m p a n y , 
Z u r i c h , Switzerland 
J u d i t h R i c h a r d s H o p e 
S e n i o r Partner, 
Paul, Hastings, J a n o f s k y & Walker, 
L o s A n g e l e s , Calif., and 
Washington, D.C. 
Attorneys at law 
Nicholas deB. K a t z e n b a c h , Retired 
S e n i o r Vice President, IBM; 
Partner, Riker, Danzig, Scherer, 
Hyland & Perretti, 
Morristown, N.J. 
Attorneys at law 
N a n n e r l 0 . K e o h a n e 
President, Wellesley College, 
Wellesley, Mass. 
J a c k D. K u e h l e r 
President, IBM 
Richard W. L y m a n 
President E m e r i t u s , 
Stanford University, 
S t a n f o r d , Calif. 
Frank A. Metz, Jr. 
S e n i o r Vice President, 
F i n a n c e and P l a n n i n g , IBM 
J. R i c h a r d M u n r o 
C h a i r m a n of the E x e c u t i v e 
C o m m i t t e e , 
T i m e Warner Inc., 
New York, N.Y. 
Media and entertainment 
T h o m a s S. M u r p h y 
C h a i r m a n of the B o a r d , 
Capital Cities/ABC, Inc., 
New York, N.Y. 
B r o a d c a s t i n g and p u b l i s h i n g 
J o h n R. Opel 
C h a i r m a n of the E x e c u t i v e 
C o m m i t t e e , IBM 
Helmut Sihier 
President and 
Chief E x e c u t i v e Officer, 
Henkel K G a A , Diisseldorf, 
G e r m a n y 
C h e m i c a l products 
J o h n B. Slaughter 
President, 
Occidental College, 
L o s A n g e l e s , Calif. 
E d g a r S. Woolard, Jr. 
C h a i r m a n and 
Chief E x e c u t i v e Officer, 
E.I. du Pont de N e m o u r s & C o m p a n y , 
W i l m i n g t o n , Del. 
C h e m i c a l products 
Executive 
Committee: 
J o h n R. Opel, C h a i r m a n 
J o h n F. Akers 
Stephen D. Bechtcl, Jr. 
J a m e s E. B u r k e 
J a c k D. K u e h l e r 
J. Richard M u n r o 
T h o m a s S. M u r p h v 
Retirement Plans 
Committee: 
Frank A. Metz, Jr., (Chairman 
Harold B r o w n 
Fritz G e r b e r 
N a n n e r l 0 . K e o h a n e 
E d g a r S. Woolard, Jr. 
Execu I i ve Com pen sa I ion 
Committee: 
J a m e s E. B u r k e , C h a i r m a n 
Stephen D. Bechtel, Jr. 
T h o m a s F. Frist, Jr. 
J. Richard M u n r o 
T h o m a s S. M u r p h y 
Audit 
Committee: 
Richard W. L y m a n , C h a i r m a n 
Judith Richards H o p e 
Nicholas deB. K a t z e n b a c h 
H e l m u t Sihier 
J o h n B. Slaughter 
G e o r g e B. Beitzcl, Retired 
S e n i o r Vice President. II5M 
F r a n k T . Carv, Retired 
C h a i r m a n of the Board. IBM 
Kas|)ar V. C a s s a n L Retired 
V i c e C h a i r m a n of the B o a r d . IIUI 
^ illiam P. C o l e m a n . Jr. 
Partner. 
O'Melveny & Myers. 
Washington. D.C. 
Attornevs at law 
Jolin M. Fox, Retired 
C h a i r m a n ol th(" Boai'd. 
SCA Services. Iiu'.. 
Boston, Mass. 
G. Keith Funston. Retired 
President, 
New York Stock Exchatige. 
New York. N.^. 
G e o r g e L. I l i n m a n 
Partner, 
H i n m a n , Howard & Kaltell, 
B i n g h a m t o n . N.'^. 
Attorneys at law 
Johti N. Irwin 11 
C o u n s e l , 
Patterson, B e l k n a p . 
Webb & Jyler, 
New York. N.Y. 
Attorneys at law 
Gilbert E. J o n e s , Retired 
V i c e C h a i r m a n of the Board, IBM 
Grayson Kirk 
President E m e r i t u s , 
C o l u m b i a University, 
New York, N.Y. 
Allen J. K r o w e , Retired 
Executive Vice Presidcjit, IBM; 
S e n i o r V i c e President and 
Chief F i n a n c i a l Officer, 
Texaco, Inc., 
White Plains, N.Y. 
T. V i n c e n t L e a r s o n , Retired 
C h a i r m a n of the B o a r d , IBM 


===== PAGE 58 =====
IBM World Trade P:urope/Middle 
East/Africa C o r p o r a t i o n B o a r d : 
J a c q u c s (). Maisonroiigo, Retired 
Senioi- Viee President, IBM 
W illiam MeChesiiey Martin, Jr. 
Retired (diairman. 
I'Vderal Reserve Board. 
Washington. 
Dean 
McKav, Retired 
Senior \ iee President. IBM 
Maersk Vle-Kinnev Mo Her 
(diiel Kxeeutive Otlieer. 
\.P. Moller. 
(iopenliagen. Denmark 
W illiam 11. Moore. Retired 
(diairman of the Board. 
Bankers IVust Company. 
Ne%v York. \.Y. 
Dean P. I'hvpers. Retired 
Senior \ ice President. IBM 
Kmanuel R. Piore. I^etired 
\ iee President. IBM 
Paul ,1. liizzo. Retired 
\ iee Chairman ol the Board. I BM; 
Dean. (Graduate School of 
Business Administration. 
I ni\ersitv of \ortli (Carolina 
at Chapel Hill 
\\ illiam W. Seranton 
Kormer I .S. Ambassador 
to the United Nations; 
former Governor of Pennsylvania 
Irving S. Shapiro 
Partner. 
Skadden, Arps, Slate, 
Meagher & Flom, 
\\ ilmington. Del. 
\ttorneys at law 
Cyrus R.Vance 
Partner, 
Simpson T h a c h e r & Bartlett, 
^ e w \ o r k . N . Y . 
Attorneys at law 
Thomas J. Watson, Jr. 
Chairman Kmeritus, IBM 
Eric Bourdais de Charhonniere 
Chief Financial Officer, 
Compagnie Gcncralc 
des Etahlissements Michelin, 
C1 e r m o n t - Fe r r a n d, FY a n c c 
Kaspar V. Cassani, Retired 
\'ice (diairman of the Board, IBM 
John P. C u n n i n g h a m 
Vice President. IBM; 
Directeur General des 
Plans et des Services Techniques, 
IBM Europe, S.A. 
Juan Antonio Garcia Diez 
Chairman. 
I 
R A I . n V . S . A . . 
Vladrid, Spain 
Pierre E. Gousseland 
Honorary Chairman, 
\MA\. Inc., 
Greenwich. Conn. 
l l a n s - O l a f H e n k e l 
\ ice President. IBM; 
iVesident, IBM Germany 
Robert J. E a B a n t 
Vice President, IBM; 
(General Manager, 
IBM United States 
Jacques G. Vlaisonrougc, Retired 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Karl Otto Poehl 
Former President, 
Deutsche Bundesbank; 
Partner, B a n k h a u s 
Sal. Oppenheim Jr. Cie KGa A, 
FYanklurt am Main, 
Germany 
R o m a n o Prodi 
Professor of 
Economic and I ndustrial Policy, 
University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy 
Renato Rivcrso 
Vice President, IBM; 
Chairman, President, 
and Chief Executive Olliccr, 
I \m World lYade 
Europe/VIiddle East/Africa 
(Corporation; 
Chairman and President, 
IBM Europe, S.A. 
Bo Rydin 
Executive Chairman, 
Svenska Cellulose AB, 
Sundsvall, Sweden 
Patrick A / l b o l c 
Senior Vice President, 
Vlanufacturing and 
Development, IBM 
Kurt Werner 
Chairman, 
MaschinenfabrikGOEBFJ 
Darmstadt, Germany 
IBM World Trade 
Latin A m e r i c a B o a r d : 
Rodrigo Guerra B. 
President and General Manager, 
IBM Mexico 
Rudolf I!ohn 
President and General Manager, 
IBM Brazil 
Robeli J. Eibero 
Vice President. I BM; 
Chairman, IBM 
WorkUlrade Latin America; 
President and General Manager, 
IBM Latin America 
Henrique Maehado Zuloaga 
I'residcnt, Sivensa, S.A., 
Caracas, Venezuela 
Eliodoro Matte L. 
Vice Chairman, Com|)ahia 
Manufaeturcra de Papcles y 
GmbH, 
Cartones, S.A.. 
Santiago, Chile 
M. Bernard Puckett 
Vice President, IBM; General 
Manager, Application Solutions 
Eliezer Batista da Silva 
Chairman, 
Companhia Vale do Rio Doce 
Internacional, 
Brussels, B e l g i u m 
Roberto Konder B o r n h a u s e n 
Chairman and 
Chief Executive Officer, 
Unibanco, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil 
J a m e s J. Forese 
Vice President, IBM 
Julio J. Gomez 
Vice President and 
General Manager, 
B a n c o Shaw, S.A.. 
Buenos Aires, Argentina 
Claudio X. Gonzalez L. 
Chairman of the Board and 
Director General, Kimberly-Clark 
de Mexico, 
Mexico City, Mexico 
Dr. Rafael Rangel Sostmann 
President, ITHSM System, 
Institute) Teehnologico y de 
Estudios, 
Monterrey, Mexico 
Peter T. Rowley 
Vice President and Assistant 
General Manager, Marketing, 
Service, and Line 
Operations, 
I BM Latin America 
Dr. Richard Webb 
Chairman, Cuanto, S.A., 
Lima, Peru 
ec 


===== PAGE 59 =====
IBM World Trade 
Asia Pacific B o a r d : 
O f f i c e r s : 
c: 
Neil R . C l a r k 
Retired M a n a g i n g Director, 
National Australia B a n k , Ltd., 
Melbourne, Australia 
Jill K. Conway 
Visiting Scholar, 
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Mass.; 
former President of 
Smith College, 
Northampton, Mass. 
Kenneth W. Dam 
Vice President, IBM 
D a v i d A . G l e d h i l l 
C h a i r m a n , J o h n Swire & Sons 
(U.K.), Ltd., 
I long Kong 
Douglas T. IIsu 
Chairman, 
Far Eastern Textile, Ltd., 
Taiwan 
Dr. K y u n g Won Kim 
President, Institute of Social 
Studies, Korea; former Korean 
Ambassador to the United States 
Ned C. Lautenbach 
Vice President, IBM; 
Chairman, IBM Asia Pacihc Board; 
President and Representative 
Director, IBM Asia Pacific 
David K. P Li 
Director and 
Chief Executive Officer, 
T h e B a n k of East Asia, Ltd., 
Ilong Kong 
Brian T. Loton 
Deputy C h a i r m a n , 
T h e Broken Hill Proprietary 
Company Ltd., 
Melbourne, Australia 
Nobuo Mii 
Vice President, IBM; 
General Manager, 
Entry Systems Technology, 
Personal Systems; 
Vice President, IBM J a p a n Ltd. 
Nobuyuki Nakahara 
President,Tonen Corporation, 
T o k y o , J a p a n 
Mohamed Noordin Sopi'cc 
Director General, 
Institute of Strategic and 
I nternational Studies, 
Kuala L u m p u r , Malaysia 
Kenichi Ohmae 
M a n a g i n g Director, 
McKinscy & Companv, Inc.. 
T o k y o , J a p a n 
Ralph A. Pfeiffcr, Jr., Retired 
Senior Vice President, IBM 
Takco Shiina 
Vice President, IBM; 
President and 
Chief Executive Officer, 
IBM Japan Ltd. 
Patrick K. II. Yeoh 
President, 
T h e Development B a n k 
of Singapore Ltd., 
Singapore 
CluiintKin of the Board 
John F. Akers 
President 
Jack D. K u e h l e r 
Senior I ice Presidents 
C. Michael Armstrong 
Wilton E. Burdick 
George 11. Conrades 
Carl J. Conti"'' 
Donato A. Evangelista 
- General Counsel 
Terry R. Lauterd)aeh 
David E. VIcKitincv 
Frank A. Vietz. Jr. 
- F i n a n c e and P l a n n i n g 
Ste|)hcn B. Schwartz 
Patrick A.Toole 
Ear! F Wheeler 
lice 
Presidents 
Rav S. A b u Z a y y a d 
John A. Armstrong 
Michael J. Altardo 
J a m e s A. C a n n a v i n o 
Ralph W. Clark 
Robert J. (^orrigan 
J o h n P. C u n n i n g h a m 
Kentu^th 
Dam 
J a m e s E. Dezell, jr. 
Bob E. Dies 
Nicholas M. Donofrio 
Gerald W Ebker 
Howard G. Figueroa 
William J. Filip 
Lucie J. Fjeldstad 
J a m e s J. Forese 
Heinz K. Fridrieh 
Richard T Gerstner 
Victor J. Goldberg 
William 0 . Grabe 
Joseph M. Guglielmi 
Lutz F. I l a h n e 
Ellen M. H a n c o c k 
Arthur J. Hedge, Jr. 
I l a n s - O l a f l l e n k e l 
Pierre Hessler 
J o h n J. Higgins 
Harry L. Kavetas 
Edward J. Kfoury 
Robert J. L a B a n t 
Ned C. Lautenbach 
Robeli J. Libero 
Paul R . L o w 
\\ ilson Lowerv. Jr. 
Edward E. Lucente^ 
Marvin L. M a n n ' 
David E. McDowell'' 
J a m e s C^. MeC^roddv 
\ o b u o Mii 
Ennio Presulti"'' 
M. Bernard i'uckelt 
Michael J. Quinlan 
William W. K . R i c h 
K(Miato Ki\(M-so 
Edward F. Rogers 
I'c^er K. Schneider 
Takeo Shiina 
Kol)ert M. Stephenson 
David M. Thomas 
John M. Thompson 
Mary Lee Turner 
J a m e s J . \atiderslice 
Michael 11. \an \ raiiketi* 
Dennie M.Welsh** 
Secretory 
John E. I lickev 
('.on t roller 
Lawrence 
Z i m m e r m a n * 
I Ice President 
and Ireostirer 
Robert Ripp* 
Issistont 
Ireasurers 
Jesse J. (Greene. J r * 
J o e Grills 
iiobert N. Mattson 
John 11. Stewart 
/tssist(utt ('.ontrollers 
Fraidc L. 1! illenbrand, Jr.* 
Jose|)h J. Martin* 
*Electe(l in IQ91 
* * E l e c t e d iti 1992 
+Retiredin 1991 


===== PAGE 60 =====
Organization and 
Stocldiolder Information 
O p e r a t i o n s 
G e o g r a p h i c Units 
Business Units 
R e s e a r c h 
IBIVl Credit C o r p o r a t i o n 
IBM's primary operating units includc geographic units 
that provide marketing, services, and support to their c u s -
tomers, and m a n u f a c t u r i n g and development businesses 
that have worldwide responsibility for product develop-
ment, manufacturing, and delivery to geographic market-
ing units and to other equipment manufacturers. 
T h e geographic marketing and services units inchidc 
IBM Asia Pacihc, IBM Canada, IBM Europe/Middle East/ 
Africa, IBM Latin America, and IBM United States. 
T h e business units and their responsibilities are: 
Applicdt 
ion Business 
—develops and manufactures 
processors and related software for small- and m e d i u m -
sized l)usinesscs, and departments of large companies. 
Applicdlion 
Solutions—develops 
solutions that consist 
of hardware, software, and services for a broad range of 
industries, including manufacturing, Hnancc. and the 
' 
o 
o 
public sector. 
Enterprise 
Systems—provides 
entcrpriscwide solutions 
involving tbe development and manufacture of I BM s 
largest general-purpose processors, operating svstems, 
systems software, and supercomputing oflerings. 
Nelivorking 
Systems—provides 
products atid services for 
operating and m a n a g i n g networks that deliver 
information electronicallv to users within an enterprise 
and externallv to customers, suppliers, distributors, 
and others. 
Pennant 
Systems 
Company—develops 
and m a n u -
factures IBM sprinters and printing solutions, includ-
ing advanced-function printers, software, and 
printing services. 
Personal 
Systems—develops 
and manufactures personal 
computers and h i g h - p e r f o r m a n c e workstations and 
their operati ng systems, as well as multimedia, graphics, 
and display systems. 
Programming 
Systems—develops 
software for data 
m a n a g e m e n t , office systems decision support, and appli-
cation development, and the architecture that pro-
vides a (;onsistent structure for soltwai'e across all lines 
of business. Manufactures and distributes software. 
Storage 
Products—develops 
and manufactures a range of 
direct access storage devices, ta|)e drives, and optical storage 
devices, and their associated software support. 
technology 
Products—develops 
and manuiactures logic 
and memory chips and electronic circuit packaging used 
in IBM products. 
Research 
Division 
—advances underlying science, 
technologies, and systems for I BM products and services. 
IBM Credit 
Corporation—provides 
customer, dealer, and 
other remarketer financing for I BM products and services 
in the United States, as well as investment options such 
as money market accounts to U.S. stockholders and money 
market and mutual f u n d accounts to U.S. employees 
and retirees. 
IBM S t o c k h o l d e r S e r v i c e s 
Questions about stockholders' accounts 
should be directed to First Chicago 
Trust Company of New York, (212) 791-4208. 
or stockholders may write to: First Chicago 
Trust Company of New York, Box 3791, 
New York, N.Y.'l()()t)8-;i79l. 
If a stock certihcate is lost, stolen, or 
destroyed, notify First C h i c a g o T r u s t Company 
of New York. Payment of a surety bond 
premium is required to replace stock certifi-
cates. Registered mail is recommended 
when stock is mailed. 
lb transfer stocks, write to: First Chicago 
Trust Companv of New York, Stock Transfer 
I)e|)artment, 30 West Broadwav. New York, 
N.Y. 10007-2192. 
IIearing-ini])aire(l stockholders with 
access to a telecommunications device can 
communieatc dircctiv with First Chicago 
IVust Companv of N e w Y o r k . T h c telephone 
number for this service is (212) 571-0022. 
IBM stock is traded on the New York Stock 
Exchange, other exchanges in the United 
States, and exchanges in Austria, Belgium, 
Canada, England, France, Germany, 
J a p a n , the Netherlands, and Switzerland. 
IBM Investor Kelations 
I BM Cor|)orati()n 
Old Orchard Road 
Armonk, N.Y. 1050 I 
(914)765-7777 
For answers to general questions about I BM 
from within the continental United States, call 
(800) 426-3333; from outside the continental 
United States, call (602)629-2747. 
International Business Machines C o r p o r a t i o n 
C o r p o r a t e Headquarters 
Old O r c h a r d Road 
Armonk, N.Y. 10504 
* \ l \ . Application System/IOO, \S/400, Enterprise 
System/900(), KS/9()()0, Information Warehouse, 
Personal System/2, l'S/2, P l u g ' n ' G o , 
RISC System/6000, and System/390 are trade-
marks of International Business Machines 
Corporation. 
* * UNIX is a trademark of UNIX System L a b o r a -
tories, Inc. 
1992 IBM A n n u a l Meeting 
Stockholders are invited to attend the 1992 
A n n u a l Meeting, which is scheduled for 
Monday, April 27, at 10 a.m. in the Colorado 
Convention Center, Denver, Colorado. 
A notice of the A n n u a l Meeting, proxy 
statement, and a proxy voting card will be 
mailed to stockholders in M a r c h . T h e 
proxy statement provides biographies of the 
Board of Directors' nominees for director 
and describes items of business to be 
voted on at the meeting. 
T h e Report of the A n n u a l Meeting, including 
highlights and voting results, will be mailed 
to stockholders of record in June. A transcript 
of the Annual Meeting is available in June. 
Literature for IBM Stockholders 
T h e following printed information is 
available without charge from First Chicago 
b 
o 
Trust Companv of New York, Box 3791, 
New York, N.Y.'l0008-3791. 
T h e Form lO-K A n n u a l Report and Form 
lO-Q Quarterly Reports to the Securities and 
Exchange Commission provide further 
details on I BM's business. Form lO-K is avail-
able in April. Form lO-Q reports are 
available in Mav, August, and November. 
I BM Credit Corporation's A n n u a l Report 
is available in March. 
T h e IBM Dividend Reinvestment Plan 
booklet explains how stockholders may auto-
matically reinvest dividends toward the 
purchase of additional IBM stock. 
•'I BM Business Conduct Guidelines" defines 
the company's ethical and business principles. 
•'Our Global C o m m u n i t y " is a report on I BM's 
social responsibility programs. 
T h e Equal Opportunity, Afhrmative Action, 
and Community Programs booklet describes 
I BM's U.S. programs for women, minorities, 
and handicapped persons. 
T h e IBM A n n u a l Report also is printed 
in Japanese. An audiocassette recording in 
English is available. 


===== PAGE 61 =====
T h e IBM 1991 A n n u a l R e p o r t was printed on 
recycled paper that contains p o s t - c o n s u m e r 
waste a n d is recyclable. 


===== PAGE 62 =====
International B u s i n e s s Machines Corporation 
Old Orchard R o a d 
A r m o n k , N.Y. 1 0 5 0 4 
G 5 0 5 - 1 9 9 1 - 0 0 
