

===== PAGE 1 =====
2009 Annual Report


===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
Dear IBM Investor:
When I wrote to you a year ago, the global economy was experiencing 
profound disruption. The financial system was freezing up. Many companies 
and entire industries were pulling in their horns, hoping simply to ride out
the storm. IBM’s own industry was no different. 
	
Nonetheless, I said that we felt confident heading into 2009. We were 
entering the year strong, and we expected to exit it stronger.
	
A year later, despite an environment that remains very challenging, 
I am happy to report that your company has continued to outperform our 
industry and the market at large. We delivered strong results in 2009, 
once again achieving record pre-tax earnings, record earnings per share and 
record free cash flow — despite reduced revenues. At the same time, we 
continued to deliver superior returns to you, our owners. Most importantly, 
we are well positioned to grow as the economy begins to recover.
A LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN


===== PAGE 4 =====
Samuel J. Palmisano
CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
2


===== PAGE 5 =====
The explanation for this performance — and for 
our optimism about both the near-term and the 
longer-term future — is threefold. It rests, first, 
on the ongoing transformation of our company; 
second, on our focused strategy to capture the large 
opportunity of a globally integrating world; and 
third, on a business model that reliably generates 
strong profits and cash, giving us the financial 
flexibility to invest for future growth.
	
I will talk about each of these factors in detail  
in this letter. It is important for you to understand 
the ways in which IBM today is a very different 
company than it was just a few years ago. This 
repositioning explains why we have demonstrated 
such stability and strong results during this  
downturn and why we believe we will benefit as  
the economy recovers and growth returns.
 A Strong Year  
 Capping a  
 Strong Decade
Two thousand nine was a tough year by any mea-
sure, but IBM’s performance was indicative both of 
our high-value market position and of the discipline 
we apply to our strategy and operations. Since the 
dot-com crash in 2002, we have added $12 billion 
to IBM’s pre-tax profit base, increased our pre-tax 
margin 2.5 times, quadrupled our earnings per 
share and more than doubled our free cash flow. 
Cumulatively, we have generated about $80 billion 
of free cash flow.
 
Our strong 2009 continued this record of 
superior performance:
margins: IBM’s gross profit margin rose for 
the sixth consecutive year — to 45.7 percent, up 
9.2 points since 2003. Our pre-tax income margin 
rose to 18.9 percent. Both margins are at their 
highest in more than a decade. We achieved this by 
driving productivity and continuing to shift our 
business mix to more profitable segments. Once 
again, more than 90 percent of our segment profit 
in 2009 was from software, services and financing.
earnings per share: We have continued to 
achieve strong EPS growth. Last year was another 
record, with diluted earnings per share of $10.01, 
up 13 percent. This marked seven straight years in 
which we have grown EPS by double digits.
cash flow: IBM has consistently generated 
strong cash flow, a key indicator of real business 
performance. In 2009 our free cash flow, excluding 
the year-to-year change in Global Financing 
receivables, was $15.1 billion, an increase of 
$800 million from 2008. IBM ended 2009 with 
$14 billion of cash and marketable securities. 
revenue and income: Our revenue was 
$95.8 billion, down 5 percent at constant currency. 
Nonetheless, in 2009 we grew pre-tax income from 
continuing operations by 9 percent, to $18.1 billion, 
our highest ever.
3
A LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN


===== PAGE 6 =====
investment and return to shareholders: 
Our superior cash flow has enabled us to invest  
in the business and to generate substantial returns 
to investors. Our 2009 cash investment was 
$1.2 billion for six acquisitions — five of them 
in key areas of software. And after investing  
$5.8 billion in R&D and $3.7 billion in net capital 
expenditures, we were able to return more than  
$10 billion to you — $7.4 billion through share 
repurchase and $2.9 billion through dividends. 
Last year’s dividend increase was 10 percent, 
marking the 14th year in a row in which we have 
raised our dividend. 
In sum, with our excellent financial position, strong 
balance sheet, solid recurring revenue, strong  
profit streams and unmatched global reach, we are 
confident about the year ahead, and beyond. 
Indeed, we achieved our 2010 objective of $10 to 
$11 in earnings per share one year early. We believe 
that we will again grow EPS by double digits this 
year, reaching at least $11. 
	
The information on pages 10 through 15 —
“A Decade of Generating Higher Value at IBM”— 
summarizes the story of our transformation,  
and describes the opportunities it has opened up  
for growth in the coming era. 
 Leading Our  
 Industry and  
 the Market  
As we enter a new decade, it’s interesting to reflect 
upon how the last one began. The conventional  
wisdom back then was that the robust IT growth of 
the go-go ’90s would continue — and even after the 
dot-com bust, most believed it would resume. It was 
thought that buyers of IT would continue to 
self-integrate — which would mean that our industry 
would remain highly disaggregated — and that 
client/server computing would become the pre-
dominant enterprise model.
	
It wasn’t unreasonable to hold these views. 
However, as we looked out, we saw a different 
picture — an undercurrent of fundamental change. 
As we worked to understand the deeper meaning  
of events, to separate the cyclical from the secular  
and to apply lessons from our own past, we came  
to believe that major shifts were underway  
that would reshape our industry and, indeed,  
the global economy:
 1. Changes in the World: The lowering of trade 
barriers, the rise of the developing world and the 
emergence of the World Wide Web were unleash-
ing the flow of work on a global scale. We believed 
these changes were powerful and irreversible, and 
that they would lead to new business models and a 
new form of the corporation itself — what we came 
to call the globally integrated enterprise. 
Since the dot-com crash in 2002,
we have added $12 billion to 
IBM’s pre-tax profit base, increased 
our pre-tax margin 2.5 times,
quadrupled our earnings per share 
and more than doubled our free 
cash flow.
4


===== PAGE 7 =====
2. Changes in Technology: At the same time, a new 
model of computing was replacing the PC-based, 
client/server approach. Computational capability 
was being put into things no one would recognize 
as computers: phones, cameras, cars, appliances, 
roadways, power lines, clothes — and even natural 
systems, such as agriculture and rivers. All of this 
was being connected through the Internet. And we 
now had the computing power, advanced analytics 
and new models (now known as “clouds”) to turn 
mountains of data into insight. As a result, the 
economic, societal and physical systems of the world 
were becoming instrumented, interconnected and 
intelligent. Our planet was becoming smarter.
3. Changes in Client Demand: Compelled by the 
new opportunities and competitive demands of 
these first two shifts, enterprises and institutions 
were no longer content with cost savings from 
off-the-shelf technologies and solutions. They now 
sought to innovate — not just in their products and 
services, but also their business processes, manage-
ment systems, policies and core business models. To 
accomplish that, they needed to integrate advanced 
technology far deeper into their operations.
Because we believed that these shifts would change 
our industry, creating winners and losers, we made 
some important decisions and got to work. We 
transformed IBM’s mix of products, services, skills 
and technologies — exiting com­moditizing busi-
nesses like PCs and hard disk drives, and making 
108 strategic acquisitions over the course of the 
decade. We amassed substantial industry expertise, 
and also re-invented the way we deploy it, shifting 
skills and decision making closer to the marketplace 
and the client. We invested significantly more in 
our teams and capabilities in emerging markets 
around the world, and we accelerated the global 
integration of IBM’s operations.
	
At the same time, we transformed our vast 
services delivery capability, applying automation, 
standardization and advanced engineering and 
management principles of the sort that prior 
generations had applied to manufacturing. We also 
rebalanced our internal R&D. Today, IBM’s portfo­
lio is built around networked, modularized and 
embedded technologies, such as service-oriented 
architecture (SOA), business intelligence and 
analytics. Of the more than 4,900 U.S. patents IBM 
received in 2009 (our 17th straight year of patent 
leadership, and a record for any company), more 
than 70 percent were for software and services.
	
That’s how the last decade played out — for our 
industry and for your company.
 The Landscape 
 for Growth 
Today, many of our competitors are emulating 
our moves. For instance, several have gone on an 
acquisition binge to get into new spaces. However, 
there is a vast difference between what your 
company has done — amassing truly differentiating 
technology and skills, and focusing on the needs 
of enterprise clients — and what others are doing, 
largely to compensate for rapidly commoditizing 
business models.
5
A LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN


===== PAGE 8 =====
	
As the new decade begins, some in our industry 
still seem to believe that history will repeat itself — 
for example, that clients will invest in IT simply 
because of product upgrade cycles. Once again, we 
have a different view. We believe that clients will 
only invest in what delivers compelling, quantifiable 
business value. We believe that the fundamental 
shifts I described earlier will continue to play out, 
and that they create a unique opportunity for IBM. 
And because of the way we have managed the 
company during the economic downturn, we have 
the flexibility to take advantage of this opportunity, 
and to invest for growth. 
	
Our investments in 2010 are focused on four 
high-potential opportunities. 
 1. Growth Markets
IBM has among the broadest global footprints of 
any corporation or institution. We serve clients 
in more than 170 countries around the world, and 
we have been deeply established within myriad 
local economies and cultures for decades. 
	
Our Growth Markets unit, established in 2008, is 
helping to capture the highest-growth opportunities 
of the world’s emerging economies. Since 2005, 
these markets have expanded their contribution 
to IBM’s geographic revenue by a point a year, 
growing at least 8 points faster than major markets 
over the last three years.
	
Going forward, both mature and emerging 
markets are building out and integrating their 
physical and digital infrastructures, and in­fusing 
the resulting systems with intelligence. More 
than $2 trillion in fiscal stimulus has already been 
earmarked by governments around the world. 
We are uniquely positioned to benefit from these 
large business and technology opportunities, and 
we are pursuing them aggressively in 2010.
2. Analytics
Data is being captured today as never before — 
both from the so-called Internet of Things (head­
ing toward trillions of connected objects) and from 
hundreds of millions of individuals using social 
media. In just three years, IP traffic is expected to 
total more than half a zettabyte. (That’s a trillion 
gigabytes — or 1 followed by 21 zeroes.) And this 
data no longer consists merely of text and numbers. 
It includes rich media of all kinds, from video and 
audio, to images, avatars, simulations and applica­
tions. Thirty percent of the data in the world today 
consists of medical images alone. 
	
All this information — the knowledge of the 
world, the flow of markets, the pulse of societies — 
can now be turned into insight through sophisticated 
mathematical models, also known as analytics. 
Where once we inferred, now we know. Where once 
we interpolated and extrapolated, now we can 
determine. The historical is giving way to the real-
time, and even the predictive.
	
IBM is moving quickly to capitalize on this 
promise. We have built the industry’s premier 
analytics practice, with 4,000 consultants, mathema­
ticians and researchers, as well as leading-edge 
software capabilities — bolstered by key acquisitions 
such as Cognos and SPSS. Our new Business 
Analytics and Optimization service line targets 
the highest-growth opportunities by delivering 
integrated analytics solutions based on the needs 
of specific industries. 
6


===== PAGE 9 =====
software and optimized systems. We have also 
established a portfolio of cloud services that clients 
can access externally from IBM or offer internally 
to users on their own premises. And because of 
IBM’s track record of integrating new technology 
paradigms like open source and the Internet into 
the enterprise, we have earned the trust of clients 
and the industry to bring reliability and security  
to what is new.
4. Smarter Planet
All of these growth strategies come together in the 
opportunity we call “smarter planet.” This is not  
a metaphor. It describes the infusion of intelligence 
into the way the world actually works, the way that 
almost anything — any person, any object, any 
process or any service, for any organization, large 
or small — can now become digitally aware, net-
worked and intelligent. This means that industries, 
infrastructures, processes, cities and entire societies 
can be more productive, efficient and responsive. 
3. Cloud and Next-Generation Data Center
As our planet becomes instrumented, interconnected 
and intelligent, the computing model is evolving 
to support it. Think of it as the industrialization of 
IT. Over the past generation, our digital infrastruc­
tures have become very complex and inefficient, 
so now we’re optimizing them through automation, 
creating systems that are highly tuned to the 
specific workloads they run and to new consump­
tion and delivery models, such as clouds. 
	
Thus, the data center is shifting from being 
a single physical place to something more like the 
Internet, a diverse set of services fueled by IT. 
This provides far more choice and flexibility, of 
particular interest to the many businesses and 
governments that want simply to consume some 
services they once built, maintained and provided 
themselves. It also makes possible things that 
were not previously so, such as modeling systemic 
risk or creating integrated healthcare records.
	
However, with these new possibilities come new 
challenges, in areas such as security. As a result, our 
clients are seeking help in architecting and building 
a new kind of highly efficient infrastructure that 
is reliable and secure, even as it integrates services 
from a variety of external sources. 
	
We have invested billions of dollars in R&D and 
acquisitions to build leadership in two key dimen­
sions of this new IT model: service management 
 We are seeing smarter systems
being implemented in every
major industry and across every
region of both the developed and
developing worlds. And they are
creating measurable economic
and societal value.
7
A LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN


===== PAGE 10 =====
• Four leading retailers have reduced supply 
chain costs by up to 30 percent, reduced 
inventory levels by up to 25 percent, and 
increased sales up to 10 percent. They’ve done 
so by analyzing customer buying behaviors, 
aligning merchandising assortments with 
demand and building end-to-end visibility 
across their entire supply chain.
This list could go on. We are quantifying the 
outcomes of hundreds and hundreds of smarter 
systems, and this measurable value gives leaders 
everywhere the confidence to try something new. 
	
So the questions we are hearing are no longer 
about whether a smarter planet is a real possibility. 
Now, there is an enormous hunger to learn how. 
CEOs, CIOs, governors and mayors are asking 
questions like: How do I infuse intelligence into 
a system for which no one enterprise or agency 
is responsible? How do I bring all the necessary 
	
We developed this agenda and strategic initiative 
in the summer of 2008, and we launched it that 
autumn — at the peak of the economic crisis. We did 
so because we believed it represented a pragmatic 
way to address the very problems that were transfix­
ing the world. 
	
After just a year, it is clear that our belief was 
correct. The idea of “smarter systems” is resonating 
with decision-makers in both the private and 
public sectors. We are seeing these systems being 
implemented in every major industry and across 
every region of both the developed and developing 
worlds. And they are creating measurable economic 
and societal value.
• In a study of 439 cities, those that employ
smarter transportation solutions — including 
ramp metering, signal coordination and 
incident management— reduced travel delays on 
average by more than 700,000 hours annually. 
• Eight hospitals and 470 primary care clinics in 
Spain implemented smarter healthcare systems 
across their facilities — and improved clinical 
results and operational efficiency by up to 
10 percent. 
• Banks and other financial services organizations 
around the world are achieving new levels 
of risk control, efficiency and customer service. 
For instance, payment processing costs at 
the Bank of Russia have been reduced by 
95 percent. And CLS Bank now handles most 
of the world’s currency exchange transactions, 
securely eliminating the risk from trades worth 
$3.5 trillion per day, and growing. 
The opportunity to make our planet 
smarter is both real and inspiring.
It has excited forward-thinking 
leaders in industry, government and 
across civil society. Encouragingly,
but not surprisingly, it has also 
energized IBMers.
8


===== PAGE 11 =====
and transformational opportunity. Everywhere 
around the world, people are eager for change.  
And every day, more and more forward-thinking 
leaders are creating tangible outcomes and benefits, 
making their parts of our planet smarter. Like 
IBMers, they recognize that we cannot wait, cannot 
let this moment pass. They know the time to act  
is now. And the way to act is together. 
	
Let me close by expressing my pride in the 
400,000 women and men of the global IBM team 
who have brought us to this point. And let me 
express my gratitude to you, our shareholders, for 
your unwavering support. I hope that you are 
pleased with how your company is performing and 
evolving. And I trust that you share our excitement 
about the role we can play in what promises to  
be a new epoch for our industry, for business and 
for our planet.
Samuel J. Palmisano
CHAIRMAN, PRESIDENT AND CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER
constituents together? How do I make the case for 
budget? How do I coalesce support with citizens? 
Where should I start?
	
In 2010, we are focusing our efforts on helping 
clients answer those questions in nine high-growth 
industries: healthcare; oil and gas; energy and 
utilities; transportation; telecommunications; retail; 
banking; government; and electronics. 
	
At the same time, we are continuing to push 
the scientific frontiers at the core of smarter 
technologies. Today, more than 25 percent of IBM 
Research’s work is on smarter planet projects, and 
we are in the process of doubling that to more than 
50 percent, in areas such as mobile Web, nanotech-
nology, stream computing, analytics and cloud. 
 Seizing  
 the  Opportunity  
 Before Us
The opportunity to make our planet smarter  
is both real and inspiring. It has excited forward-
thinking leaders in industry, government and  
across civil society in both mature and growth 
markets. Encouragingly, but not surprisingly, it has 
also energized IBMers. Over nearly a century, 
IBM’s greatest achievements have arisen from our 
distinctive culture and values. 
	
This is why, despite the current economic 
climate, I am optimistic about IBM’s prospects 
to lead the era we are now entering. Underneath  
the surface turmoil, this moment presents a rich 
The selected references in this letter to the company’s financial results related to (i) free cash flow excluding Global Financing receivables and (ii) revenue at constant currency 
are, in each case, non-GAAP financial measures. These references are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. Information 
about these references is provided in the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the SEC on January 19, 2010 (Attachment II — Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).
9
A LETTER FROM THE CHAIRMAN


===== PAGE 12 =====
A Decade of Generating
Higher Value at IBM
The IT industry and the broader 
economy were being transformed by the 
rising tide of global integration, by a 
new computing model and by new client 
needs for integration and innovation.
The global economy was integrating. 
The rapidly growing nations of the 
developing world were making historic 
investments in fundamental business 
infrastructure. And enterprises everywhere 
were seeking access to global skills 
and growth markets.
A new computing architecture was 
taking shape. It was built on pervasive 
instrumentation and interconnectivity, 
open standards, unprecedented 
computing power and advanced 
analytics. This model could transform 
oceans of data into intelligence.
Clients were shifting their focus from 
productivity to innovation. By integrating 
advanced technology far deeper into 
their business operations, they sought to 
unlock innovation and drive growth.
Segment Pre-tax Income*
($ in billions)
	
A decade ago, we 
	
saw change coming.
	
In response, we changed the mix 
	
of our businesses . . .
To capture the emerging higher-value 
opportunities, IBM divested com­
mod­itizing businesses like personal 
computers and hard disk drives, and 
strengthened its position through 
strategic investments and acquisitions in 
areas such as analytics, next-generation 
data centers, cloud computing and 
green solutions.
From 2000 to 2009 we made 108 
strategic acquisitions to strengthen 
our portfolio of products and offerings. 
This has changed our business mix 
toward higher-value, more profitable 
segments of the industry.
1
2000**
2009
1.4
1.7
8.1
8.1
2.7
1.2
4.5
2.8
24%
11%
40%
25%
7%
9%
42%
42%
Hardware
Financing
Services
Software
2
* 
** 
Sum of external segment pre-tax income not equal to IBM pre-tax income
Excludes Enterprise Investments and stock-based compensation
10


===== PAGE 13 =====
Since 2005, global integration has  
enabled IBM to cut expenses by $5 billion 
and improve service quality, speed and  
risk management in very dynamic 
environments. We have shifted resources 
toward building client relationships and 
employee skills, while positioning  
IBM for new market opportunities, such  
as business analytics, smarter cities  
and the large-scale infrastructure build- 
outs underway in emerging markets.
During this period, IBM has pioneered  
a new operating model, changing from a 
classic “multinational,” with smaller versions 
of the parent company replicated in 
countries around the world, to a global 
model with one set of processes, shared 
services and broadly distributed decision 
making, carried out by a highly skilled 
global workforce managed by a common 
set of values.
	
. . . and became a globally integrated 
	
enterprise, leveraging our scale to capture 
	
new growth.
Globally Integrated Enterprise
 (21st century )
Locates operations and functions 
anywhere in the world based on 
the right cost, skills and business 
environment.
Globally Integrated Operations 
IBM’s shift to a globally integrated model allowed the company 
to refocus our country organizations on generating growth 
and serving clients. Currently, nine out of every ten employees 
in our country organizations are focused on providing our 
clients with high-value, high-margin solutions.
In the globally integrated model, even the smallest of our 
emerging country teams can leverage IBM’s global scale and 
expertise to deliver value of a depth and breadth unattainable 
in a multinational construct.
Growth Markets Share
of Geographic Revenue
In 2009, Growth Markets—
defined as those countries
with the potential to grow at 
above-average rates over the 
coming decade—represented
 19 percent of IBM’s geographic 
revenue and grew 8 points
faster than Major Markets.
2009
19%
18%
17%
16%
15%
2005
Multinational 
 (mid-20th century )
Creates smaller versions of itself 
in countries around the world and 
makes heavy local investments.
International 
 (mid-19th to early 20th century )
Most operations are centered in 
the home country, with overseas 
sales and distribution.
3
Client-facing Operations
Major Markets
Growth Markets
Client-facing Operations
Procurement
Finance
Legal
HR
Marketing
Supply Chain
11


===== PAGE 14 =====
Pre-tax Income 
Free Cash Flow
Revenue
Divested Revenue
Note: 2005–2008 EPS reflects the adoption of amendments 
to ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share”
Financial Performance History 
($ in billions)
Earnings Per Share
$161
billion
	
As a result, IBM today is a 
	
higher-performing enterprise.
4
We have achieved record earnings per share …
Diluted earnings per share in 2009 were $10.01, marking 
seven consecutive years of double-digit growth. Pre-tax 
earnings from continuing operations were $18.1 billion, an 
increase of 9 percent.
… and record cash performance.
In 2009 our free cash flow, excluding the year-to-year change 
in Global Financing receivables, was $15.1 billion—an increase 
of $800 million from 2008. 
Our business model is more aligned with our clients’ needs and generates better financial results. 
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
00
85
83
81
89
96
91
91
99
104
96
$18.1
$15.1
0
4
8
12
16
$20
	
We have therefore been able to invest 
	
in future sources of growth and provide
	
record return to shareholders . . .
Primary Uses of Cash 
From 2000 to 2009
$65 billion
Reinvested
Acquisitions & Capital Expenditures
$96 billion
Returned to Shareholders
Share Repurchases & Dividends
. . . while continuing to invest in R&D—more 
than $56 billion from 2000 to 2009.
5
3.88
2.43
09
08
07
06
05
04
03
02
01
00
3.94
3.76
4.39
4.91
6.05
7.15
8.89
10.01
0
2
4
6
8
$10
12


===== PAGE 15 =====
Key Drivers for 2010
Historical revenue 
growth
We maintain historical 
revenue growth through 
annuity businesses, global 
presence and a balanced 
business mix.
Margin 
expansion
We focus on delivering 
higher value to clients and 
on increasing productivity, 
to improve profitability.
Share 
repurchases
Our strong cash generation 
lets us return value 
to shareholders by reducing 
shares outstanding while 
reinvesting for future growth.
Growth initiatives and 
future acquisitions
We invest in key growth 
initiatives and strategic 
acquisitions to complement 
and scale our product 
portfolio.
Retirement-related 
costs
Retirement-related costs 
vary based on market 
performance and plan 
redesigns.
Note: 2006–2008 EPS reflects the adoption of amendments to ASC 260, “Earnings Per Share”
The transformation of our company has allowed us to achieve consistently strong results since 2002. 
And despite a challenging economy over the last two years, we reached the target of our 2010 EPS 
road map of $10 to $11 one year ahead of schedule.
	
This has resulted in strong, steady performance in
	
the current economic environment . . .
6
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
$6.05
$7.15
$8.89
$10.01
$11.00
18%
24%
13%
10%
0
2
4
6
8
10
$12
$10.00
Earnings Per Share Road Map to 2010
13
A DECADE OF GENERATING HIGHER VALUE AT IBM


===== PAGE 16 =====
Smarter medical research 
Industry: Healthcare (United States)
The University of North Carolina’s smart healthcare system 
allows researchers, clinicians and administrators to analyze 
and correlate data in new ways, leading to improved patient 
outcomes and compliance, and advances in research on 
diseases such as diabetes and cancer—shortening query 
times from weeks to seconds.
Smarter microfinance 
Industry: Banking & Financial Markets (India)
Microfinance bank Grameen Koota uses an open-source 
banking platform for accurate, near-real-time information, 
enabling them to predict capital requirements; to expand their 
microloans, insurance accounts and other banking functions; 
and to grow from 70,000 to 350,000 low-income clients.
Smarter luggage 
Industry: Transportation (Netherlands)
An integrated baggage-control and passenger-check-in 
system at Amsterdam’s airport streamlines luggage 
tracking, offloading and redirection of bags on alternative 
flights, and fully automated security screening for all 
transfer baggage travelling through the airport.
Venezuela
Brazil
United States
Canada
Mexico
Argentina
	
. . . and our investments position us for growth 
	
in the next decade—the Decade of Smart.
7
We are focusing on four major growth opportunities in 2010:
Peru
Smarter oil and gas imaging
Industry: Chemicals & Petroleum (Venezuela)
3-D seismic imaging technology helped Tricon 
Geophysics cut processing time by 50 percent and 
realize a 40-percent savings in power and cooling 
infrastructure, and operational costs.
Growth markets: IBM serves clients in more than 
 170 countries around the world. In both mature and growth 
economies, infrastructure represents a major technology 
and business opportunity, with more than $2 trillion in fiscal 
stimulus earmarked by governments.
Analytics: Enabling clients to get far more value from their 
information, IBM’s new analytics service line draws on 
4,000 dedicated consultants, plus 200 mathematicians and 
advanced analytics experts in IBM Research. We have 
invested $10 billion in 14 acquisitions since 2005, creating 
seven analytics solution centers around the world.
Cloud and next-generation data center: These new models 
are enabling efficient consumption and delivery of IT-based 
services. More than 18 million people use LotusLive, IBM’s cloud-
based collaboration suite. More than 200 IBM researchers are 
working on breakthroughs in areas like cloud security and privacy.
Smarter planet: We estimate that smarter planet increases 
IBM’s addressable opportunity by 40 percent over the decade 
ahead. The sampling on this map of recent partnerships with 
more than 300 clients illustrates the reach of smarter solutions 
across industries and markets.
14


===== PAGE 17 =====
Smarter mobile phone promotions
Industry: Telecommunications (Philippines)
To hold onto existing mobile phone customers and win 
new ones, Philippine telcos must micro-target promotions for 
new services, in real time. Globe Telecom’s smart Toolbox 
has cut the preparation time for launching service promotions 
from 40 weeks to three weeks, increasing Globe’s sales by 
600 percent.
Smarter patient care 
Industry: Healthcare (People’s Republic of China)
An intelligent medical records system at the Guang Dong 
Hospital of Traditional Chinese Medicine enables sharing 
between local facilities and large hospitals and across multiple 
departments. The result? Better patient care, improved 
diagnosis and treatment—with the promise of using deep 
analytics to drive cutting-edge research in global healthcare.
India
Vietnam
Thailand
Taiwan
People’s Republic of China
Philippines 
South Korea
Japan
Turkey
Saudi Arabia
South Africa
New Zealand
Australia
Russia
Belgium
Finland
Malta
Bulgaria
Ireland
Denmark
Czech Republic
Norway
Poland
Sweden
Germany
Netherlands
France
Italy
U.K.
Spain
Slovenia
Smarter Planet 
Engagements
By industry
	 Aerospace & Defense
	 Automotive
	 Banking &	
	 	 Financial Markets
	 Chemicals & Petroleum
	 Consumer Products
	 Education
	 Electronics
	 Energy & Utilities
	 Government
	 Healthcare
	 Industrial Products
	 Insurance
	 Life Sciences
	 Media & Entertainment
	 Retail
	 Telecommunications
	 Transportation
Switzerland
U.A.E.
Singapore
Smarter global financial systems
Industry: Electronics (Japan)
Panasonic’s Global Treasury System integrates financial 
management for 600+ subsidiaries around the world.
By managing cash flow, currency exchange and settlements
as a global, in-house bank, the company has significantly 
reduced financial costs, while giving it daily financial visibility.
15
A DECADE OF GENERATING HIGHER VALUE AT IBM


===== PAGE 18 =====
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
	
	
2009	
2008
Revenue	
	
	
	
	
$  95,758	
$103,630
Net income	
	
	
	
	
$  13,425	
$  12,334
Earnings per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution	
	
	
	
	
$    10.01	
$      8.89*
	 Basic		
	
	
	
	
$    10.12	
$      9.02*
Net cash provided by operating activities	
	
	
	
	
$  20,773	
$  18,812
Capital expenditures, net	
	
	
	
	
3,747	
4,536
Share repurchase	
	
	
	
	
7,429	
10,578
Cash dividends paid on common stock	
	
	
	
	
2,860	
2,585
	 Per share of common stock	
	
	
	
	
2.15	
1.90
At December 31:	
	
	
	
	
2009	
2008
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities	
	
	
	
	
$  13,973	
$  12,907
Total assets	
	
	
	
	
109,022	
109,524
Working capital	
	
	
	
	
12,933	
6,568
Total debt	
	
	
	
	
26,099	
33,926
Total equity	
	
	
	
	
22,755	
13,584**
Common shares outstanding (in millions)	
	
	
	
	
1,305	
1,339
Market capitalization 	
	
	
	
	
$170,869	
$112,698
Stock price per common share	
	
	
	
	
$  130.90	
$    84.16
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries	
	
	
	
	
399,409	
398,455
*	 Reflects the adoption of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions 
are participating securities. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
**	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information.
Financial Highlights
16


===== PAGE 19 =====
Report of Financials
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Management Discussion
Overview	
18
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements	
18
Management Discussion Snapshot	
 19
Description of Business	
20
Year in Review	
25
Prior Year in Review	
40
Discontinued Operations 	
 47
Other Information 	
47
	
Looking Forward	
47
	
Liquidity and Capital Resources	
49
	
Critical Accounting Estimates	
52
	
Currency Rate Fluctuations	
54
	
Market Risk	
55
	
Financing Risks	
56
	
Employees and Related Workforce	
56
Global Financing	
57
REPORT OF MANAGEMENT	
62
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED 
	
PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM	
63
Consolidated Financial Statements
Earnings	
64
Financial Position	
65
Cash Flows	
66
Changes in Equity	
 67
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
A	 Significant Accounting Policies	
 70
B	 Accounting Changes	
79
C 	 Acquisitions/Divestitures	
82
D 	 Fair Value	
86
E	 Financial Instruments (Excluding Derivatives) 	
 87
F	 Inventories	
 88
G	 Financing Receivables	
 88
H	 Plant, Rental Machines and Other Property 	
 89
I	
Investments and Sundry Assets	
89
J	 Intangible Assets Including Goodwill	
89
K	 Borrowings	
90
L	 Derivatives and Hedging Transactions	
92
M	 Other Liabilities	
97
N	 Equity Activity	
98
O	 Contingencies and Commitments	
99
P	 Taxes	
101
Q	 Research, Development and Engineering	
103
R	 Earnings Per Share of Common Stock	
104
S	 Rental Expense and Lease Commitments	
104
T	 Stock-Based Compensation	
105
U	 Retirement-Related Benefits	
109
V	 Segment Information	
122
W	 Subsequent Events	
126
FIVE-YEAR COMPARISON OF SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA	
127
SELECTED QUARTERLY DATA	
128
PERFORMANCE GRAPHS	
129
BOARD OF DIRECTORS AND SENIOR LEADERSHIP	
131
STOCKHOLDER INFORMATION	
132
17


===== PAGE 20 =====
Overview
The financial section of the International Business Machines Cor­
por­ation (IBM or the company) 2009 Annual Report includes the 
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State­ments 
and the Notes to the Consolidated Financial State­ments. This 
Over­view is designed to provide the reader with some perspec­
tive regarding the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
•	 The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers 
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the com­
pany’s financial results and certain factors that may affect 
its future prospects from the perspective of the company’s 
management. The “Management Discussion Snap­shot” on 
pages 19 and 20 presents an overview of the key perfor­
mance drivers in 2009.
•	 Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 25, the Manage­
ment Discussion contains the results of operations for each 
reportable segment of the business and a discussion of the 
company’s financial position and cash flows. Other key sections 
within the Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” 
on pages 47 to 49 and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on 
pages 49 to 52. It is useful to read the Management Dis­
cussion in conjunction with note V, “Segment Information,” on 
pages 122 to 126.
•	 Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as 
if it were a standalone entity. A separate “Global Financing” 
section is included beginning on page 57. The information 
presented in this section is consistent with this separate 
company view.
•	 The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on 
pages 64 through 69. These statements provide an overview 
of the company’s income and cash flow performance and its 
financial position. 
•	 The notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Among other items, the notes contain the company’s account­
ing policies (pages 70 to 79), acquisitions and divestitures 
(pages 82 to 86), detailed information on specific items within 
the financial statements, certain contingencies and commit­
ments (pages 99 to 101), and retirement-related benefits 
information (pages 109 through 121).
•	 The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant 
currency” in the Management Discussion are made so that 
certain financial results can be viewed without the impact 
of fluctuations in foreign currency exchange rates, thereby 
facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business perfor­
mance. Financial results adjusted for currency are calculated 
by translating current period activity in local currency using 
the comparable prior year period’s currency conversion rate. 
This approach is used for all countries where the functional 
currency is the local country currency. See “Currency Rate 
Fluctuations” on page 54 for additional information.
•	 Within the financial tables in this Annual Report, certain 
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded 
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are 
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.
Discontinued Operations
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its hard disk drive 
(HDD) business to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). The HDD business 
was accounted for as a discontinued operation under generally 
accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP) and 
therefore, the HDD results of operations and cash flows have 
been removed from the company’s results of continuing opera­
tions and cash flows for the year 2007. There was no activity in 
2008 or 2009. See page 47 for additional information. 
Forward-Looking 
and Cautionary Statements
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may consti­
tute forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private 
Secur­ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. These statements involve 
a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could cause 
actual results to be materially different, as discussed more fully 
elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s filings with 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the 
company’s 2009 Form 10-K filed on February 23, 2010.
18


===== PAGE 21 =====
Management Discussion Snapshot
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
Percent/
	
	
	
Margin
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Revenue	
$  95,758	
$103,630	
(7.6)%*
Gross profit margin	
45.7%	
44.1%	
1.7 pts.
Total expense and other income	
$  25,647	
$  28,945	
(11.4)%
Total expense and other
	 income-to-revenue ratio	
26.8%	
27.9%	
(1.1) pts.
Income before income taxes	
$  18,138	
$  16,715	
8.5%
Provision for income taxes	
4,713	
  4,381	
7.6%
Net income	
$  13,425	
$  12,334	
8.8%
Net income margin	
14.0%	
11.9%	
2.1 pts.
Earnings per share of
	 common stock:
	 Assuming dilution	
$    10.01	
$      8.89+	
12.6%
Weighted-average shares 
	 outstanding:
	 Assuming dilution	
1,341.4	
1,387.8+	
(3.3)%
Assets**	
$109,022	
$109,524	
(0.5)%
Liabilities**	
$  86,267	
$  95,939++	
(10.1)%
Equity**	
$  22,755	
$  13,584++	
67.5%
*	 (5.3) percent adjusted for currency.
**	 At December 31.
+	 Reflects the adoption of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 
guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment 
transactions are participating securities. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” 
on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
++	Reflects the adoption of  the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in 
consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on 
pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
In 2009, in a difficult global economic environment, the com­
pany continued to deliver value to its clients and strong financial 
results to its investors—with profit growth driven by continued 
margin expansion, expense productivity, market share gains in 
software and systems and a continuing strong cash position. 
The company again achieved record levels of pre-tax profit, 
earnings per share and cash flow from operations—despite 
a decline in revenue. The financial performance reflected the 
strength of the company’s global model and the results of the 
strategic transformation of the business. 
	
The company’s transformation, which started at the begin­
ning of the decade, is driven by a combination of shifting the 
business mix, improving operating leverage through productivity 
and investing to capture growth opportunities.
	
The company has exited commoditizing businesses and 
remixed its portfolio to higher value areas through organic invest­
ments and acquisitions. This shift to higher value areas drives a 
more profitable mix and enables the company to better meet 
clients’ needs. In addition, the focus on global integration has 
improved productivity and efficiency. The company’s ongoing 
initiatives have reduced the fixed cost base and improved the 
operational balance point—generating more profit for each dol­
lar of revenue. The strong profit and cash base has enabled the 
company to make significant investments for growth and return 
capital to shareholders. Key areas of investment include Smarter 
Planet solutions, business analytics, growth market opportuni­
ties and new computing models such as cloud computing. 
The strategic transformation of the company has enabled the 
company to deliver strong financial performance since the last 
recession in 2002, including the difficult environment in 2008 
and 2009, and has positioned the business for the future.
	
For the year, the company delivered $10.01 in diluted earn­
ings per share, an increase of 12.6 percent year to year. This 
was the seventh consecutive year of double-digit earnings per 
share growth. In 2007, the company developed a road map for 
growth with an earnings per share objective for 2010 of $10 
to $11 per share. With its performance in 2009, the company 
achieved this objective one year early.
	
Total revenue decreased 7.6 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) compared to 2008. Revenue from the growth markets 
declined 3.5 percent, but increased 1 percent at constant cur­
rency. Performance was led by the BRIC countries of Brazil, 
Russia, India and China which increased 4 percent, adjusted for 
currency. Segment performance was driven by Software which 
decreased 3.1 percent year to year (1 percent adjusted for 
currency) and Global Technology Services which declined 4.9 
percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). Within Software per­
formance was led by key branded middleware which increased 
revenue 1.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared 
to the prior year. 
	
Gross profit margins improved reflecting the shift to higher 
value businesses and the continued focus on productivity 
and cost management. The consolidated gross profit margin 
increased 1.7 points versus 2008 to 45.7 percent. This was the 
sixth consecutive year of improvement in the gross profit margin. 
Gross profit margin performance by segment and the impact to 
the consolidated gross margin was as follows:
	
Gross	
Yr.-to-Yr.	
Consolidated
	
Margin	
Change	
Impact
Global Technology Services	
35.0%	
2.4 pts.	
0.8 pts.
Global Business Services	
28.2%	
1.5 pts.	
0.4 pts.
Software 	
86.0%	
0.6 pts.	
0.6 pts.
Systems & Technology	
37.8%	
(0.2) pts.	
0.1 pts.
Global Financing	
47.5%	
(3.8) pts.	
(0.1) pts.
Total expense and other income decreased 11.4 percent in 2009 
versus 2008. The year-to-year drivers were approximately:
•	 Operational expense, (9) points
•	 Currency, (4) points 
•	 Acquisitions, 1 point
19


===== PAGE 22 =====
Pre-tax income grew 8.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
18.9 percent, the highest level in more than a decade. Net income 
increased 8.8 percent reflecting a slight improvement in the tax 
rate. The effective tax rate for 2009 was 26.0 percent, compared 
with 26.2 percent in 2008. 
	
Diluted earnings per share improved 12.6 percent reflecting 
the strong growth in net income and the benefits of the common 
stock repurchase program. In 2009, the company repurchased 
approximately 69 million shares of its common stock. Diluted 
earnings per share of $10.01 increased $1.12 from the prior year 
driven by the following factors:
•	 Revenue decrease at actual rates: 	
$(0.68)
•	 Gross margin increase of 1.7 points: 	
$0.85
•	 Expense productivity: 	
$0.58
•	 Tax rate decrease of 0.2 points: 	
$0.03
•	 Common stock repurchases: 	
$0.34
At December 31, 2009, the company’s balance sheet and 
liquidity positions remained strong. Cash on hand was $12,183 
million. Total debt decreased $7,826 million year to year, and 
the company generated $20,773 million in operating cash flow 
in 2009. The company has consistently generated strong cash 
flow from operations and also continues to have access to 
additional sources of liquidity through the capital markets and 
its global credit facility.
	
Key drivers in the company’s balance sheet and total cash 
flows are highlighted below.
	
Total assets decreased $502 million (decreased $3,885 mil­
lion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2008, driven by: 
•	 Decreases in cash and cash equivalents ($558 million) and 
total receivables ($1,301 million); and
•	 Lower deferred taxes ($2,888 million) and intangible assets 
($365 million), partially offset by;
•	 Increased goodwill ($1,964 million) and prepaid pension 
assets ($1,401 million); and
•	 Higher level of marketable securities ($1,625 million).
The company had $13,973 million in cash and marketable secu­
rities at December 31, 2009.
	
Total liabilities decreased $9,672 million (decreased $11,213 
million adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2008 driven by:
•	 Lower total debt ($7,826 million);
•	 Decrease in retirement-related benefit obligations ($3,500 
million), partially offset by;
•	 Higher tax liabilities ($1,083 million); and
•	 Increased deferred income ($997 million).
Total equity of $22,755 million increased $9,170 million from the 
prior year-end balance as a result of:
•	 Higher retained earnings ($10,546 million); 
•	 Increase in foreign currency translation adjustments ($1,732 
million);
•	 Increase in retirement-related items ($1,727 million) and com­
mon stock ($2,682 million), partially offset by;
•	 Increased treasury stock ($7,072 million); and
•	 Increased net unrealized losses on cash flow derivatives 
($556 million).
The company generated $20,773 million in cash flow provided 
by operating activities, an increase of $1,961 million, compared 
to 2008, primarily driven by a decrease in receivables ($1,857 
million). Net cash used in investing activities of $6,729 million 
was $2,556 million lower than 2008, primarily due to the prior 
year Cognos acquisition and the core logistics operations dives­
titure in 2009, partially offset by the year-to-year impacts related 
to marketable securities and other investments.
	
Net cash used in financing activities of $14,700 million was 
$2,866 million higher, primarily due to debt repayments ($5,019 
million), partially offset by lower common stock repurchases 
($3,150 million) in 2009 versus 2008.
	
Total Global Services signings were $57,094 million, flat (up 2 
percent adjusted for currency) versus 2008. The estimated Global 
Services backlog was $137 billion at December 31, 2009, up 
$7 billion ($1 billion adjusted for currency) versus the prior year-
end balance.
	
In January 2010, the company disclosed that it is expecting 
earnings of at least $11.00 per diluted share for the full year 2010.
	
For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review” 
section on pages 25 through 39.
Description of Business
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with the 
SEC on February 23, 2010 for a more detailed version of this Des­
cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
	
The company creates business value for clients and solves 
business problems through integrated solutions that leverage 
information technology and deep knowledge of business pro­
cesses. IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s 
operational costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate 
revenue. These solutions draw from an industry leading portfolio 
of consulting, delivery and implementation services, enterprise 
software, systems and financing. 
Strategy
Despite the volatility of the information technology (IT) industry 
over the past decade, IBM has consistently delivered superior 
performance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings 
per share growth. The company has shifted its business mix, 
exiting commoditized segments while increasing its presence 
in higher-value areas such as services, software and integrated 
solutions. As part of this shift, the company has acquired over 
100 companies this past decade, complementing and scaling its 
portfolio of products and offerings.
20


===== PAGE 23 =====
	
IBM’s clear strategy has enabled steady results in core busi­
ness areas, while expanding its offerings and addressable markets. 
The key tenets of this strategy are:
•	 Deliver value to enterprise clients through integrated busi­
ness and IT innovation
•	 Build/expand strong positions in growth initiatives
•	 Shift the business mix to higher-value software and services
•	 Become the premier globally integrated enterprise
These priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending away from 
“point products” and toward integrated solutions, as companies 
seek higher levels of business value from their IT investments. 
IBM has been able to deliver this enhanced client value thanks to 
its industry expertise, understanding of clients’ businesses and 
the breadth and depth of the company’s capabilities. 
	
IBM’s growth initiatives, like its strengthened capabilities, align 
with these client priorities. These initiatives include Smarter Planet 
and Industry Frameworks, Growth Markets, Business Analytics 
and Cloud Computing. Each initiative represents a significant 
growth opportunity with attractive profit margins for IBM.
Smarter Planet and Industry Frameworks
Smarter Planet is an overarching strategy that highlights IBM’s 
differentiated capabilities and generates broad-based demand 
for the company’s products and services. Smarter Planet 
encapsulates IBM’s view of enterprise IT’s next major revolution: 
the instrumentation and integration of the world’s processes 
and infra­structures—from energy grids and pipelines to supply 
chains and traffic systems. The massive amount of data these 
systems are generating can now be captured and analyzed. 
This infusion of intelligence enables more efficiency, productivity 
and responsiveness.
	
Clients seeking these “smart” solutions value IBM’s deep 
industry and process expertise, powerful back-end systems and 
data analytics, complex systems integration capability and unique 
research capacity. 
	
IBM’s Industry Frameworks create a flexible software foun­
dation for developing, acquiring and deploying smart industry 
solutions. Each framework supports multiple solutions, enabling 
fast, efficient and tailored capabilities in support of clients’ busi­
ness needs. These frameworks represent a proven technique for 
the company to engage with its clients, driving sustained growth 
and high business value. They cover a wide variety of industries 
and domains, most of which are directly tied to Smarter Planet.
Growth Markets
The company has benefited from its investments over the past 
several years in growth markets. The focus now is on geographic 
expansion of IBM’s presence; on specific industry verticals of the 
highest impact and opportunity; on countries’ build-out of infra­
structure aligned with their national agendas; and on creating 
markets and new business models to serve the different require­
ments that exist in these emerging countries.
	
In order to support this growth, IBM is continuing to invest 
significantly in these markets to expand capacity and develop 
talent. At the same time, IBM is expanding and benefiting from 
large teams of talent with global missions of delivery. The com­
pany continues to deepen its research and development (R&D) 
teams to design for the unique challenges and rapid growth 
facing these markets.
Business Analytics and Optimization
Business optimization through the application of advanced ana­
lytics is emerging as another major category of business value. 
It succeeds earlier generations of back-office automation, basic 
enterprise resource planning and traditional business intelligence. 
Advanced analytics allow clients to see patterns in data they 
could not see before, understand their exposure to risk and pre­
dict the outcomes of business decisions with greater certainty.
	
IBM’s approach is end-to-end, providing cross-enterprise as 
well as industry-based analytics solutions. IBM has established 
the Business Analytics and Optimization practice, leveraging IBM 
consulting capabilities and software products, along with sys­
tems and research assets. IBM’s breadth of expertise uniquely 
positions the company for revenue and profit growth.
Cloud Computing
“Cloud” is an emerging consumption and delivery model for many 
IT-related services. Clients are attracted to its improved econom­
ics, flexibility and user experience. Traditional enterprise IT will 
increasingly integrate with these new cloud deployments, deliv­
ered as services via the Internet (also known as public clouds) or 
behind a firewall (private clouds). In discussions with enterprise 
clients, most are initially focused on private cloud implementa­
tions, the middle ground between the traditional enterprise IT and 
public clouds. 
	
IBM is helping clients determine how to leverage cloud com­
puting to achieve business advantage. The company provides a 
full set of capabilities, from support in designing and implement­
ing cloud solutions, to services for running and managing them 
if desired. IBM is applying its deep experience in critical areas 
such as security, reliability and innovation to deliver differentiated 
value. The company is also investing in new cloud initiatives tai­
lored to particular industries, in conjunction with its partners and 
clients, to deliver cloud business services directly to the market. 
By providing deployment choice, optimizing solutions based 
on workload characteristics and delivering complete service 
management capabilities, IBM is positioned as the leading cloud 
service and infrastructure provider for enterprises. 
21


===== PAGE 24 =====
Business Model
The company’s business model is built to support two principal 
goals: helping clients succeed in delivering business value by 
becoming more innovative, efficient and competitive through the 
use of business insight and IT solutions; and providing long-term 
value to shareholders. The business model has been developed 
over time through strategic investments in capabilities and tech­
nologies that have the best long-term growth and profitability 
prospects based on the value they deliver to clients.
	
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, 
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad 
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide busi­
ness insight and solutions for the company’s clients.
	
The business model is flexible, adapting to the continuously 
changing market and economic environment. The company con­
tinues to divest commoditizing businesses and strengthen its 
position through strategic investments and acquisitions in higher 
value segments like business analytics, smarter planet and cloud 
computing. In addition, the company has transformed itself into 
a globally integrated enterprise which has improved overall pro­
ductivity and is driving investment and participation in the world’s 
fastest growing markets. As a result, the company is a higher 
performing enterprise today than it was several years ago.
	
The business model, supported by the company’s long-term 
financial model, has enabled the company to deliver consistently 
strong earnings, cash flows and returns to shareholders in chang­
ing economic environments.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations comprise: a Global Tech­nology 
Services segment; a Global Business Services segment; a Soft­
ware segment; a Systems and Technology segment; and a Global 
Finan­cing segment.
Global Services is a critical component of the company’s strategy 
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions 
to clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM 
software and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if 
a client solution requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external 
Global Services segment revenue is annuity-based, coming 
primarily from outsourcing, maintenance and custom application 
management services arrangements. The Global Services back­
log provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within 
Global Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech­
nology Services and Global Business Services.
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT infra­
structure services and business process services, delivering 
business value through the company’s global scale, standard­
ization and automation.
GTS CAPABILITIES
Strategic Outsourcing Services. Comprehensive IT outsourcing 
services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing infrastruc­
tures to ensure better quality, cost control, adaptability, security 
and compliance. IBM integrates long-standing experience in 
service management, technology and industry applications with 
new technologies, such as cloud computing and virtualization, 
to enable new capabilities for clients.
Business Transformation Outsourcing. A range of offerings from 
standardized processing platforms and Business Process Out­
sourcing through transformational offerings that deliver improved 
business results to clients through the strategic change and/or 
operation of the client’s business processes, applications and 
infrastructure.
Integrated Technology Services. Project-based portfolio of ser­
vices that enable clients to optimize their IT environments by 
driving efficiency, flexibility and productivity, while reducing costs. 
The standardized portfolio is built around key assets and pat­
ented software, and incorporates best practices and proven 
methodologies that ensure predictive quality of delivery, security 
and compliance.
Maintenance. A complete line of support services from product 
maintenance through solution support to maintain and improve 
the availability of clients’ IT infrastructure.
The GTS outsourcing businesses are supported by integrated 
worldwide delivery organizations:
Integrated Technology Delivery (ITD) is responsible for worldwide 
service delivery supporting the Strategic Outsourcing business. 
It manages the world’s largest privately-owned IT infrastructure 
with employees in over 40 countries, supporting over 450 data 
centers. ITD operates a globally integrated delivery model which 
supports regional client-facing teams by utilizing a global net­
work of competencies and centers. Each competency provides 
industry-leading, standardized, integrated tools and processes. 
By leveraging IBM’s global scale, skills and technology which is 
combined with the innovation from IBM research, clients gain 
access to leading edge, high-quality services with improved pro­
ductivity, flexibility and cost.
Business Process Delivery (BPD) provides highly efficient, world-
class delivery capabilities in IBM’s business process delivery 
operations, which include Business Transformation Outsourcing, 
Business Pro­cess Outsourcing and Business Process Services. 
BPD has employees and delivery centers in over 40 countries 
worldwide.
Global Business Services (GBS) primarily provides professional 
services and application outsourcing services, delivering busi­
ness value and innovation to clients through solutions which 
leverage industry- and business-process expertise.
22


===== PAGE 25 =====
GBS CAPABILITIES
Consulting and Systems Integration. Delivery of value to clients 
through consulting services for client-relationship management, 
financial management, human-capital management, business 
strategy and change, and supply-chain management. In 2009, 
the company announced the creation of a new consulting service 
line dedicated to the market for advanced business analytics and 
business optimization.
Application Management Services. Application development, 
management, maintenance and support services for packaged 
software, as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is 
delivered through the company’s global resource capabilities, 
industry knowledge and the standardization and automation of 
application development.
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating sys­
tems software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate 
systems, processes and applications across a standard soft­
ware platform. IBM middleware is designed on open standards, 
making it easier to integrate disparate business applications, 
developed by different methods and implemented at different 
times. Operating systems are the software engines that run 
computers. Approximately two-thirds of external software seg­
ment revenue is annuity-based, coming from recurring license 
charges and ongoing subscription and support from one-time 
charge (OTC) arrangements. The remaining one-third relates to 
OTC arrangements in which clients pay one, up-front payment 
for a perpetual license. Typically, arrangements for the sale of OTC 
software include one year of subscription and support. Clients 
can also purchase ongoing subscription and support after the 
first year, which includes product upgrades and technical support.
SOFTWARE CAPABILITIES
WebSphere Software. Delivers capabilities that enable clients to 
integrate and manage business processes across their organiza­
tions with the flexibility and agility they need to respond to changing 
conditions quickly. With a services-oriented architecture (SOA), 
businesses can more easily link together their fragmented data and 
business processes to extract value from their existing technology.
Information Management Software. Enables clients to integrate, 
manage and use their information to gain business value and 
improve their outcomes. Solutions include advanced database 
management, enterprise content management, information inte­
gration, data warehousing, business analytics and intelligence, 
performance management and predictive analytics.
Tivoli Software. Helps clients manage their technology and busi­
ness assets by providing visibility, control and automation across 
their organizations. With solutions for identity management, data 
security, storage management and the ability to provide automa­
tion and provisioning of the datacenter, Tivoli helps build the 
infrastructure needed to make the world’s systems—from trans­
portation to water, energy and telecommunications—run smarter.
Lotus Software. Enables businesses to connect people and 
processes for more effective communication and increased pro­
ductivity through collaboration, messaging and social networking 
software. By remaining at the forefront of collaboration tools, 
Lotus helps organizations reap the benefits of social networking 
and other Web 2.0 modalities.
Rational Software. Supports software development for both IT 
and embedded system solutions with a suite of Application 
Lifecycle Management products. Jazz, Rational’s technology 
platform, transforms the way people work together to build 
software, making software delivery more collaborative, produc­
tive and transparent.
Operating Systems. Software that manages the fundamental 
processes that make computers run.
Systems and Technology provides clients with business solu­
tions requiring advanced computing power and storage capa­
bilities. Approximately 55 percent of Systems and Technology’s 
server and storage sales transactions are through the company’s 
business partners; approximately 45 percent are direct to end-
user clients. In addition, Systems and Technology provides leading 
semiconductor technology, products and pack­aging solutions to 
clients and for IBM’s own advanced tech­nology needs.
SYSTEMS AND TECHNOLOGY CAPABILITIES
Systems. A range of general purpose and integrated systems 
designed and optimized for specific business, public and sci­
entific computing needs. These systems—System z, converged 
System p and System x—are typically the core technology in 
data centers that provide required infrastructure for business and 
institutions. Also, these systems form the foundation for IBM’s 
integrated offerings, such as IBM Smart Business Storage Cloud, 
IBM Smart Analytics Cloud, IBM Smart Analytics System and 
IBM CloudBurst. IBM servers use both IBM and non-IBM micro­
processor technology and operating systems. All IBM servers 
run Linux, a key open-source operating system. 
Storage. IBM provides data storage products and solutions that 
allow clients to retain and manage rapidly growing, complex 
volumes of digital information. These solutions address critical 
client requirements for information retention and archiving, data 
deduplication, availability and virtualization, and security and com­
pliance. The portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and tape 
storage systems and software, including the next-generation, 
ultra-scalable disk storage system XIV.
Retail Store Solutions. Point-of-sale retail systems (network con­
nected cash registers) as well as solutions which connect them 
to other store systems.
23


===== PAGE 26 =====
Microelectronics. Semiconductor design and manufacturing 
primarily for use in IBM systems and storage products and for 
sale to external clients.
Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems, 
software and services. Global Financing invests in financing 
assets, leverages with debt and manages the associated risks 
with the objective of generating consistently strong returns on 
equity. The primary focus on the company’s offerings and clients 
mitigates many of the risks normally associated with a financing 
company. Global Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowl­
edge of its client base and a clear insight into the products and 
services that are being financed. This combination allows Global 
Financing to effectively manage two of the major risks (credit and 
residual value) that are normally associated with financing. 
GLOBAL FINANCING CAPABILITIES
Client Financing. Lease and loan financing to end users and 
internal clients for terms generally between two and seven years. 
Internal financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ 
long-term client service contracts. Global Financing also fac­
tors a selected portion of the company’s accounts receivable, 
primarily for cash management purposes. All internal financing 
arrangements are at arm’s-length rates and are based upon 
market conditions.
Commercial Financing. Short-term inventory and accounts receiv­
able financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products. 
Remarketing. The sale and lease of used equipment to new or 
existing clients both externally and internally. This equipment is 
primarily sourced from the conclusion of lease transactions. Exter­
nally remarketed equipment revenue represents sales or leases to 
clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equipment revenue pri­
marily represents used equipment that is sold or leased internally 
to the Systems and Technology and Global Services segments. 
The Systems and Technology segment may also sell the equip­
ment that it purchases from Global Financing to external clients. 
IBM Worldwide Organizations
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s 
delivery of value to its clients:
•	 Sales and Distribution
•	 Research, Development and Intellectual Property
•	 Integrated Supply Chain
Sales and Distribution
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 
170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic 
distribution of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution 
organization manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated 
country-based operating units focused on delivering client value. 
Within these units, client relationship professionals work with 
integrated teams of consultants, product specialists and deliv­
ery fulfillment teams to improve clients’ business performance. 
These teams deliver value by understanding the clients’ busi­
nesses and needs, and then bring together capabilities from 
across IBM and an extensive network of Business Partners to 
develop and implement solutions.
	
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s 
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for 
local clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and 
timely investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic 
units align industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. 
IBM extends capabilities to mid-market client segments by lever­
aging industry skills with marketing, ibm.com and local Business 
Partner resources.
	
In 2008, the company implemented a new growth markets 
organization to increase its focus on the emerging markets 
around the world that have market growth rates greater than 
the global average—countries within Southeast Asia, Eastern 
Europe, the Middle East and Latin America. The company’s 
major markets include the United States (U.S.), Canada, the 
United Kingdom (U.K.), France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Denmark, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Austria, Belgium, Finland, Greece, Ireland, 
the Netherlands, Portugal, Cyprus, Norway, Israel, Spain, the 
Bahamas and the Caribbean region.
	
The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, 
occurs in industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors:
•	 Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance
•	 Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences
•	 Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive, Chemical 
and Petroleum, Electronics
•	 Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail, Travel and Trans­
portation
•	 Communications: Telecommunications, Media and Entertain­
ment, Energy and Utilities
•	 General Business: Mainly companies with fewer than 1,000 
employees
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s R&D operations differentiate the company from its com­
petitors. IBM annually invests approximately $6 billion for R&D, 
focusing on high-growth, high-value opportunities. As a result 
of innovations in these and other areas, IBM was once again 
awarded more U.S. patents in 2009 than any other company, 
the 17th consecutive year IBM has been the patent leader. 
IBM’s 4,914 patents in 2009 were the most U.S. patents ever 
awarded to one company in a single year. Consistent with the 
shift in the com­pany’s business mix, approximately 70 percent 
of these patents were for software and services. The company 
will continue to actively seek intellectual property protection for 
its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other initiatives 
designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership and 
promote innovation.
24


===== PAGE 27 =====
Year in Review
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2009 versus 2008 reportable segment results. The analysis of 2008 versus 2007 reportable segment 
results is on pages 40 to 45.
	
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue and gross margin results.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Percent/	
 Change
	
	
	
	
	
Margin	
Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
Change	
for Currency
Revenue:
Global Technology Services	
	
	
$37,347	
$  39,264	
(4.9)%	
(2.0)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
35.0%	
32.6%	
2.4 pts.
Global Business Services	
	
	
17,653	
19,628	
(10.1)%	
(8.1)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
28.2%	
26.7%	
1.5 pts.
Software	
	
	
21,396	
22,089	
(3.1)%	
(0.8)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
86.0%	
85.4%	
0.6 pts.
Systems and Technology	
	
	
16,190	
19,287	
(16.1)%	
(14.9)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
37.8%	
38.1%	
(0.2) pts.
Global Financing	
	
	
2,302	
2,559	
(10.0)%	
(7.3)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
47.5%	
51.3%	
(3.8) pts.
Other		 	
	
	
869	
803	
8.3%	
11.7%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
11.6%	
13.4%	
(1.8) pts.
Total revenue	
	
	
$95,758	
$103,630	
(7.6)%	
(5.3)%
	 Gross profit	
	
	
$43,785	
$  45,661	
(4.1)%
	 Gross margin	
	
	
45.7%	
44.1%	
1.7 pts.
	
In addition to producing world-class systems, software and 
technology products, IBM innovations are also a major differen­
tiator in providing solutions for the company’s clients through its 
services businesses. The company’s investments in R&D also 
result in intellectual property (IP) income of approximately $1 
billion annually. Some of IBM’s technological breakthroughs are 
used exclusively in IBM products, while others are licensed and 
may be used in either/both IBM products and/or the products 
of the licensee. While the company’s various proprietary intel­
lectual property rights are important to its success, IBM believes 
its business as a whole is not materially dependent on any 
particular patent or license, or any particular group of patents or 
licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number of patents, 
which vary in duration, relating to its products. Licenses under 
patents owned by IBM have been and are being granted to oth­
ers under reasonable terms and conditions.
Integrated Supply Chain
Consistent with the company’s work with clients to transform 
their supply chains for greater efficiency and responsiveness to 
global market conditions, the company continues to derive busi­
ness value from its own globally integrated supply chain, thereby 
providing a strategic advantage for the company to create value 
for clients. IBM leverages its supply-chain expertise for clients 
through its supply-chain business transformation outsourcing 
service to optimize and help operate clients’ end-to-end supply-
chain processes, from procurement to logistics.
	
IBM spends approximately $35 billion annually through its 
supply chain, procuring materials and services globally. The 
supply, manufacturing and logistics and customer fulfillment 
operations are integrated in one operating unit that has opti­
mized inventories over time, improved response to marketplace 
opportunities and external risks and converted fixed costs to 
variable costs. Simplifying and streamlining internal processes 
has improved operations, sales force productivity and processes.
25


===== PAGE 28 =====
In 2009, Global Services and Software increased as a per­
centage of total segment revenue and total segment pre-tax 
income, with Global Services and Software each contributing 
42 percent of segment pre-tax income. These changes reflect 
the company’s continuing transformation and the remix of its 
business—both aimed at market segments that present the 
best long-term opportunities.
Global Services
The Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, had combined 
revenue of $55,000 million, a decrease of 6.6 percent (4 per­
cent adjusted for currency) in 2009 when compared to 2008. 
Services revenue performance was supported by its annuity 
revenue base, but also reflected the challenges in the more 
economically sensitive consulting business.
	
Total Global Services signings of $57,094 million decreased 0.2 
percent (increased 2 percent adjusted for currency). Outsourcing 
signings of $33,014 million increased 8.8 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency). Outsourcing signings growth was broad 
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
Change	
for Currency
Global Services external revenue:	
	
	
$55,000	
$58,891	
(6.6)%	
(4.0)%
Global Technology Services	
	
	
$37,347	
$39,264	
(4.9)%	
(2.0)%
	 Strategic Outsourcing	
	
	
19,340	
20,183	
(4.2)	
(1.5)
	 Integrated Technology Services	
	
	
8,771	
9,283	
(5.5)	
(2.9)
	 Business Transformation Outsourcing	
	
	
2,280	
2,550	
(10.6)	
(6.1)
	 Maintenance	
	
	
6,956	
7,250	
(4.1)	
(1.1)
Global Business Services	
	
	
$17,653	
$19,628	
(10.1)%	
(8.1)%
based across all the major geographies and in each business area: 
Strategic Outsourcing, Business Transformation Outsourcing and 
Application Outsourcing. Consulting and Systems Integration and 
Integrated Technology Services signings were $24,081 million, 
a decrease of 10.2 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). 
The estimated Global Services backlog at actual currency rates 
was $137 billion at December 31, 2009, an increase of $7 billion 
($1 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2008 and 
an increase of $2 billion ($3 billion adjusted for currency) from 
September 30, 2009. 
	
The Global Services segments delivered a combined pre-tax 
profit of $8,092 million in 2009, a growth of 11.0 percent versus 
2008, and expanded pre-tax margin 2.3 points to 14.1 percent. 
The improved margin was a result of the structural changes made 
to services delivery over the past several years. The services 
global delivery capabilities have proven to be dynamic and flexible 
enough to deal with very tough market conditions. Overall, the 
Global Services business delivered strong margin and signings 
performance in a difficult economic climate.
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue as a percentage of total segment external revenue and each 
reportable segment’s pre-tax income as a percentage of total segment pre-tax income.
	
Revenue	
Pre-tax Income*
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008
Global Technology Services	
	
	
39.4%	
38.2%	
28.6%	
26.3%
Global Business Services	
	
	
18.6	
19.1	
13.2	
15.3
	 Total Global Services	
	
	
58.0	
57.3	
41.9	
41.6
Software	
	
	
22.5	
21.5	
41.9	
40.4
Systems and Technology	
	
	
17.1	
18.8	
7.3	
8.8
Global Financing	
	
	
2.4	
2.5	
8.9	
9.2
Total 	 	
	
	
100.0%	
100.0%	
100.0%	
100.0%
*	 Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate 
items; see note V, “Segment Information” for additional information.
26


===== PAGE 29 =====
	
Global Technology Services revenue of $37,347 million 
decreased 4.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 
versus 2008. Total GTS signings of $34,703 million in 2009 were 
flat (increased 3 percent adjusted for currency) versus 2008. 
Outsourcing signings of $25,507 million increased 4.3 percent 
(8 percent adjusted for currency) with growth of 7 percent in the 
major markets and 14 percent in the growth markets, adjusted 
for currency. Integrated Technology Services signings of $9,196 
million decreased 10.3 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Strategic Outsourcing (SO) revenue decreased 4.2 percent (1 
percent adjusted for currency). SO revenue performance, adjusted 
for currency, was consistent throughout the year, although impac­
ted by reduced volumes in the existing client base. SO signings 
increased 1.8 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) when 
compared to 2008. Revenue trends in outsourcing should 
improve in 2010 as a result of the 2009 signings performance.
	
Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue decreased 
5.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 
2008. Revenue performance largely reflects recent signings 
performance which continued to be impacted by declines in 
OEM offerings, as the ITS portfolio shifts to higher value, higher 
margin offerings. 
	
Business Transformation Outsourcing (BTO) revenue de­creased 
10.6 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) year to year and 
reflects declines in client business volumes in a slower economic 
environment and an increased focus on deal selectivity. BTO 
signings increased 21.9 percent (26 percent adjusted for cur­
rency) in 2009 compared to 2008. 
	
Global Business Services revenue decreased 10.1 percent 
(8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 driven primarily by a 
double-digit decline in Consulting and Systems Integration rev­
enue. Total signings in GBS decreased 0.4 percent (increased 1 
percent adjusted for currency). Application Outsourcing signings 
increased 27.1 percent (25 percent adjusted for currency), illus­
trating the strong value proposition Application Outsourcing can 
provide to clients with compelling cost savings. Consulting and 
Systems Integration signings decreased 10.2 percent (8 percent 
adjusted for currency).
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Global Services:
	 Global Technology Services:
	 	 External gross profit	
$13,081	
$12,802	
2.2%
	 	 External gross profit margin	
35.0%	
32.6%	
2.4 pts.
	 	 Pre-tax income	
$  5,537	
$  4,607	
20.2%
	 	 Pre-tax margin	
14.3%	
11.3%	
3.0 pts.
	 Global Business Services:
	 	 External gross profit	
$  4,979	
$  5,238	
(4.9)%
	 	 External gross profit margin	
28.2%	
26.7%	
1.5 pts.
	 	 Pre-tax income	
$  2,555	
$  2,681	
(4.7)%
	 	 Pre-tax margin	
13.8%	
13.0%	
0.8 pts.
GTS gross profit margin improved 2.4 points to 35.0 percent in 
2009 and expanded in all lines of business when compared to 
2008. Strategic Outsourcing gross margin improved for the fifth 
con­secutive year, while also improving overall service delivery 
quality. This has been accomplished through a disciplined and 
inno­vative approach to delivery focused on both labor and non-
labor productivity actions. GTS has been executing a strategy to 
deliver services out of key global delivery centers using consis­
tent global delivery methods and processes. The delivery centers 
are also improving labor utilization with analytics and by applying 
supply chain tools and techniques to the labor base. Integrated 
Technology Services gross margin improved as the result of mix­
ing the portfolio to more profitable labor-based services. Business 
Transformation Outsourcing gross margin expanded as a result of 
improved deal selectivity and delivery performance. Segment pre-
tax profit increased 20.2 percent to $5,537 million with a pre-tax 
margin of 14.3 percent, an increase of 3.0 points versus 2008. 
	
GBS gross profit margin improved 1.5 points to 28.2 percent 
in 2009 with an improving margin trend throughout the year. 
Segment pre-tax profit was down 4.7 percent to $2,555 million, 
however, margin improved 0.8 points year over year. Throughout 
the year, the dynamic GBS delivery model enabled solid profit 
performance in a tough economic climate. The pre-tax margin 
expansion also included improving trends throughout the year 
and was driven primarily by improved delivery center utiliza­
tion, reduced subcontractor spending and improved cost and 
expense management.
GLOBAL SERVICES SIGNINGS
The table on page 28 presents Global Services signings as 
reported. Signings at actual currency rates provide investors 
with a better view of how these signings will convert to services 
revenue and also provides better comparability to other compa­
nies in the industry who report signings using actual rates.
27


===== PAGE 30 =====
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	
Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
Change	
for Currency
Global Technology Services Signings: 
	 Outsourcing	
	
	
$25,507	
$24,446	
4.3%	
8.1%
	 ITS		 	
	
	
9,196	
10,247	
(10.3)	
(8.2)
Total	 	 	
	
	
$34,703	
$34,693	
0.0%	
3.3%
Global Business Services Signings: 
	 Application Outsourcing	
	
	
$  7,506	
$  5,905	
27.1%	
25.1%
	 Consulting & Systems Integration	
	
	
14,885	
16,584	
(10.2)	
(7.9)
Total	 	 	
	
	
$22,391	
$22,488	
(0.4)%	
0.8%
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the 
revenue value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services 
contract. Signings are used by management to assess period 
performance of Global Services management. There are no third-
party standards or requirements governing the calculation of 
signings. The calculation used by management involves estimates 
and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commitment, 
including the type and duration of the agreement, and the pres­
ence of termination charges or wind-down costs. 
	
Signings include SO, BTO, ITS and GBS contracts. Contract 
extensions and increases in scope are treated as signings only 
to the extent of the incremental new revenue value. Maintenance 
is not included in signings as maintenance contracts tend to be 
more steady state, where revenues equal renewals.
	
Backlog includes SO, BTO, ITS, GBS and Maintenance. 
Backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work under 
contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog esti­
mates are subject to change and are affected by several factors, 
including terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, peri­
odic revalidations and adjustments for revenue not materialized.
	
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as 
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the 
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be 
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or 
coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
Software
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	
Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008*	
Change	
for Currency
Software external revenue:	
	
	
$21,396	
$22,089	
(3.1)%	
(0.8)%
	 Middleware	
	
	
$17,125	
$17,305	
(1.0)%	
1.4%
	 	 Key Branded Middleware	
	
	
12,524	
12,392	
1.1	
3.4
	 	 	 WebSphere Family	
	
	
	
	
10.5	
12.7
	 	 	 Information Management	
	
	
	
	
(0.5)	
1.9
	 	 	 Lotus	
	
	
	
	
(10.0)	
(7.9)
	 	 	 Tivoli	
	
	
	
	
2.9	
5.1
	 	 	 Rational	
	
	
	
	
0.2	
2.7
	 	 Other middleware	
	
	
4,602	
4,912	
(6.3)	
(3.5)
	 Operating systems	
	
	
2,163	
2,337	
(7.4)	
(4.9)
	 Product Lifecycle Management	
	
	
739	
960	
(23.0)	
(21.7)
	 Other		
	
	
1,369	
1,488	
(8.0)	
(5.8)
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
28


===== PAGE 31 =====
Software revenue of $21,396 million decreased 3.1 percent 
(1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 compared to 2008. 
Adjusted for currency, growth in the Key Branded Middleware 
products was offset by decreased revenue in other compo­
nents of the software portfolio. Overall, the software business 
has continued to perform well in an uncertain environment. The 
company’s recent acquisitions increased revenue and the com­
pany is continuing to invest in capabilities that accelerate the 
development of new market opportunities like business analytics 
and smarter planet. 
	
Key Branded Middleware revenue increased 1.1 percent (3 
percent adjusted for currency) and represented 59 percent of 
total Software revenue, an increase of 2 points from 2008. The 
company continued to solidify its lead in the middleware market, 
gaining share for nine consecutive quarters. Organic invest­
ments and acquisitions in middleware capabilities continue to 
result in it becoming a larger portion of the software portfolio and 
improving the overall software revenue growth rate. Growth in 
2009, adjusted for currency, was led by WebSphere and Tivoli. 
	
WebSphere Family revenue increased 10.5 percent (13 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 with strong performance 
throughout the year. Application Servers, which provide custom­
ers with a secure and resilient infrastructure for mission-critical 
business applications, grew 5 percent adjusted for currency. 
Business Integration software had double-digit revenue growth 
in 2009, including strong contribution from ILOG, a company 
acquired in the fourth quarter of 2008. 
	
Information Management revenue decreased 0.5 percent 
(increased 2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus the 
prior year, with revenue growth, adjusted for currency, in both 
Information Management solutions and infrastructure offerings. 
Cognos and InfoSphere software, two key components of the 
business analytics area, both had double-digit revenue growth 
adjusted for currency. The acquisition of SPSS, which was com­
pleted in early October, 2009, further expands the company’s 
business analytics capabilities. 
	
Lotus revenue decreased 10.0 percent (8 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2009. Demand for Lotus software was impacted 
by customer consolidations and downsizing throughout 2009.
	
Tivoli revenue increased 2.9 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2009 when compared to 2008, driven by growth 
in storage software. Tivoli storage revenue grew consistently 
throughout the year as customers managed their rapidly grow­
ing storage data.
	
Rational revenue increased 0.2 percent in 2009 as reported 
and increased 3 percent adjusted for currency versus 2008. 
Rational’s integrated software tools improve the speed, qual­
ity and efficiency for customers with software development 
projects. Telelogic contributed strong revenue growth in 2009 
and extended the brand’s reach into the systems development 
market opportunity.
	
Revenue from Other middleware products decreased 6.3 
percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus the 
prior year. This software product set includes more mature prod­
ucts which provide a more stable flow of revenue. 
	
Operating systems product revenue decreased 7.4 percent 
(5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 compared to 2008, 
reflecting declining sales in all system brands. 
	
Product Lifecycle Management revenue decreased 23.0 
percent (22 percent adjusted for currency). The company and 
Dassault Systemes (DS) signed an agreement in October 2009 
under which DS intends to acquire the company’s sales and 
client support operations encompassing DS’s Product Lifecycle 
Management software application portfolio, as well as customer 
contracts and related assets. The company expects to record a 
gain when this transaction is completed, which is anticipated in 
the first quarter of 2010.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Software:
	 External gross profit	
$18,405	
$18,859	
(2.4)%
	 External gross profit margin	
86.0%	
85.4%	
0.6 pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$  8,095	
$  7,075	
14.4%
	 Pre-tax margin	
33.6%	
28.5%	
5.2 pts.
Software gross profit of $18,405 million in 2009 decreased 2.4 
percent versus 2008, driven primarily by declining revenue. 
Gross profit margin expanded 0.6 points to 86.0 percent in 
2009. The Software segment delivered $8,095 million of pre-tax 
profit in 2009, an increase of 14.4 percent versus 2008. The 
segment pre-tax profit margin expanded 5.2 points to 33.6 per­
cent. The breadth of the software portfolio, the strong recurring 
revenue stream and the actions taken to improve efficiency and 
productivity combined to deliver strong profit results.
29


===== PAGE 32 =====
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
Change	
for Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue:	
	
	
$16,190	
$19,287	
(16.1)%	
(14.9)%
	 System z	
	
	
	
	
(28.7)%	
(27.5)%
	 Converged System p	
	
	
	
	
(10.7)	
(9.2)
	 System x	
	
	
	
	
(4.6)	
(3.3)
	 System Storage	
	
	
	
	
(12.0)	
(11.0)
	 Retail Store Solutions	
	
	
	
	
(25.6)	
(23.6)
	 	 Total Systems	
	
	
	
	
(15.9)	
(14.6)
	 Microelectronics OEM	
	
	
	
	
(15.1)	
(15.2)
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 16.1 percent (15 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 2008 reflecting 
the challenges that transactional-based businesses are facing in 
the current environment. While revenue performance declined in 
2009, the rate of decline improved sequentially in the third and 
fourth quarters. The company gained share in System p, System 
x, blades, and in System Storage external disk and tape storage 
during 2009.
	
System z revenue decreased 28.7 percent (28 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 2008. MIPS (millions of 
instructions per second) shipments decreased 13 percent in 
2009 versus the prior year. MIPS increased 4 percent in 2009 
on a two year compounded growth rate and this performance is 
consistent with what the company would expect at this point in 
the product cycle. In the third quarter, the company introduced 
System z offerings called System z Solution Editions, which 
expanded the platform’s value proposition to both new and 
existing clients. In 2010 the company will be releasing the next 
generation System z mainframe product.
	
Converged System p revenue decreased 10.7 percent (9 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 2008. Low-end 
server revenue declined 43 percent, midrange server revenue 
decreased 2 percent and high-end server revenue decreased 
10 percent versus 2008. Although revenue declined, the com­
pany continued to gain market share in the midrange and high 
end of the product line by helping clients increase efficiency in 
their data centers by leveraging consolidation and virtualization 
results. This has led to seven consecutive quarters of share 
gains. In addition, in 2009, the company increased sales gener­
ated by UNIX competitive displacements to over $600 million. In 
February 2010, the company introduced several new models of 
the next generation POWER systems, which will deliver 2 to 3 
times the performance, within the same energy envelope. 
	
System x revenue decreased 4.6 percent (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2009 versus 2008. Revenue performance in the 
second half of the year was strong with third quarter revenue 
increasing 0.6 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency) and 
fourth quarter revenue increasing 36.8 percent (30 percent 
adjusted for currency) compared to the prior year periods. 
System x server revenue declined 4 percent, primarily driven by 
decreased low-end server revenue (10 percent) in 2009 versus 
2008. Blades revenue increased 11 percent in 2009 versus 
2008. System x server has gained share in four consecutive 
quarters. The company’s improved sales model and enhanced 
product offerings were the key contributors to this performance.
	
System Storage revenue decreased 12.0 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 2008. Total disk revenue 
decreased 9 percent versus 2008. These decreases were driven 
by declines in midrange disk revenue of 18 percent and decreased 
Enterprise Disk revenue of 6 percent. In the fourth quarter, the 
company introduced the DS8700 product, the latest addition to 
the DS8000 line of high-end disk systems. The company’s stor­
age acquisitions, XIV and Diligent, had strong performance. XIV 
has added over 400 new customers since the acquisition. Tape 
revenue declined 20 percent in 2009 versus 2008. 
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue decreased 25.6 percent (24 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 2008, reflecting 
continued weakness in the retail sector.
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 15.1 percent (15 
percent adjusted for currency), in 2009 versus 2008. Although 
2009 revenue declined, second half revenue improved signifi­
cantly over first half performance with performance essentially 
flat compared to the prior year. The company’s 45 nanometer 
technology is in production and on track to drive the launch of 
the POWER7 systems in 2010.
30


===== PAGE 33 =====
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Systems and Technology:
	 External gross profit	
$6,127	
$7,341	
(16.5)%
	 External gross profit margin	
37.8%	
38.1%	
(0.2) pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$1,419	
$1,550	
(8.5)%
	 Pre-tax margin	
8.3%	
7.7%	
0.6 pts.
The decrease in external gross profit for 2009 versus 2008 was 
primarily driven by lower revenue. 
	
Overall, gross margin decreased 0.2 points versus the prior 
year. Margin improvements in System x, converged System p 
and System z were offset by impacts due to product mix and a 
margin decline in Microelectronics. 
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased 8.5 
percent in 2009 when compared to 2008 driven by lower reve­
nue. Pre-tax margin increased 0.6 points in 2009 versus the prior 
year, reflecting the focus on cost and expense management and 
improving productivity.
Global Financing
See page 57 for an analysis of Global Financing’s segment results.
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the 
company also measures revenue performance on a geographic 
basis. The following geographic, regional and country-specific 
revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed 
separately below.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2009	
2008	
Change	
for Currency
Total revenue:	
	
	
$95,758	
$103,630	
(7.6)%	
(5.3)%
Geographies:	
	
	
$93,477	
$100,939	
(7.4)%	
(5.1)%
	 Americas	
	
	
40,184	
42,807	
(6.1)	
(5.1)
	 Europe/Middle East/Africa	
	
	
32,583	
37,020	
(12.0)	
(5.7)
	 Asia Pacific	
	
	
20,710	
21,111	
(1.9)	
(3.7)
Major markets	
	
	
	
	
(8.2)%	
(6.4)%
Growth markets	
	
	
	
	
(3.5)%	
1.2%
	 BRIC countries	
	
	
	
	
0.7%	
4.3%
Geographic revenue decreased 7.4 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency) to $93,477 million in 2009 when compared to 
2008, with relatively consistent performance, adjusted for cur­
rency, across the geographies. Revenue from the growth markets 
decreased 3.5 percent (increased 1 percent adjusted for currency) 
and revenue from the major markets decreased 8.2 percent 
(6 percent adjusted for currency). While the economic environment 
slowed globally in 2009, revenue growth, adjusted for currency, in 
the growth markets remained approximately 8 points higher than 
the major markets. The company has been investing to capture 
the opportunity in the emerging markets as these countries build 
out their public and private infrastructures. The growth markets 
contributed 19 percent of the geographic revenue in 2009, 1 point 
higher versus 2008. Within the BRIC countries, revenue increased 
0.7 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) led by growth in 
China, India and Brazil, adjusted for currency. 
	
Americas revenue decreased 6.1 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2009. Within the major market countries, the 
U.S. declined 6.5 percent and Canada decreased 7.1 percent 
(1 percent adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America 
growth markets decreased 3.4 percent (increased 1 percent 
adjusted for currency) led by growth in Brazil (increased 3 per­
cent adjusted for currency). 
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 12.0 
percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 when compared 
to 2008. Revenue decreased in the major market countries with 
year-to-year declines in the U.K. of 13.6 percent (increased 1 
percent adjusted for currency), Germany 10.3 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency), France 11.6 percent (7 percent adjusted 
for currency), Italy 11.3 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) 
and Spain 12.6 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). 
31


===== PAGE 34 =====
	
Asia Pacific revenue decreased 1.9 percent (4 percent adjus­
ted for currency) year over year. Revenue in the Asia Pacific 
growth markets decreased 2.4 percent (increased 3 percent 
adjusted for currency), led by growth in China and India. China 
revenue increased 10 percent, adjusted for currency, as the 
company leveraged its broad portfolio to provide comprehensive 
solutions to clients. India revenue increased 6 percent, adjusted 
for currency. Japan revenue decreased 1.4 percent (10 percent 
adjusted for currency).
	
The company continues to see growing opportunity glob­
ally—much of which is outside the traditional IT opportunity—to 
help its clients drive efficiency in their physical infrastructures. 
	
OEM revenue of $2,281 million in 2009 declined 15.2 
percent (15 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2008 
driven by reduced demand year over year in the technology 
OEM business. Year-to-year revenue performance improved in 
this business across the second half of 2009.
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Total expense and other income	
$25,647	
$28,945	
(11.4)%
Expense to Revenue 	
26.8%	
27.9%	
(1.1) pts.
The key drivers year to year in total expense and other income 
were approximately:
•	 Operational expense, (9) points
•	 Currency, (4) points 
•	 Acquisitions, 1 point
In 2009, the company continued to execute its operational plan 
to increase process efficiency and productivity; leveraging the 
company’s scale and global presence. The company’s efforts 
have been focused on all areas of the business—from sales 
efficiency, supply chain management and service delivery to 
the global support functions. The company’s cost and expense 
base (approximately $80 billion) provides ample opportunity for 
savings and the company yielded approximately $3.7 billion in 
cost and expense savings in 2009. The company’s initiatives 
have contributed to an improved operational balance point and 
the improvements in margins and profit. As a result, the com­
pany is able to continue to invest in capabilities that will differen­
tiate the company in the future and accelerate the development 
of new market opportunities.
	
For additional information regarding total expense and other 
income, see the following analyses by category.
SELLING, GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008*	
Change
Selling, general and 
	 administrative — base	
$18,056	
$19,967	
(9.6)%
Advertising and promotional expense	
1,252	
1,259	
(0.6)
Workforce reductions 	
474	
737	
(35.7)
Amortization expense —
	 acquired intangibles	
285	
306	
(6.9)
Retirement-related expense	
322	
326	
(1.2)
Stock-based compensation	
417	
484	
(13.9)
Bad debt expense	
147	
306	
(52.0)
Total		 	
$20,952	
$23,386	
(10.4)%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation. 
Total Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense decreased 
10.4 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2009 versus 
2008. Overall, the decrease was driven by reductions in opera­
tional expense (down 9 points) as the company continues to 
focus on disciplined expense management, while investing 
for future growth. Currency impacts also drove a year-to-year 
decline (down 3 points), partially offset by acquisition-related 
spending (up 1 point). Workforce reductions expense decreased 
$264 million, primarily due to actions taken in the fourth quarter 
of 2008, reflecting workforce actions in Japan ($120 million) and 
other ongoing skills rebalancing that is a regular element of the 
company’s business model. Bad debt expense decreased $159 
million primarily driven by reductions in specific reserve require­
ments and lower accounts receivable balances in 2009 versus 
2008. The company’s accounts receivable provision coverage is 
2.0 percent, flat from a year ago.
OTHER (INCOME) AND EXPENSE
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008*	
Change
Foreign currency transaction 
	 (gains)/losses	
$    (1)	
$ 328	
NM
Gains on derivative instruments	
(12)	
(26)	
(53.4)%
Interest income	
(94)	
(343)	
(72.6)
Net losses/(gains) from securities
	 and investment assets	
112	
(52)	
NM
Net realized gains from certain
	 real estate activities	
(5)	
(26)	
(82.6)
Other		 	
(352)	
(179)	
96.8
Total		 	
$(351)	
$(298)	
17.7%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful
32


===== PAGE 35 =====
Other (income) and expense was income of $351 million in 
2009, an increase in income of $53 million year to year. The 
increase was driven by several key factors: the $298 million gain, 
reflected in Other, from the core logistics operations divestiture; 
increased foreign currency transaction gains of $329 million; 
offset by less interest income of $249 million due to lower rates; 
less gains from securities transactions of $162 million due to 
Lenovo equity sales in 2008; and a 2009 loss provision related to 
a joint venture investment of $119 million, also reflected in Other.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND ENGINEERING
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Research, development 
	 and engineering 
Total		 	
$5,820	
$6,337	
(8.2)%
The company continues to invest in research and development, 
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities. 
Total Research, development and engineering (RD&E) expense 
decreased 8.2 percent in 2009 versus 2008; adjusted for cur­
rency, expense decreased 6 percent in 2009. The decrease in 
spending, adjusted for currency, was driven by continued process 
efficiencies and reductions in discretionary spending, partially off­
set by the impact of acquisitions. RD&E investments represented 
6.1 percent of total revenue in 2009, flat compared to 2008.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND CUSTOM DEVELOPMENT INCOME
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Sales and other transfers 
	 of intellectual property	
$   228	
$   138	
65.5%
Licensing/royalty-based fees	
370	
514	
(28.0)
Custom development income	
579	
501	
15.5
Total		 	
$1,177	
$1,153	
2.1%
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may 
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing 
of divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and 
the timing of new patents and know-how development. There 
were no significant individual IP transactions in 2009 or 2008.
INTEREST EXPENSE
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Interest expense 
Total		 	
$402	
$673	
(40.3)%
The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower debt 
balances in 2009 versus 2008. Total debt at December 31, 2009 
was $26.1 billion; a decline of $7.8 billion of primarily non-Global 
Financing debt. Interest expense is presented in cost of financ­
ing in the Consolidated State­ment of Earnings if the related 
external borrowings are to support the Global Financing external 
business. Overall interest expense for 2009 was $1,109 million, 
a decrease of $353 million versus 2008.
Stock-Based Compensation
Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $558 million 
decreased $101 million compared to 2008. The decrease was 
principally the result of a reduction in the level of stock option 
grants ($159 million), offset by an increase related to restricted 
and performance-based share units ($58 million). The year-to-
year change was reflected in the following categories: reductions 
in cost ($22 million), RD&E expense ($12 million), and SG&A 
expense ($67 million).
	
See note T, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 105 to 
109 for additional information on stock-based incentive awards.
Retirement-Related Benefits 
The following table presents the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings within the category (e.g., cost, SG&A, 
RD&E) relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008*	
Change
Defined benefit and contribution
	 pension plans cost	
$1,065	
$1,076	
(1.1)%
Nonpension postretirement plans costs	
350	
363	
(3.6)
Total		 	
$1,415	
$1,439	
(1.7)%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation. 
33


===== PAGE 36 =====
Overall retirement-related benefit costs decreased $24 million 
versus 2008. Total plan costs decreased $142 millon year-to-
year, driven by lower defined contribution plans cost of $160 
million compared to 2008. This decrease was offset by higher 
costs for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage. 
During the year ended December 31, 2009, the company paid 
$140 million for mandatory pension insolvency insurance cover­
age in certain non-U.S. countries, an increase year to year of 
$117 million driven primarily by premiums paid in Germany. While 
not related to the IBM Plans, all companies with plans in Germany 
and several other countries are subject to these charges.
	
Retirement-related plan costs decreased approximately $16 
million in cost, $4 million in SG&A expense and $3 million in 
RD&E expense.
	
See note U, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 109 
through 121 for additional information on these plans and the 
factors driving the year-to-year change in total cost. 
Acquired Intangible Asset Amortization
The company has been investing in targeted acquisitions to 
increase its capabilities in higher value businesses. The following 
table presents the total acquired intangible asset amortization 
included in the Consol­idated Statement of Earnings. See note 
J, “Intangible Assets Including Goodwill,” on pages 89 and 90 
for additional information.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Cost: 
	 Software (Sales)	
$160	
$173	
(7.5)%
	 Global Technology Services (Services)	
33	
32	
2.2
	 Systems and Technology (Sales)	
11	
8	
27.0
Selling, general and
	 administrative expense	
285	
306	
(6.9)
Total		 	
$489	
$520	
(6.0)%
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2009 was 26.0 percent, compared 
with 26.2 percent in 2008. The 0.2 point decrease was primarily 
driven by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax income, 
the absence of the 2008 tax cost impacts associated with the 
intercompany transfer of certain intellectual property and the 
agreements reached regarding the completion of the U.S. federal 
income tax examination for the years 2004 and 2005, includ­
ing the associated income tax reserve redeterminations. These 
benefits were offset by a decrease in 2009 in the utilization of 
foreign tax credits.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during 
the period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis 
of the weighted-average number of shares of common stock 
outstanding plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares 
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. 
Dilutive potential common shares include outstanding stock 
options, share awards and convertible notes.
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Earnings per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution	
 $10.01	
$ 8.89*	
12.6%
	 Basic		
$10.12	
$ 9.02*	
12.2%
Weighted-average shares 
	 outstanding (in millions): 
	 Assuming dilution	
 1,341.4	
1,387.8*	
(3.3)%
	 Basic		
1,327.2	
1,369.4*	
(3.1)%
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments 
granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. See 
note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2009 and December 
31, 2008 were 1,305.3 million and 1,339.1 million, respectively. 
The average number of common shares outstanding assuming 
dilution was 46.4 million shares lower in 2009 versus 2008. The 
decrease was primarily the result of the common stock repur­
chase program. See note N, “Equity Activity,” on pages 98 and 
99 for additional information regarding common stock activities. 
Also see note R, “Earnings Per Share of Common Stock,” on 
page 104.
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2009, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
position remain strong. Cash on hand at year end was $12,183 
million. Total debt of $26,099 million decreased $7,826 million 
from prior year-end levels, primarily as a result of the repayment 
of debt issued in support of the 2007 accelerated share repur­
chase program. The commercial paper balance at December 
31, 2009 was $235 million, down $233 million from December 
31, 2008. In 2009, the company generated $20,773 million in 
cash from operations, an increase of $1,961 million compared 
to 2008. The company has consistently generated strong cash 
flow from operations and continues to have access to additional 
sources of liquidity through the capital markets and its $10 billion 
global credit facility.
34


===== PAGE 37 =====
	
Consistent with accounting standards, the company remea­
sures the funded status of its retirement and postretirement 
plans at December 31. The funded status is measured as the 
difference between the fair value of the plan assets and the ben­
efit obligation and is recognized in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. At December 31, 2009, primarily as a result 
of improved returns on plan assets, the overall net underfunded 
position decreased $4,667 million from December 31, 2008, to 
a net underfunded position of $13,818 million. This change is 
primarily reflected in prepaid pension assets and retirement and 
nonpension postretirement benefit obligations which increased 
$1,401 million and decreased $3,500 million, respectively, from 
year-end 2008 levels. Due to the improvement in the equity 
markets in 2009, the return on the U.S. Personal Pension Plan 
assets was 11 percent, compared to a negative 15 percent in 
2008. The company’s asset return in the non-U.S. plans was 
approximately 14 percent compared to a negative 21 percent in 
2008. At December 31, 2009, the company’s qualified defined 
benefit plans worldwide were 99 percent funded with the U.S. 
qualified Personal Pension Plan 101 percent funded.
	
In addition, total equity increased $9,170 million, net of tax, 
primarily as a result of an improvement in retained earnings of 
$10,546 million driven by current year net income, partially offset 
by net stock transactions which declined $4,390 million primarily 
due to common stock repurchases.
	
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing 
business are a significant part of the company’s financial posi­
tion. The financial position amounts appearing on page 65 
are the consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The 
amounts appearing in the separate Global Financing section 
on pages 57 through 61 are supplementary data presented to 
facilitate an understanding of the Global Financing business.
Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Current assets	
	
$48,935	
$49,004
Current liabilities	
	
36,002	
42,435
Working capital	
	
$12,933	
$  6,568
Current ratio	
	
1.36	
1.15
Working capital increased $6,365 million compared to the prior 
year primarily as a result of a net decrease in current liabilities. 
The key drivers are described below:
	
Current assets decreased $68 million due to:
•	 An increase of $1,066 million in cash and cash equivalents 
and marketable securities (see Cash Flow analysis below 
and on page 36); partially offset by; 
•	 A decrease of $1,541 million in short-term receivables, offset 
by a currency benefit of $779 million, driven by short-term 
financing receivables due to lower volumes;
•	 A decrease of $353 million in prepaid expenses and other 
current assets primarily resulting from:
	
– a decrease of $500 million in derivative assets as a result of 
changes in foreign currency rates primarily driven by instru­
ments in cash flow hedging relationships; partially offset by;
	
– an increase of approximately $236 million in services pre­
paid and deferred transition costs; and
	
– a currency benefit of $135 million. 
Current liabilities decreased $6,433 million as a result of:
•	 A decrease in short-term debt of $7,068 million primarily 
driven by:
	
– $12,123 million in payments; partially offset by;
	
– reclasses of $2,282 million from long-term to short-term 
debt to reflect maturity dates; and
	
– $3,502 million in new debt issuances. 
•	 A decrease of $1,357 million in other accrued expenses and 
liabilities primarily due to:
	
– a decrease of $508 million in derivative liabilities as a result 
of changes in foreign currency rates primarily for certain 
economic hedges;
	
– a decrease of $349 million in workforce reduction accru­
als; and
	
– a decrease of $218 million in deferred tax liabilities; partially 
offset by;
•	 An increase of $1,083 million in taxes payable as a result of 
a reclass from noncurrent liabilities related to uncertain tax 
benefits and higher pre-tax income;
•	 An increase of $606 million in deferred income mainly driven 
by a currency impact of approximately $329 million; and
•	 An increase of $423 million in accounts payable including a 
currency impact of $131 million.
Cash Flow
The company’s cash flow from operating, investing and financ­
ing activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows on page 66, is summarized in the following table. These 
amounts include the cash flows associated with the Global 
Financing business.
35


===== PAGE 38 =====
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Net cash provided by/(used in):
	 	 Operating activities	
	
$ 20,773	
$ 18,812
	 	 Investing activities	
	
(6,729)	
(9,285)
	 	 Financing activities	
	
(14,700)	
(11,834)
Effect of exchange rate changes
	 on cash and cash equivalents	
	
98	
58
Net change in cash and cash equivalents	
	
$     (558)	 $  (2,250)
Net cash from operating activities for 2009 increased $1,961 
million as compared to 2008 driven by the following key factors:
•	 An increase in cash provided by accounts receivable of 
$1,857 million, driven by Global Financing receivables due to 
lower volumes in 2009;
•	 Lower payments resulted in a benefit in accounts payable of 
$1,030 million year to year;
•	 Tax refunds of approximately $710 million; partially offset by:
•	 Higher retirement-related funding of $875 million;
•	 Derivative instruments in cash flow hedging relationships rep­
resenting a use of cash of $247 million in the current year in 
comparison to a source of cash of $176 million in 2008; and
•	 Higher payments for workforce rebalancing actions of $377 
million.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $2,556 million on 
a year-to-year basis driven by: 
•	 A decrease of $5,119 million in cash used for acquisitions 
primarily driven by the acquisition of Cognos in 2008; 
•	 A decrease in cash used in net capital spending of $704 
million driven by a decline in rental additions and lower 
invest­ment requirements in the Strategic Outsourcing and 
Microelectronics businesses; and
•	 An increase in cash from divestitures of $329 million as a 
result of the Geodis transaction in 2009; partially offset by:
•	 The net impact of purchases and sales of marketable securi­
ties and other investments that resulted in a use of cash of 
$2,005 million in the current year in comparison to a source 
of cash in 2008 of $1,510 million.
Net cash used in financing activities increased $2,866 million 
compared to 2008 as a result of:
•	 An increase of $5,019 million in net cash payments used to 
retire debt; 
•	 A decrease of $721 million in cash generated by other com­
mon stock transactions primarily due to lower stock option 
exercises; partially offset by: 
•	 Lower common stock repurchases of $3,150 million.
Within total debt, on a net basis, the company utilized $7,463 
million in net cash to retire debt versus $2,444 million in net 
cash used in 2008. The net cash used to retire debt in 2009 
was comprised of: $13,495 million in cash payments to settle 
debt and net payments of $651 million in short-term borrow­
ings, partially offset by $6,683 million of new debt issuances. 
See note K, “Borrowings,” on pages 90 to 92 for a listing of the 
company’s debt securities.
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Noncurrent assets	
	
$60,087	
$60,520
Long-term debt	
	
$21,932	
$22,689
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt)	
	
$28,334	
$30,815*
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in con­
solidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 
to 82 for additional information.
The decrease in noncurrent assets of $433 million compared to 
the prior year-end balance was primarily driven by:
•	 A decrease of $3,075 million in deferred taxes primarily driven 
by pension related activity;
•	 A decrease of $904 million in long-term financing receiv­
ables, offset by a currency benefit of $365 million, driven by 
maturities exceeding originations; and
•	 A decrease of $365 million in intangible assets driven by 
amortization; partially offset by:
•	 An increase of $1,964 million in goodwill primarily driven by 
a currency impact of $1,035 million and the acquisition of 
SPSS; and
•	 An increase of $1,401 million in pension assets mainly driven 
by plan contributions and pension remeasurements.
Long-term debt decreased $758 million primarily due to reclasses 
to short-term debt as certain instruments approached maturity 
($2,282 million); offset by new net debt issuances ($1,885 million).
	
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, decreased $2,481 
million primarily driven by:
•	 A decrease of $3,500 million in retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligations primarily driven by pension 
remeasurements and plan contributions; partially offset by:
36


===== PAGE 39 =====
•	 An increase in deferred income of $392 million including a 
currency impact of $117 million; 
•	 An increase in executive compensation plan accruals of $300 
million primarily due to improvement in market returns; and 
•	 An increase of $200 million in deferred tax liabilities.
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored 
and strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and 
liability profile. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Total company debt	
	
$26,099	
$33,926
Total Global Financing segment debt:	
	
$22,383	
$24,360
	 Debt to support external clients	
	
19,091	
20,892
	 Debt to support internal clients	
	
3,292	
3,468
The Global Financing business provides funding predominantly 
for the company’s external client assets as well as for certain 
assets under contract by other IBM units. These assets, pri­
marily for Global Services, generate long-term, stable revenue 
streams similar to the Global Financing asset portfolio. Based 
on their nature, these Global Services assets are leveraged con­
sistent with the balance of the Global Financing asset base. The 
debt analysis above is further detailed in the Global Finan­cing 
section on page 60.
	
Total debt decreased $7,826 million in 2009 versus 2008, 
primarily as a result of the repayment of debt issued in support 
of the 2007 accelerated share repurchase program. 
	
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-
to-capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and 
equity as management believes this is more representative of the 
company’s core business operations. This ratio can vary from 
period to period as the company manages its global cash and 
debt positions.
	
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing 
debt and equity) was 16.0 percent at December 31, 2009 com­
pared to 48.7 percent at December 31, 2008. The reduction 
was primarily driven by the decrease in non-Global Financing 
debt of $5,849 million and growth in non-Global Financing 
equity of $9,493 million from December 31, 2008 balances.
	
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2009 
was 53.4 percent versus 71.4 percent at December 31, 2008.
Equity
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008*
Equity
Total		 	
	
$22,755	
$13,584
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in con­
solidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 
to 82 for additional information.
Total equity increased $9,170 million in 2009 as a result of several 
key factors:
•	 An increase of $10,546 million in retained earnings primarily 
driven by net income of $13,425 million, partially offset by 
dividends ($2,860 million); and
•	 An increase of $3,015 million as a result of lower accumu­
lated other comprehensive income/(loss), primarily from a 
positive impact from foreign currency translation adjustments 
of $1,732 million, in addition to pension remeasurements and 
other retirement-related activities of $1,727 million; partially 
offset by deferred losses from hedging programs in the cur­
rent year of $481 million in comparison to deferred gains of 
$74 million in 2008; partially offset by:
•	 A decrease related to net stock transactions of $4,390 million, 
driven by less common stock repurchases in 2009 versus 2008.
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
Percent/
	
	
	
Margin
For the fourth quarter:	
2009	
2008	
Change
Revenue	
$27,230	
$27,006	
0.8%*
Gross profit margin	
48.3%	
47.9%	
0.4 pts.
Total expense and other income	
$  6,765	
$  7,127	
(5.1)%
Total expense and other
	 income-to-revenue ratio	
24.8%	
26.4%	
(1.5) pts.
Income before income taxes	
$  6,381	
$  5,808	
9.9%
Provision for income taxes	
1,568	
1,382	
13.5%
Net income	
$  4,813	
$  4,427	
8.7%
Net income margin	
17.7%	
16.4%	
1.3 pts.
Earnings per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution	
$    3.59	
$     3.27+	
9.8%
Weighted-average shares outstanding:
	 Assuming dilution	
1,340.7	
1,353.7+	
(1.0)%
*	 (5.5) percent adjusted for currency.
+	Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments 
granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. See 
note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
37


===== PAGE 40 =====
The fourth quarter capped off a great year for the company in 
an uncertain economic environment with financial performance 
driven by continued margin expansion, profit growth and cash 
generation. Total revenue increased 0.8 percent as reported and 
decreased 5.5 percent, adjusted for currency, versus the fourth 
quarter of 2008. Systems and Technology year-to-year revenue 
growth improved sequentially in the quarter with share gains in 
System p, System x and Storage. Software had share gains in 
WebSphere, Tivoli and Key Branded Middleware. Global Services 
revenue, adjusted for currency, was consistent with third-quarter 
performance while signings and backlog both increased year to 
year. Gross profit margin expanded 40 basis points primarily due 
to improved margins in services and systems as the company’s 
productivity initiatives continued to yield improvements in gross 
margin. The company has improved gross margin in 21 of the 
last 22 quarters. Total expense and other income decreased 5.1 
percent driven by operational expense management. Pre-tax 
income increased 9.9 percent and pre-tax margin improved 1.9 
points versus the fourth-quarter 2008. Pre-tax profit increased 
and margins expanded in every segment. Net income increased 
8.7 percent and diluted earnings per share of $3.59 increased 
9.8 percent year to year.
	
The Global Services segments combined had $14,630 mil­
lion of revenue in the fourth quarter, an increase of 2.1 percent 
(decrease of 5 percent adjusted for currency) and delivered pre-
tax profit of $2,322 million, an increase of 6.7 percent year to 
year. Total signings for Global Services in the fourth quarter were 
$18,763 million, an increase of 9.0 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) versus 2008. Signings in the quarter included 22 
deals larger than $100 million. Outsourcing signings of $11,385 
million increased 15.0 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). 
Consulting and Systems Integration and Integrated Technology 
Services signings increased 1.0 percent (decreased 6 percent 
adjusted for currency) to $7,378 million.
	
GTS revenue of $10,051 million increased 4.4 percent 
(decreased 3 percent adjusted for currency) versus the fourth 
quarter of 2008. GTS signings of $11,350 million increased 
2.8 percent (decreased 4 percent adjusted for currency) with 
outsourcing signings increasing 4.7 percent (decreased 1 per­
cent adjusted for currency), partially offset by a 2.9 percent 
decrease (10 percent adjusted for currency) in Integrated Tech­
nology Services signings. SO revenue increased 5.6 percent 
(decreased 2 percent adjusted for currency). SO signings 
decreased 9.9 percent (16 percent adjusted for currency). ITS 
revenue increased 0.2 percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted 
for currency). Revenue performance largely reflects signings 
performance which continued to be impacted by declines in 
OEM as the portfolio shifts to higher value offerings. ITS signings 
continued to be impacted by client deferrals and capital con­
straints. BTO revenue increased 7.0 percent (1 percent adjusted 
for currency) and signings increased 132.9 percent (124 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
GTS gross profit margin improved 0.9 points to 35.8 percent 
with margin expansion in all lines of business. The GTS segment 
fourth-quarter pre-tax profit was up 8.3 percent and the pre-tax 
margin improved 60 basis points to 15.0 percent from fourth-
quarter 2008.
	
GBS revenue of $4,579 million decreased 2.8 percent (9 
percent adjusted for currency) compared to the fourth-quarter 
2008. GBS signings of $7,413 million, increased 20.3 percent (13 
percent adjusted for currency), driven by a 65.4 percent increase 
(55 percent adjusted for currency) in Application Outsourcing 
signings. Consulting and Systems Integration signings increased 
3.4 percent (decreased 3 percent adjusted for currency) in the 
quarter, a significant improvement compared to third-quarter 
2009. In the fourth quarter, small deal performance improved as 
the quarter progressed, general business and distribution sec­
tors grew and the growth markets were up 34 percent, adjusted 
for currency. 
	
GBS gross profit increased 2.9 percent in the quarter with 
the gross margin improving 1.7 points to 30.3 percent. The GBS 
segment pre-tax profit increased 3.5 percent in the fourth quar­
ter and the pre-tax margin expanded 1.1 points to 16.0 percent, 
a record margin performance for the segment. Pre-tax margin 
was driven by strong utilization in the delivery centers, good sub­
contractor resource management and spending management.
	
Software revenue of $6,577 million increased 2.4 percent 
(decreased 4 percent adjusted for currency). Revenue perfor­
mance highlighted continued strength in demand in the growth 
markets, strong contributions from recent acquisitions and an 
increase in the volume of small deal activity in North America. 
Key Branded Middleware increased 6.1 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency) and represented 63 percent of total software revenue, 
an increase of 2 points year to year. WebSphere Family revenue 
increased 12.9 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) in 
the quarter. Business Process Management, Commerce and 
DataPower products all had double-digit revenue growth. ILOG 
performed well again this quarter and contributed to the overall 
WebSphere growth. Information Management increased 7.1 
percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). Business Analytics 
continues to be a key growth area and Cognos posted 
strong double-digit revenue growth in the quarter. InfoSphere 
Warehouse, which helps customers turn information into a stra­
tegic asset, also grew double digits in the quarter. Tivoli software 
revenue increased 7.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency). 
Enterprise Asset Management, which is part of the Smarter 
Planet strategy, grew over 40 percent in the growth markets, 
adjusted for currency. Tivoli storage continued its strong growth 
as customers manage their rapidly growing storage data. Data 
Protection and Storage Management had double-digit rev­
enue growth, with broad-based geography and sector growth. 
Rational revenue decreased 4.5 percent (10 percent adjusted for 
currency) and Lotus revenue decreased 5.3 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
38


===== PAGE 41 =====
	
Software gross profit increased 2.4 percent with a flat mar­
gin year to year. The Software segment delivered pre-tax profit 
of $3,058 million, an increase of 9.6 percent. The pre-tax margin 
of 41.5 percent increased 2.4 points compared to fourth-quar­
ter 2008. 
	
Systems and Technology revenue of $5,190 million decreased 
4.3 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency). The rate of year-
to-year decline improved sequentially for the second consecutive 
quarter. System z revenue decreased 26.8 percent (31 percent 
adjusted for currency). System z MIPS shipments decreased 
19 percent year to year. Volume performance was consistent 
with expectations for this point in the product cycle. Converged 
System p revenue declined 13.8 percent (18 percent adjusted 
for currency). Although revenue has declined, the brand has 
continued to gain market share, up 4 points in the quarter. In 
the fourth quarter, sales generated by UNIX competitive dis­
placements was approximately $200 million. System x revenue 
increased 36.8 percent (30 percent adjusted for currency), 
with share gains in server (3 points) and blades (6 points). The 
improved sales model and enhanced product offerings were the 
key contributors to the fourth quarter performance. Systems 
Storage revenue increased 1.4 percent (decreased 4 percent 
adjusted for currency). Total disk revenue increased 6.1 percent 
(1 percent adjusted for currency) driven by strong growth in 
midrange and XIV. Tape revenue declined 9.8 percent (15 per­
cent adjusted for currency) versus the fourth quarter of 2008. 
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 1.9 percent in the 
fourth quarter. The company’s 300 millimeter fabrication facility is 
nearing full utilization and the 45 nanometer process output was 
sold out again this quarter. 
	
Systems and Technology gross margin of 42.5 percent, 
increased 2.6 points versus the fourth quarter of 2008 with 
margin improvement in all brands. This was the highest gross 
profit margin since the fourth quarter of 2007 and was driven by 
improvements in System x server and converged System p. The 
Systems and Technology segment pre-tax profit increased 15.3 
percent to $832 million. Pre-tax margin increased 2.6 points to 
15.4 percent compared to the fourth quarter of 2008. 
	
Global Financing external revenue of $621 million decreased 
5.9 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency), driven by decreased 
financing revenue. The Global Financing segment delivered 2.0 
points of external gross margin improvement and 5.5 points of 
total pre-tax margin expansion in the fourth quarter of 2009.
	
Geographic revenue increased 0.7 percent (decreased 6 
percent adjusted for currency) with declines in all geographies, 
adjusted for currency. Revenue in the major markets decreased 
2.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and was 1 point 
weaker than third quarter performance, adjusted for currency. 
The U.K. had solid growth and revenue performance improved 
sequentially in Canada and Japan (adjusted for currency). 
Revenue in the growth markets increased 14.3 percent (2 
percent adjusted for currency), 9 points higher than the major 
markets, adjusted for currency. The growth markets contributed 
20 percent of the geographic revenue in the fourth quarter. The 
BRIC countries were up 18.4 percent (7 percent adjusted for 
currency) driven by India, Brazil and China. Americas revenue 
was $11,106 million, a decrease of 3.0 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency). Adjusted for currency, revenue increased 
2 percent in Latin America, while the U.S. declined 8 percent 
and Canada declined 1 percent. EMEA revenue increased 2.4 
percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted for currency) to $9,694 
million. In the major market countries, when adjusted for cur­
rency, revenue in Germany declined 8 percent, France declined 
12 percent, Italy declined 11 percent and Spain declined 11 
percent while the U.K. was up 4 percent. Asia Pacific revenue 
increased 5.7 percent (decreased 3 percent adjusted for cur­
rency) to $5,782 million, with the growth markets up 14.3 
percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and Japan down 2.8 
percent (9 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Total expense and other income decreased 5.1 percent 
compared to the fourth quarter of 2008 and the expense-to-
revenue-ratio improved 1.5 points. The decrease was driven by 
lower operational expenses (approximately 15 points), partially 
offset by 9 points due to the impact of currency and 1 point due 
to the impact of acquisitions. The company continues to execute 
its operational plan to increase efficiency and drive productiv­
ity by leveraging its scale and global presence. Initiatives such 
as globalization of support functions and services delivery and 
workforce balancing have yielded significant expense and cost 
savings. Within selling, general and administrative expense, 
workforce reduction charges decreased approximately $340 mil­
lion in the fourth quarter.
	
The company’s effective tax rate in the fourth-quarter 2009 
was 24.6 percent compared with 23.8 percent in the fourth 
quarter of 2008. The higher rate was primarily driven by higher 
utilization of tax credits in the prior year.
	
Share repurchases totaled $3,128 million in the fourth quar­
ter. The weighted-average number of diluted common shares 
outstanding in the fourth quarter of 2009 was 1,340.7 million 
compared with 1,353.7 million in the fourth quarter of 2008.
	
The company ended the quarter with $12,183 million of cash 
and cash equivalents and generated $6,448 million in cash flow 
provided by operating activities driven primarily by net income. 
Net cash from investing activities was a use of cash of $2,495 
million in fourth quarter of 2009 and Net cash from financing 
activities was a use of cash of $1,206 million.
39


===== PAGE 42 =====
Prior Year in Review
The Prior Year in Review section provides a summary of the 
company’s financial performance in 2008 as compared to 2007. 
For a detailed discussion of 2008 performance, see the 2008 
Annual Report.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
Percent/
	
	
	
Margin
For the year ended December 31:	
2008	
2007	
Change
Revenue	
$103,630	
$  98,786	
4.9%*
Gross profit margin	
44.1%	
42.2%	
1.8 pts.
Total expense and other income	
$  28,945	
$  27,240	
6.3%
Total expense and other
	 income-to-revenue ratio	
27.9%	
27.6%	
0.4 pts.
Income from continuing
	 operations before income taxes	
$  16,715	
$  14,489	
15.4%
Provision for income taxes	
4,381	
4,071	
7.6%
Income from continuing 
	 operations	
$  12,334	
$  10,418	
18.4%
Net income	
$  12,334	
$  10,418	
18.4%
Net income margin	
11.9%	
10.5%	
1.4 pts.
Earnings per share of
	 common stock:
	 	 Assuming dilution:
	 	 	 Continuing operations	
$      8.89+	
$      7.15+	
24.3%
	 	 	 Discontinued operations	
     —	
       (0.00)	
NM
	 	 Total	
$      8.89+	
$      7.15+	
24.3%
Weighted-average shares
	 outstanding:
	 Assuming dilution	
1,387.8+	
1,456.9+	
(4.7)%
Assets**	
$109,524	
$120,431	
(9.1)%
Liabilities**	
$  95,939++	 $  91,816++	
4.5%
Equity**	
$  13,584++	 $  28,615++	
(52.5)%
*	 2.3 percent adjusted for currency. 
**	 At December 31.
+	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments 
granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. 
See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
++	Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in 
consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on 
pages 79 to 82 for additional information
NM—Not meaningful
Continuing Operations
In 2008, the company performed extremely well in a difficult 
econ­omic environment, delivering record levels of revenue, pre-
tax profit, earnings per share and cash flow from operations. The 
financial performance reflected the continuing strength of the 
company’s global model and the results of the ongoing trans­
formation of the business. The key elements of the company’s 
transformation include:
•	 A continuing shift to higher value businesses;
•	 Investing for growth in the emerging markets;
•	 Global integration;
•	 Investing in innovation; and 
•	 Ongoing productivity resulting in higher profit margins.
Overall, the company capitalized on the opportunities in the global 
economies, generating approximately 65 percent of its revenue 
outside the U.S., in delivering full-year growth of 4.9 percent (2 
percent adjusted for currency). Revenue increased in all geogra­
phies, both on an as reported basis and adjusted for currency—
the revenue performance, adjusted for currency, was stable 
throughout the year as the company focused on solutions that 
meet clients’ needs. Revenue from the growth markets organiza­
tion increased 9.8 percent (10 percent adjusted for currency). In 
these markets, where the growth was driven by the infrastructure 
build-out, the company invested aggressively to capture these 
opportunities. For the full year, growth in these markets, adjusted 
for currency, was 8 points greater than the major markets.
	
Gross profit margins improved, reflecting the shift to higher 
value businesses, pricing for value and the continued focus on 
productivity and cost management. Pre-tax income from continu­
ing operations grew 15.4 percent and net income from continuing 
operations increased 18.4 percent reflecting an improve­ment in 
the tax rate. Diluted earnings per share improved 24.3 percent 
reflecting the strong growth in net income and the benefits of the 
common stock repurchase program. In 2008, the company repur­
chased approximately 90 million shares of its common stock. 
	
The increase in 2008 revenue was primarily due to:
•	 Continued strong performance from Global Technology Ser­
vices and Global Business Services with growth in all business 
lines and geographic units;
•	 Continued strong demand in the Software business, driven 
by Key Branded Middleware products, with strong contribu­
tions from strategic acquisitions; and
•	 Continued strength in the growth markets. 
The increase in income from continuing operations before 
income taxes in 2008 was primarily due to the revenue growth 
and gross profit margin improvements in the Global Services 
and Software segments.
40


===== PAGE 43 =====
	
The following is an analysis of the 2008 versus 2007 reportable segment results for Global Services, Systems and Technology and 
Software. The Global Financing segment analysis is included in the Global Financing section on pages 57 through 61. 
Global Services
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2008	
2007	
Change	
for Currency
Global Services external revenue:	
	
	
$58,891	
$54,144	
8.8%	
5.6%
Global Technology Services:	
	
	
$39,264	
$36,103	
8.8%	
5.8%
	 Strategic Outsourcing	
	
	
20,183	
18,701	
7.9	
4.7
	 Integrated Technology Services	
	
	
9,283	
8,438	
10.0	
7.5
	 Business Transformation Outsourcing	
	
	
2,550	
2,294	
11.2	
11.9
	 Maintenance	
	
	
7,250	
6,670	
8.7	
5.1
Global Business Services	
	
	
$19,628	
$18,041	
8.8%	
5.2%
Global Technology Services revenue increased 8.8 percent (6 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007 with strong 
performance across all lines of business. Total signings in GTS of 
$34,693 million increased 1 percent (flat adjusted for currency) 
led by Integrated Technology Services (ITS) signings growth of 5 
percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). Outsourcing signings 
decreased 1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Strategic Outsourcing (SO) revenue was up 7.9 percent (5 
percent adjusted for currency) with growth in all geographies, 
driven by prior year’s signings and continued growth in the base 
accounts. SO signings in 2008 increased 3 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) when compared to 2007. Signings were 
very strong in the fourth quarter (up 20 percent), as clients 
focused on the value of the SO offerings in the current environ­
ment. The initiatives around standardization, global integration 
and improved efficiency are driving improvements in quality and 
customer satisfaction which are reflected in the signings perfor­
mance and in improved profitability. 
	
ITS revenue increased 10.0 percent (7 percent adjusted for 
cur­rency) in 2008 versus 2007 led by growth in key infrastructure 
offerings such as Green Data Cen­ter and Converged Commu­
nications. ITS infrastructure offerings deliver high-value, standard­
ized, asset-based services that leverage the company’s services, 
systems and software capabilities, providing clients end-to-end 
solutions and processes that transform their businesses. 
	
Business Transformation Outsourcing (BTO) revenue increased 
11.2 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency) with growth in 
all geographies, led by Asia Pacific. The Daksh business, which 
is focused on business process outsourcing, delivered strong 
growth. BTO signings decreased 18 percent (14 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 compared to 2007. 
	
Maintenance revenue increased 8.7 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) with growth in availability services on both 
IBM and non-IBM IT equipment.
	
Global Business Services (GBS) revenue increased 8.8 per­
cent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008, with balanced 
growth across all three geographies. Revenue performance was 
led by growth in Application Management Services (12.5 percent) 
and Core Consulting (6.1 percent). Total signings of $22,488 
million increased 2 percent (decreased 1 percent adjusted for 
currency), led by a 10 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency) 
growth in Consulting and Systems Integration signings. Growth 
was driven by offerings that enable clients to reduce cost and 
conserve capital. In the second half of the year, signings for trans­
formational and compliance offerings also increased. Application 
Outsourcing signings decreased 14 percent (16 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year.
41


===== PAGE 44 =====
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2008	
2007	
Change
Global Services:
Global Technology Services:
	 External gross profit	
$12,802	
$10,800	
18.5%
	 External gross profit margin	
32.6%	
29.9%	
2.7 pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$  4,607	
$  3,557	
29.5%
	 Pre-tax margin	
11.3%	
9.4%	
1.9 pts.
Global Business Services:
	 External gross profit	
$  5,238	
$  4,240	
23.5%
	 External gross profit margin	
26.7%	
23.5%	
3.2 pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$  2,681	
$  2,064	
29.9%
	 Pre-tax margin	
13.0%	
10.7%	
2.2 pts.
GTS gross profit increased 18.5 percent compared to 2007, 
with gross profit margin improving 2.7 points. All lines of busi­
ness delivered gross margin expansion year over year driven 
by a combination of a mix to higher value offerings and an 
improved cost structure. Segment pre-tax profit increased 29.5 
percent to $4,607 million with a pre-tax margin of 11.3 percent, 
an increase of 1.9 points versus 2007. At year-end 2008, GTS 
had delivered six consecutive quarters of double-digit pre-tax 
profit growth. The margin improvement was driven primarily by 
a delivery structure that maximizes utilization and flexibility, a 
mix to higher value offerings, lower retirement-related costs and 
improved productivity.
	
GBS gross profit increased 23.5 percent to $5,238 million 
in 2008 when compared to 2007, and the gross profit margin 
improved 3.2 points. Segment pre-tax profit increased 29.9 
percent to $2,681 million with a pre-tax margin of 13.0 percent, 
an improvement of 2.2 points year over year. This was the third 
straight year of profit growth greater than 20 percent in GBS and 
demonstrates the results of a strong operating discipline and the 
benefits of a globally integrated operating model. The margin 
expansion was driven by improved utilization, cost and expense 
management, stable pricing and lower retirement-related costs.
	
At December 31, 2008, the estimated Global Services back­
log at actual currency rates was $130 billion ($117 billion adjusted 
for currency), a decrease of $6 billion ($2 billion adjusted for cur­
rency) from prior year-end levels.
Software
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2008	
2007	
Change	
for Currency
Software external revenue:	
	
	
$22,089	
$19,982	
10.5%	
8.1%
	 Middleware	
	
	
$17,305	
$15,505	
11.6%	
9.5%
	 	 Key Branded Middleware	
	
	
12,383	
10,827	
14.4	
12.5
	 	 	 WebSphere Family	
	
	
	
	
6.2	
4.5
	 	 	 Information Management	
	
	
	
	
24.5	
22.0
	 	 	 Lotus	
	
	
	
	
10.4	
7.8
	 	 	 Tivoli	
	
	
	
	
2.9	
2.1
	 	 	 Rational	
	
	
	
	
13.2	
11.6
	 	 Other middleware	
	
	
4,922	
4,678	
5.2	
2.6
	 Operating systems	
	
	
2,337	
2,319	
0.8	
(1.9)
	 Product Lifecycle Management	
	
	
960	
1,051	
(8.6)	
(14.4)
	 Other		
	
	
1,488	
1,107	
34.4	
31.3
42


===== PAGE 45 =====
Software revenue of $22,089 million increased 10.5 percent (8 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 led by growth in the Key 
Branded Middleware products and strong contributions from 
the annuity base and acquisitions. Clients continue to embed 
the company’s software in the fabric of their IT infrastructures.
	
Key Branded Middleware revenue increased 14.4 percent 
(12 percent adjusted for currency) and represented 56 percent 
of total Software segment revenue, an increase of 2 points from 
2007. When adjusted for currency, growth in 2008 was led 
by Information Management, Rational and Lotus. Strategic 
acquisitions, including Cognos and Telelogic, have extended the 
segment’s middleware capabilities.
	
WebSphere Family revenue increased 6.2 percent (5 per­
cent adjusted for currency) in 2008 and was led by growth 
in WebSphere Application Servers and WebSphere Business 
Integration software. In December 2008, the company com­
pleted the acquisition of ILOG, whose products help customers 
improve business decisions with optimization, visualization and 
business rules software. The WebSphere products provide the 
foundation for Web-enabled applications and are a key product 
set in deploying a client’s SOA. Information Management reve­
nue increased 24.5 percent (22 percent adjusted for currency) in 
2008 versus the prior year, reflecting contribution from Cognos 
and strong demand for the distributed relational database 
products. Cognos’ performance management solution helps 
customers improve decision-making across the enterprise to 
optimize business performance. 
	
Lotus revenue increased 10.4 percent (8 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 led by growth in Lotus Notes products 
as customers continue to invest to improve their workforce effi­
ciency. Lotus software is well established as a tool for providing 
improved workplace collaboration and productivity.
	
Tivoli revenue increased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 when compared to 2007. Revenue per­
formance was led by growth in Tivoli Security and Storage 
Management products. Tivoli software provides the advanced 
capabilities required to run large mission-critical environments. 
This includes security and storage software which helps cus­
tomers improve utilization and reduce costs. 
	
Rational revenue increased 13.2 percent (12 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 driven primarily by Telelogic contributions. 
Telelogic’s suite of system programming tools complements 
Rational’s IT tool set, providing a common framework for soft­
ware and systems delivery across a clients enterprise.
	
Revenue from Other middleware products increased 5.2 per­
cent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus the prior 
year. This software product set includes more mature products 
which provide a more stable flow of revenue. 
	
Other software segment revenue increased 34.4 percent (31 
percent adjusted for currency) versus 2007 reflecting continued 
growth in software-related services.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the Year Ended December 31:	
2008	
2007	
Change
Software:
	 External gross profit	
$18,859	
$17,015	
10.8%
	 External gross profit margin	
85.4%	
85.2%	
0.2 pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$  7,075	
$  6,002	
17.9%
	 Pre-tax margin	
28.5%	
26.8%	
1.7 pts.
Software segment gross profit increased 10.8 percent to $18,859 
million in 2008, driven primarily by the strong revenue growth. 
The large annuity base of this business continues to provide a 
predictable and growing profit stream. Gross profit margin was 
85.4 percent in 2008, an increase of 0.2 points versus 2007. 
The company has been investing significantly in the software 
business with good results. The Software segment contributed 
$7,075 million of pre-tax profit in 2008, an increase of 17.9 per­
cent versus 2007 while successfully integrating Cognos and 
Telelogic. Software contributed approximately 40 percent of the 
company’s segment pre-tax profit in 2008. The segment pre-tax 
profit margin increased 1.7 points to 28.5 percent. The pre-tax 
income and margin improvements have been driven primarily by 
revenue growth and increasing operational efficiencies.
43


===== PAGE 46 =====
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2008	
2007	
Change	
for Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue:	
	
	
$19,287	
$21,317	
(9.5)%	
(10.8)%
	 System z	
	
	
	
	
12.5%	
10.6%
	 Legacy System i	
	
	
	
	
(66.1)	
(67.5)
	 Converged System p	
	
	
	
	
11.2	
10.7
	 System x	
	
	
	
	
(16.9)	
(18.9)
	 System Storage	
	
	
	
	
(3.4)	
(4.7)
	 Retail Store Solutions	
	
	
	
	
(15.0)	
(15.8)
	 	 Total Systems	
	
	
	
	
(4.9)	
(6.3)
	 Microelectronics OEM	
	
	
	
	
(25.1)	
(25.4)
	 Printing Systems	
	
	
	
	
NM	
NM
NM—Not meaningful
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 9.5 percent (down 
11 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. In June 
2007, the company divested its printing business. Systems and 
Tech­nology revenue, excluding the divested printing business, 
decreased 7.8 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 
versus 2007. Total Systems revenue decreased 4.9 percent (6 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007.
	
In the current economic environment, clients are focused on 
reducing the cost of running their IT infrastructure. Virtualization, 
which provides the capability to run multiple workloads on a 
single server, is a key enabler of efficiency. System z is the lead­
ing platform for virtualization as it is able to support thousands 
of images and operate fully utilized. The company’s POWER 
architecture supports hundreds of partitions, often driving utiliza­
tion rates of over 60 percent. Both of these platforms leverage 
the entire system, from the company’s custom semiconductors 
through the software stack, to achieve these high levels of effi­
ciency and lower cost of ownership. The distributed computing 
model, which utilizes many small servers, cannot offer the same 
level of efficiency and value.
	
System z revenue increased 12.5 percent (11 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. System z revenue growth was 
particularly strong in the Americas (up 19 percent), as well as 
in the Financial Services and Industrial sectors globally. Clients 
in emerging markets also leveraged this platform’s stability and 
efficiency during 2008. MIPS (millions of instructions per second) 
shipments increased 25 percent in 2008 versus 2007, posting 
double-digit growth in each quarter, reflecting strength in both 
traditional and specialty workloads. Specialty MIPS increased 68 
percent in 2008, as clients exploit the capabilities of System z to 
bring new Linux and Java applications to this highly efficient and 
cost effective platform.
	
Converged System p revenue increased 11.2 percent (11 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007, reflecting 
solid demand for the energy efficiencies and multi-operating 
system capabilities of POWER6 technology. Clients concluded 
that POWER6 technology is the right solution for a multitude of 
workloads. The revenue growth was primarily driven by mid­
range servers which increased 32 percent and high-end servers 
which increased 3 percent in 2008 versus 2007. 
	
Legacy System i revenue decreased 66.1 percent (67 per­
cent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007, as the company 
continues to transition the System i customer base to the con­
verged POWER platform within System p. 
	
System x revenue decreased 16.9 percent (19 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. System x server revenue 
declined 15 percent and blades revenue decreased 3 percent, 
in 2008 versus 2007, respectively. The decline in server revenue 
reflects a significant slowdown in the x86 market, especially in 
the second half of 2008, as clients are virtualizing and consoli­
dating workloads onto more efficient platforms such as POWER 
and mainframe. 
	
System Storage revenue decreased 3.4 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. Total disk revenue 
was essentially flat in 2008 versus 2007. Enterprise Disk revenue 
increased 2 percent primarily due to increased demand for the 
DS8000 product, while mid-range disk revenue declined 15 per­
cent. Tape revenue declined 10 percent in 2008 primarily due 
to reduced demand and clients deciding to purchase additional 
media to expand the utilization of their existing devices. 
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue decreased 25.1 percent (25 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. The primary 
mission of this business is to provide leadership technology for 
the systems business, as demonstrated during 2008 in the new 
System z10 mainframe and POWER6 systems. 
44


===== PAGE 47 =====
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue decreased 15.0 percent (16 
percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007, reflecting 
weakness in the retail sector and a compare to a strong 2007, 
when a new programmable point-of-sale solution was being 
delivered to large clients. 
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2008	
2007	
Change
Systems and Technology:
	 External gross profit	
$7,341	
$8,468	
(13.3)%
	 External gross profit margin	
38.1%	
39.7%	
(1.7) pts.
	 Pre-tax income	
$1,550	
$2,153	
(28.0)%
	 Pre-tax margin	
7.7%	
9.6%	
(2.0) pts.
Gross margin decreased by 1.7 points versus the prior year. This 
decrease was primarily driven by margin declines in System z, 
System x and Microelectronics OEM which impacted the overall 
margin by 1.6 points, 1.3 points and 1.2 points, respectively. 
Partially offsetting these margin declines was a revenue mix 
benefit of 2.7 points due to the increased revenue in System z 
and converged System p.
	
Systems and Technology segment pre-tax margin declined 
2.0 points to 7.7 percent in 2008 reflecting the lower revenue 
and gross profit margin in 2008 versus 2007.
Global Financing
See page 57 for an analysis of Global Financing’s segment results.
Geographic Revenue
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
	
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.	 Change Adjusted
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
2008	
2007	
Change	
for Currency
Total revenue:	
	
	
$103,630	
$98,786	
4.9%	
2.3%
Geographies:	
	
	
$100,939	
$95,320	
5.9%	
3.3%
	 Americas	
	
	
42,807	
41,122	
4.1	
3.9
	 Europe/Middle East/Africa	
	
	
37,020	
34,699	
6.7	
3.2
	 Asia Pacific	
	
	
21,111	
19,501	
8.3	
2.1
Major markets	
	
	
	
	
5.1%	
1.9%
Growth markets	
	
	
	
	
9.8%	
9.9%
	 BRIC countries	
	
	
	
	
17.6%	
14.5%
Geographic revenue increased 5.9 percent (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) to $100,939 million in 2008 when compared to 2007. 
Revenue increased in all geographies in 2008, and adjusted for 
currency, revenue growth was strongest in the Americas followed 
by Europe and Asia Pacific. Revenue from the growth markets 
organization increased 9.8 percent (10 percent adjusted for cur­
rency) while growth in the more established major markets was 
5.1 percent (2 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Americas revenue increased 4.1 percent (4 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008. Revenue increased in all regions with the 
U.S. up 2.9 percent, Canada 5.6 percent (6 percent adjusted for 
currency) and Latin America 13.9 percent (11 percent adjusted 
for currency). 
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue increased 6.7 per­
cent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 when compared to 
2007. The majority of major market countries performed well led 
by Spain which grew 12.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for cur­
rency), Germany increased 10.8 percent (4 percent adjusted for 
currency) and France increased 9.0 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency). Italy increased 5.8 percent (decreased 1 percent 
adjusted for currency) while the U.K. decreased 4.9 percent 
(increased 4 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Asia Pacific revenue increased 8.3 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year. Revenue increased in the India, South 
Korea, ASEAN, Australia/New Zealand and China regions with 
combined growth of 8.1 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency). 
Japan revenue, which represented 49 percent of the Asia Pacific 
revenue base, increased 8.5 percent as reported, but decreased 
5 percent adjusted for currency in 2008 when compared to 2007. 
	
Across the geographies, aggregate revenue from the countries 
comprising the growth markets organization increased 9.8 per­
cent (10 percent adjusted for currency) in 2008 and represented 
approximately 18 percent of the company’s total geographic 
revenue. The company has continued to invest to capture new 
infrastructure spending in the growth markets. Adjusted for 
currency, growth in these markets was 8 points higher than in 
the major markets. The BRIC countries, a subset of the growth 
45


===== PAGE 48 =====
markets, together grew 17.6 percent (15 percent adjusted for 
currency), with growth in India of 25.8 percent (33 percent 
adjusted for currency), Brazil 18.3 percent (13 percent adjusted 
for currency), China 14.7 percent (8 percent adjusted for cur­
rency) and Russia 11.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
OEM revenue decreased 22.4 percent (23 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2008 when compared to 2007, driven by 
reduced demand in the Microelectronics OEM business.
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr.
For the year ended December 31:	
2008	
2007	
Change
Total expense and other income	
$28,945	
$27,240	
6.3%
Expense to Revenue	
27.9%	
27.6%	
0.4 pts.
The key drivers year to year in total expense and other income 
were approximately:
•	 Operational expense, (1) point
•	 Acquisitions, 5 points
•	 Currency, 2 points 
In 2008, the company continued to focus on productivity 
improvements in its more established markets and increased 
its investments in the growth markets. Within selling, general 
and administrative expense (SG&A), total sales and marketing 
expense increased 4 percent year to year (2 percent adjusted 
for currency). Sales and marketing expense in the growth mar­
kets increased 13 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency), 
as compared to major markets where sales and marketing 
expense increased 3 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) 
year to year. On a consolidated basis, general and administrative 
expenses, which are indirect expenses incurred in the business, 
increased 2 percent (flat at constant currency) year to year.
	
Total SG&A expense increased 6.0 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2008 versus 2007. The increase in SG&A 
was primarily due to acquisition-related spending, predominantly 
for Cognos and Telelogic, which accounted for 5 points of the 
increase, while the effects of currency accounted for 2 points. 
Workforce reductions—ongoing expense increased $387 million 
primarily due to charges recorded in the fourth quarter reflect­
ing workforce actions in Japan ($120 million) and other ongoing 
skills rebalancing that is a regular element of the company’s 
business model. In addition, bad debt expense increased $206 
million primarily driven by additional specific accounts receivable 
reserves reflecting the current economic environment in many 
industries. The company’s accounts receivable provision cover­
age at December 31, 2008 was 2.0 percent, an increase of 50 
basis points from year-end 2007. These increases were partially 
offset by lower retirement-related expense of $287 million.
	
Other (income) and expense was income of $298 million 
and $626 million in 2008 and 2007, respectively. The decrease 
in income was primarily driven by higher foreign currency trans­
action losses ($285 million) and lower interest income reflecting 
lower cash balances and the current interest rate environment 
($222 million). These decreases were partially offset by a gain 
on derivative instruments which primarily hedge foreign currency 
risks ($221 million). Included within the foreign currency hedging 
activity, the company hedges its major cross-border cash flows 
to mitigate the effect of currency volatility in its global cash plan­
ning, which also reduces volatility in the year-over-year results. 
The impact of these hedging programs is primarily reflected in 
other (income) and expense, as well as cost of goods sold. The 
impact of losses from these cash flow hedges reflected in other 
(income) and expense was $186 million, a decrease of $24 mil­
lion year to year.
	
The increase in RD&E expense of $184 million was primarily 
driven by acquisitions and investments to maintain technology 
leadership across the company’s offerings. Software spending 
increased $262 million, partially offset by lower spending in 
Systems and Technology ($54 million) and other unit spending 
($74 million). 
	
IP income of $1,153 million increased 20.4 percent in 2008, 
however, there were no significant individual IP transactions 
in 2008 or 2007. The improvement year to year was primarily 
driven by the Systems and Technology business. 
	
The increase in interest expense of $63 million to $673 
million was primarily due to the increase in debt in 2007 asso­
ciated with the financing of the accelerated share repurchase 
agreements, partially offset by lower interest rates in 2008. See 
note N, “Equity Activity,” on page 98 for additional information 
regarding the accelerated share repurchase. Overall interest 
expense, including amounts reflected in cost of financing, for 
2008 was $1,462 million, an increase of $40 million versus 2007.
46


===== PAGE 49 =====
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2008 was 26.2 percent, compared 
with 28.1 percent in 2007. The 1.9 point decrease was primarily 
driven by the 2008 net increase in the utilization of foreign and 
state tax credits (2.9 points), the benefit associated with the 
second quarter 2008 agreement reached with the U.S. Internal 
Revenue Service (IRS) regarding claims for certain tax incentives 
(1.7 points) and the benefit related to certain issues associated 
with newly published U.S. tax regulations (1.2 points). These 
benefits were partially offset by several items including the net 
impact related to the completion of the U.S. federal income tax 
examination for the years 2004 and 2005 including the asso­
ciated income tax reserve redeterminations (0.5 points), the 
second quarter 2008 tax cost associated with the intercompany 
transfer of certain intellectual property (2.8 points) and lower 
capital loss utilization in 2008 (0.7 points). The remaining items 
were individually insignificant.
Financial Position
Total assets decreased $10,907 million ($5,854 million adjusted 
for currency) primarily due to decreases in cash and cash equiv­
alents ($2,250 million), prepaid pension assets ($15,816 million), 
short-term marketable securities ($989 million) and total financ­
ing receivables ($1,233 million). These decreases were partially 
offset by increases in long-term deferred taxes ($5,757 million), 
goodwill ($3,941 million) and intangible assets ($771 million).
	
Total liabilities increased $4,123 million ($5,301 million 
adjusted for currency) driven primarily by increases in retirement 
and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations ($5,871 mil­
lion) and total deferred income ($547 million), partially offset by 
decreases in total debt ($1,349 million) and accounts payable 
($1,041 million). 
	
Total equity of $13,584 million decreased $15,030 million 
versus 2007. Net income of $12,334 million was offset by the 
effects of pension remeasurements and other retirement-related 
items ($14,856 million), common/treasury stock activity ($6,323 
million), dividends ($2,585 million) and equity translation adjust­
ments ($3,552 million). 
	
The company generated $18,812 million in cash flow pro­
vided by operating activities, an increase of $2,718 million, 
compared to 2007, primarily driven by increased net income 
($1,916 million). Net cash used in investing activities of $9,285 
million was $4,611 million higher than 2007, primarily due to 
increased spending for acquisitions ($5,304 million). Net cash 
used in financing activities of $11,834 million increased $7,095 
million primarily due to debt transactions ($14,556 million), par­
tially offset by lower common stock repurchases ($8,249 million) 
in 2008 versus 2007.
Discontinued Operations
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its HDD business to 
Hitachi for approximately $2 billion. The final cash payment of 
$399 million was received on December 30, 2005. 
	
In 2007, the company reported a net loss of less than $1 mil­
lion, net of tax. There was no activity in 2008.
Other Information
Looking Forward
Looking forward, the company enters 2010 in excellent opera­
tional and financial position. Since the last recession in 2002, 
the company has consistently generated strong profit and cash 
growth. In that timeframe (2003–2009), the company has added 
$12 billion to its pre-tax income base; pre-tax income margin 
has expanded more than 2.5 times; earnings per diluted share 
is up 4 times, and cumulatively, the company has generated 
approximately $115 billion in cash flow from operating activities. 
This financial performance is the result of the transformation of 
the business that started at the beginning of the decade. Its 
driven by a combination of shifting the company’s business mix, 
improving leverage through productivity and investing to capture 
growth opportunities.
	
The company has remixed its business to move into higher 
value areas—exiting commoditizing businesses, while acquiring 
108 companies since 2000 for a total of approximately $22 billion 
in net cash. These portfolio actions have contributed to a signifi­
cant change in the company’s business profile. In 2000, Global 
Services segment pre-tax income was $4.5 billion; in 2009, it 
was over $8 billion. The Software growth is even more dynamic. 
In 2000, Software segment pre-tax income was $2.8 billion; in 
2009, it also was over $8 billion. In 2009, over 90 percent of 
segment pre-tax income came from Software, Global Services 
and Global Financing, with Software and Global Services each 
contributing 42 percent of segment pre-tax income. The portfolio 
generates high profitability and the company will continue to remix 
to higher value through organic investments and acquisitions. 
	
The company has had an ongoing focus on driving operating 
leverage through productivity. The company has leveraged its 
scale and global presence to improve processes and productiv­
ity in a number of areas, including support functions and service 
delivery. In 2009, the company yielded $3.7 billion of cost and 
expense savings from the structural actions it has taken, driving 
gross margin improvement and reductions in operational expense. 
These actions have reduced the fixed cost base and improved 
the operational balance point. Going forward, this will provide an 
advantage as the spending environment improves—with solid 
operating leverage off of the company’s leaner cost base.
47


===== PAGE 50 =====
	
Another key element of the company’s transformation is the 
significant investments it has made for growth—investments 
enabled by the strong margins, profitability and cash base. The 
company continues to invest to capture the opportunity in the 
emerging markets. In 2009, the revenue growth in the growth 
markets remained 8 points greater than the major markets. 
The company is also investing in capabilities that differentiate 
IBM and accelerate the development of new market oppor­
tunities—areas like business analytics, cloud computing and 
smarter planet. The company remains committed to technology 
leadership, and in 2009, the company invested approximately 
$6 billion in research and development. The company’s organic 
investments have been complemented with acquisitions, with a 
key focus on business analytics which provide a solid platform 
for the Smarter Planet initiatives. Since 2005, the company has 
invested approximately $8.5 billion in net cash for 14 strategic 
acquisitions to build its business analytics capabilities.
	
The last decade has seen a significant transformation of IBM. 
The company will continue to shift to higher value areas, improve 
the efficiency of the business and invest where management 
sees the best long-term opportunities. This transformation and 
the focus going forward positions the company for growth mov­
ing into 2010.
	
In May 2007, the company met with investors and analysts 
and discussed a road map to deliver earnings per share in 2010 
in the range of $10 to $11 per share, or 14 to 16 percent com­
pound growth rate from 2006. The company’s 2010 road map 
is comprised of two key components. First, the 2010 road map 
includes generating earnings per share in the range of $9 to 
$10 per share, or 10 to 14 percent growth from 2006 through a 
combination of operational elements including revenue growth, 
margin improvement, growth initiatives, acquisitions and effective 
capital deployment to fund growth and provide returns to share­
holders through dividends and common stock repurchases.
	
In addition to these operational elements, the company’s road 
map to the $10 to $11 per share range includes the projected 
benefit of retire­ment-related costs based on December 31, 2006 
assumptions. Actual retirement-related costs will depend on 
several factors including financial market performance, the inter­
est rate environment and actuarial assumptions. In March 2008 
and May 2009, the company met with investors and analysts 
and discussed the progress the company is making on its 2010 
road map.
	
The company’s performance in 2009 highlighted the benefits 
of its global reach and the strength of its business model. The 
financial results reflected solid progress on major elements of the 
long-term goals. Despite a challenging economy, with diluted 
earnings per share of $10.01 in 2009, the company achieved its 
road map objective one year early. 
	
In January 2010, the company disclosed that it is expecting 
earnings of at least $11.00 per diluted share for the full year 2010, 
with consistent earnings per share growth throughout the year. 
Also in January 2010, the company disclosed that, for the first 
quarter of 2010, the company expects a 4–5 point improvement 
in its year-to-year revenue growth rate compared to the fourth 
quarter of 2009, at both actual currency rates and at constant 
currency. This would represent a mid-single-digit revenue 
growth at actual rates compared to the 0.8 percent growth in 
the fourth quarter of 2009. The company is confident in its ability 
to continue to leverage its business model to expand margins, 
grow profit, generate cash, return value to shareholders and 
return to revenue growth in 2010.
	
The continued investments in Software have led to this seg­
ment’s emergence as a strong source of revenue and the largest 
contributor to the company’s pre-tax profit. The Software busi­
ness is differentiated in the industry by both the strength of its 
individual products and the breadth of the software offerings. 
Clients continue to rely on the extensive middleware portfolio to 
help them transform their business, streamline costs and seek 
new business opportunities. The key to continued Software 
growth stems from the ability to maintain and grow this industry-
leading software business. Investments will be aligned to advance 
the company’s growth strategy through new client acquisition, 
with specific focus on key industries and local businesses. The 
company will also continue to focus on expanding its software 
capabilities through a combination of internal development and 
strategic acquisitions. In January 2010, the company disclosed 
that it expects Software to deliver a double-digit revenue growth 
rate, at actual rates, in the first quarter of 2010.
	
Within the Global Services business, profit margins improved 
and the company continues to yield significant results from the 
targeted actions and investments it has made in the last few years. 
The business has been transformed into one that is more flexible 
and more focused on higher-value segments of the market. The 
two services segments are well-positioned heading into 2010 
driven by: an 11 percent growth (at constant currency) in out­
sourcing signings in 2009; a backlog of $137 billion at December 
31, 2009; improving trends in Global Business Services; and, 
a global delivery structure that has enabled the company to 
perform well in a tough environment. In addition, the portfolio 
is strong with a complement of offerings and capabilities that 
deliver both high value and productivity to clients. Going for­
ward the Global Services business will look to build upon its 
momentum by continuing to deliver value and by focusing on 
further enhancements to its offerings/integrated solutions port­
folio and continuing to improve both the skills and structure of 
the business.
	
In the Systems and Technology business, the company will 
continue to focus its investments on differentiating technologies 
with leadership and high-growth potential including POWER, 
high-performance computing, virtualization, nanotechnology and 
energy efficiency. In this market, the value has shifted to the high 
end to address clients’ needs to consolidate and virtualize their 
environments. The company will focus on providing clients with a 
clear path to a fully dynamic infrastructure that not only reduces 
48


===== PAGE 51 =====
cost, but is both intelligent and secure. The systems product 
line will be significantly refreshed in 2010 with the release of the 
next generation System z mainframe in the second half and the 
next generation POWER systems in System p beginning in the 
first quarter of 2010. 
	
In 2010, Global Financing will continue to focus on expand­
ing its core business by accelerating growth in the participation 
rates for IBM products and services transactions. In addition, 
the business will drive increased operational efficiency and 
sales productivity through the deployment of its single operating 
model initiative. This global initiative is focused on simplifying 
processes, standardizing operations and optimizing business 
performance.
	
The company expects 2010 pre-tax retirement-related plan 
cost to be approximately $1.5 billion,  an increase of approximately 
$100 million compared to 2009. This estimate reflects current 
pension plan assumptions and the impacts of recent non-U.S. 
pension plan redesign efforts. See note U, “Retirement-Related 
Benefits,” on pages 109 through 121 for additional information.
	
The company expects in the normal course of business that 
its effective tax rate in 2010 will be approximately 26.0–26.5 
percent. The rate will change year to year based on non-recur­
ring events, such as the settlement of income tax audits and 
changes in tax laws, as well as recurring factors including the 
geographic mix of income before taxes, the timing and amount 
of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local taxes and the 
effects of various global income tax strategies.
	
Effective January 1, 2010, the company will implement sev­
eral new accounting standards that have been issued by 
the Financial Accounting Standards Board. These standards 
include: amended guidance for revenue recognition for arrange­
ments with multiple deliverables; guidance that revises the scope 
of existing software revenue recognition accounting; amend­
ments to the accounting rules for variable interest entities and 
transfers of financial assets; and, additional disclosure require­
ments for fair value measurements. The company has evaluated 
the new guidance and does not expect a material impact on the 
Consolidated Financial Statements. See note B, “Accounting 
Changes”, on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow 
from operations, improving results year to year and providing 
a source of funds ranging between $14.9 billion and $20.8 bil­
lion per year over the past five years. The company provides 
for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining an 
adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, 
a committed global credit facility and other committed and 
uncommitted lines of credit worldwide. At December 31, 2009, 
the company had total unused lines of credit of $17,314 million. 
The following table provides a summary of the major sources of 
liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2005 through 2009.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2006	
2005
Net cash from 
	 operating activities	
$20.8	 $18.8	 $16.1	 $15.0	 $14.9
Cash and short-term 
	 marketable securities	
$14.0	 $12.9	 $16.1	 $10.7	 $13.7
Committed global credit 
	 facilities	
$10.0	 $10.0	 $10.0	 $10.0	 $10.0
Trade receivables 
	 securitization facility	
$   —	 $    —	 $    —	 $    —	 $  0.5
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt 
securities at December 31, 2009 appear in the table below and 
remain unchanged from December 31, 2008. The company’s 
debt securities do not contain any acceleration clauses which 
could change the scheduled maturities of the obligation. In addi­
tion, the company does not have “ratings trigger” provisions in 
its debt covenants or documentation, which would allow the 
holders to declare an event of default and seek to accelerate 
payments thereunder in the event of a change in credit rating. 
The company’s contractual agreements governing derivative 
instruments contain standard market clauses which can trigger 
the termination of the agreement if the company’s credit rating 
were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2009, the 
fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position was 
$1,555 million, before any applicable netting, and this position 
is subject to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on 
the level of the company’s outstanding instruments and market 
conditions. The company has no other contractual arrange­
ments that, in the event of a change in credit rating, would result 
in a material adverse effect on its financial position or liquidity.
	 	 	 	 	
	
Moody’s	

	 	 	 	 	
Standard	
Investors	
Fitch 
	 	 	 	 	
& Poor’s	
Service	
Ratings
Senior long-term debt	
A+	
A1	
A+
Commercial paper	
A-1	
Prime-1	
F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows in accordance with applicable accounting standards for 
cash flow presentation on page 66 and highlights causes and 
events underlying sources and uses of cash in that format on 
pages 35 and 36. For purposes of running its business, the 
company manages, monitors and analyzes cash flows in a dif­
ferent format.
	
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the 
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evalu­
ate strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and 
need to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined 
term under U.S. GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire 
free cash flow amount is available for discretionary expenditures. 
The company defines free cash flow as net cash from operating 
activities less the change in Global Financing receivables and net 
49


===== PAGE 52 =====
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow 
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in oper­
ating results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, 
unexpected adverse impacts from litigation or future pension 
funding requirements during periods of severe downturn in the 
capital markets. Whether any litigation has such an adverse 
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more com­
pletely described in note O, “Contingencies and Commitments” 
on pages 99 and 100. With respect to pension funding, in 2009, 
the company contributed $1,252 million to its non-U.S. defined 
benefit plans, versus $917 million in 2008. As highlighted in the 
Contractual Obligations table on page 51, the company expects 
to make legally mandated pension plan contributions to certain 
non-U.S. plans of approximately $3.6 billion in the next five years. 
The 2010 contributions are currently expected to be approxi­
mately $0.8 billion. Financial market performance in 2010 could 
increase the legally mandated minimum contributions in certain 
non-U.S. countries that require more frequent remeasurement 
of the funded status. The company is not quantifying any fur­
ther impact from pension funding because it is not possible to 
predict future movements in the capital markets or pension plan 
funding regulations.
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in 
2006, and, among other things, increases the funding require­
ments for certain U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after 
December 31, 2007. No mandatory contribution is required for 
the U.S. defined benefit plan in 2010 as of December 31, 2009.
capital expenditures. As discussed on page 24, a key objective 
of the Global Financing business is to generate strong returns on 
equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a financing 
business. Accordingly, management considers Global Financing 
receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working 
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering 
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net 
operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by 
the company as free cash flow.
	
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 
2009, free cash flow was $15.1 billion, an increase of $0.8 billion 
compared to 2008. This cash performance was driven primarily 
by the growth in net income of $1.1 billion, lower capital spending 
of $0.8 billion and higher cash from sales cycle working capital 
($1.2 billion), partially offset by higher retirement-related funding 
($0.9 billion) and workforce rebalancing payments ($0.6 billion).
	
Over the past five years, the company generated over $61 
billion in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested 
$13.8 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $63 bil­
lion to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. 
The amount of prospective returns to shareholders in the form 
of dividends and share repurchases will vary based upon several 
factors including each year’s operating results, capital expendi­
ture requirements, research and development investments and 
acquisitions, as well as the factors discussed below.
	
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider 
the dividend payment. The company expects to fund dividend 
payments through cash from operations. In the second quarter 
of 2009, the Board of Directors increased the company’s quar­
terly common stock dividend from $0.50 to $0.55 per share.
	
The table below represents the way in which management 
reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2006	
2005
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP (Continuing Operations)	
	
$20.8	
$ 18.8	
$16.1	
$15.0	
$14.9
Less: Global Financing receivables	
	
(1.9)	
(0.0)	
(1.3)	
(0.3)	
1.8
Net cash from operating activities (Continuing Operations),
	 excluding Global Financing receivables	
	
18.9	
18.8	
17.4	
15.3	
13.1
	 	 Capital expenditures, net	
	
(3.7)	
(4.5)	
(5.0)	
(4.7)	
(3.5)
Free cash flow (excluding Global Financing receivables)	
	
15.1	
14.3	
12.4	
10.5	
9.6
	 	 Acquisitions	
	
(1.2)	
(6.3)	
(1.0)	
(3.8)	
(1.5)
	 	 Divestitures	
	
0.4	
0.1	
0.3	
—	
0.9
	 	 Share repurchase	
	
(7.4)	
(10.6)	
(18.8)	
(8.1)	
(7.7)
	 	 Dividends	
	
(2.9)	
(2.6)	
(2.1)	
(1.7)	
(1.2)
	 	 Non-Global Financing debt	
	
(4.7)	
(3.2)	
10.9	
(1.1)	
1.2
	 	 Other (includes Global Financing receivables
	 	 	 and Global Financing debt) 	
	
1.7	
5.0	
3.8	
1.1	
1.9
Change in cash, cash equivalents 
	 and short-term marketable securities	
	
$  1.1	
$  (3.2)	
$  5.5	
$ (3.0)	
$  3.1
50


===== PAGE 53 =====
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
	
Total
	
Contractual	
Payments due in
	
	 Payment Stream	
2010	
2011–12	
2013–14	
After 2014
Long-term debt obligations	
	
$23,842	
$2,186	
$  6,992	
$  5,250	
$  9,414
Interest on long-term debt obligations	
	
12,381	
1,166	
2,073	
1,507	
7,635
Capital (finance) lease obligations	
	
165	
64	
57	
44	
—
Operating lease obligations	
	
5,938	
1,504	
2,263	
1,395	
776
Purchase obligations	
	
2,314	
771	
851	
423	
269
Other long-term liabilities:
	 Minimum pension funding (mandated)*	
	
3,936	
803	
1,535	
1,261	
337
	 Executive compensation	
	
1,207	
71	
152	
166	
817
	 Long-term termination benefits	
	
1,789	
223	
245	
213	
1,109
	 Tax reserves**	
	
4,371	
1,083	
—	
—	
—
	 Other		
	
879	
66	
93	
67	
653
Total		 	
	
$56,822	
$7,937	
$14,261	
$10,326	
$21,011
*	 Represents future pension contributions that are mandated by local regulations or statute, all associated with non-U.S. pension plans. See note U, “Retirement-Related 
Benefits,” on pages 109 through 121 for additional information on the non-U.S. plans’ investment strategies and expected contributions and for information regarding the 
company’s unfunded pension plans of $16,819 million at December 31, 2009.
**	These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $1,083 million of the liability is expected to be settled 
within the next 12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will 
depend on the progress of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months. 
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above 
excluding the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal 
the amounts reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Posi­tion. Total contractual obligations decreased $10.4 billion 
from the amount reported in the 2008 Annual Report primarily 
due to the paydown of debt and the removal of the associ­
ated interest expense obligations. Long-term debt obligations 
decreased $6.4 billion and interest expense related to long-term 
debt obligations decreased $4.1 billion.
	
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase 
goods or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that 
meet any of the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, 
(2) the company would incur a penalty if the agreement was 
canceled, or (3) the company must make specified minimum 
payments even if it does not take delivery of the contracted 
products or services (take-or-pay). If the obligation to pur­
chase goods or services is noncancelable, the entire value of 
the contract is included in the table above. If the obligation is 
cancelable, but the company would incur a penalty if canceled, 
the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a purchase obli­
gation. Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay 
contracts are also included in the table as they represent the 
portion of each contract that is a firm commitment.
	
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into 
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a 
portion of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or 
service from a supplier or vendor. These contracts are gener­
ally entered into in order to secure pricing or other negotiated 
terms. They do not specify fixed or minimum quantities to be 
purchased and, therefore, the company does not consider them 
to be purchase obligations.
	
Interest on floating rate debt obligations is calculated using 
the effective interest rate at December 31, 2009, plus the inter­
est rate spread associated with that debt, if any. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance 
sheet arrangements as defined by the SEC Financial Reporting 
Release 67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion 
and Analysis about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and 
Aggregate Con­tractual Obligations.”
	
At December 31, 2009, the company has no off-balance 
sheet arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, 
a material current or future effect on financial condition, changes 
in financial condition, revenues or expenses, results of opera­
tions, liquidity, capital expenditures or capital resources. See 
the table above for the company’s contractual obligations and 
note O, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 99 to 
101, for detailed information about the company’s guarantees, 
financial commitments and indemnification arrangements. The 
company does not have retained interests in assets transferred 
to unconsolidated entities or other material off-balance sheet 
interests or instruments.
51


===== PAGE 54 =====
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make esti­
mates and assumptions about future events that directly affect 
its reported financial condition and operating performance. The 
accounting estimates and assumptions discussed in this section 
are those that the company considers to be the most critical to 
its financial statements. An accounting estimate is considered 
critical if both (a) the nature of the estimate or assumption is 
material due to the levels of subjectivity and judgment involved, 
and (b) the impact within a reasonable range of outcomes of the 
estimate and assumption is material to the company’s financial 
condition or operating performance. Senior management has 
discussed the development, selection and disclosure of these 
estimates with the Audit Committee of the company’s Board 
of Directors. The company’s significant accounting policies are 
described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 
70 to 79.
	
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that infor­
mation is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and 
provides material information to investors. The amounts used to 
assess sensitivity (e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included 
to allow users of the Annual Report to understand a general 
direction cause and effect of changes in the estimates and do 
not represent management’s predictions of variability. For all 
of these estimates, it should be noted that future events rarely 
develop exactly as forecasted, and estimates require regular 
review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
The measurement of the company’s benefit obligation to its 
employees and net periodic pension cost/(income) requires the 
use of certain assumptions, including, among others, estimates 
of discount rates and expected return on plan assets.
	
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the 
(gain)/loss amortization and interest cost components of the net 
periodic pension cost/(income) calculation (see page 115 for 
information regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the 
projected benefit obligation (PBO). As presented on page 115, 
the company decreased the discount rate assumption for the 
IBM Personal Pension Plan (PPP), a U.S.-based defined benefit 
plan, by 15 basis points to 5.60 percent on December 31, 2009. 
This change will increase pre-tax cost and expense recognized 
in 2010 by an estimated $40 million. If the discount rate assump­
tion for the PPP increased by 15 basis points on December 31, 
2009, pre-tax cost and expense recognized in 2010 would have 
decreased by an estimated $41 million. Changes in the dis­
count rate assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, may 
impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds plan 
assets. Each 25 basis point increase or decrease in the discount 
rate will cause a corresponding decrease or increase, respec­
tively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.2 billion based upon 
December 31, 2009 data. The PPP’s PBO (after the decrease 
in discount rate presented on page 115) and plan assets as of 
December 31, 2009 is presented on page 113. 
	
The expected long-term return on plan assets is used in cal­
culating the net periodic pension cost/(income). See page 115 
for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption. The differences between the actual return on 
plan assets and expected long-term return on plan assets are 
recognized over five years in the expected return on plan assets 
line in net periodic pension cost/(income) and also as a com­
ponent of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized over the 
service lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending 
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds which are 
based upon the obligation or the value of plan assets.
	
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such 
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in 
the expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption 
will have an estimated increase or decrease, respectively, of 
$252 million on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension 
cost/(income) (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 
31, 2009 and assuming no contributions are made in 2010).
	
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be 
required, by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. 
Actual results that differ from the estimates may result in more 
or less future company funding into the pension plans than is 
planned by management.
	
Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s defined 
benefit pension plans in other countries worldwide will vary 
depending upon the status of each respective plan.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related 
to the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the 
company to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, com­
plex arrangements with nonstandard terms and conditions may 
require significant contract interpretation to determine the appro­
priate accounting, including whether the deliverables specified in 
a multiple element arrangement should be treated as separate 
units of accounting. Other significant judgments include deter­
mining whether IBM or a reseller is acting as the principal in a 
transaction and whether separate contracts are considered part 
of one arrangement.
52


===== PAGE 55 =====
	
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s 
ability to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and allow­
ances for uncollectible receivables. The company considers 
various factors, including a review of specific transactions, the 
credit-worthiness of the customers, historical experience and 
market and economic conditions when calculating these provi­
sions and allowances. Estimates are evaluated each quarter to 
assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates were 
changed by 10 percent in 2009, net income would be impacted 
by $74 million (excluding Global Financing receivables reserves 
discussed on page 59).
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
The company enters into numerous service contracts through 
its GTS and GBS businesses. During the contractual period, 
revenue, cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the 
ultimate profitability of each contract, especially contracts for 
which the company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) 
method of accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate 
the POC contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss 
for the remainder of the contract is recorded immediately in 
cost. The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of 
its services contracts in order to determine whether the latest 
estimates require updating. Key factors reviewed by the com­
pany to estimate the future costs to complete each contract 
are future labor costs, future product costs and productivity 
efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded as a component 
of other accrued expenses and liabilities are approximately $37 
million and $24 million at December 31, 2009 and December 
31, 2008, respectively.
Income Taxes
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numer­
ous foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in 
determining the consolidated provision for income taxes.
	
During the ordinary course of business, there are many 
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax deter­
mination is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax 
liabilities based on estimates of whether additional taxes and 
interest will be due. These tax liabilities are recognized when, 
despite the company’s belief that its tax return positions are sup­
portable, the company believes that certain positions may not 
be fully sustained upon review by tax authorities. The company 
believes that its accruals for tax liabilities are adequate for all open 
audit years based on its assessment of many factors including 
past experience and interpretations of tax law. This assessment 
relies on estimates and assumptions and may involve a series 
of complex judgments about future events. To the extent that 
new information becomes available which causes the company 
to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing tax 
liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax 
expense in the period in which such determination is made.
	
Significant judgment is also required in determining any 
valuation allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In 
assessing the need for a valuation allowance, management 
considers all available evidence for each jurisdiction including 
past operating results, estimates of future taxable income and 
the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. In the event 
that the company changes its determination as to the amount of 
deferred tax assets that can be realized, the company will adjust 
its valuation allowance with a corresponding impact to income 
tax expense in the period in which such determination is made.
	
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
decreases by 1 percent of income from continuing operations 
before income taxes, consolidated income from continuing oper­
ations would have decreased/improved by $181 million in 2009.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment account­
ing requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. 
The acquisition method of accounting for business combina­
tions requires the company to estimate the fair value of assets 
acquired, liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest 
in the acquiree to properly allocate purchase price consider­
ation between assets that are depreciated and amortized from 
goodwill. Impairment testing for assets, other than goodwill, 
requires the allocation of cash flows to those assets or group 
of assets and if required, an estimate of fair value for the assets 
or group of assets. The company’s estimates are based upon 
assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are inherently 
uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require the use of 
management’s assumptions, which would not reflect unantici­
pated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and 
whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate the car­
rying value of goodwill may not be recoverable. The guidance 
on goodwill impairment requires the company to perform a two-
step impairment test. In the first step, the company compares 
the fair value of each reporting unit to its carrying value. The 
company determines the fair value of its reporting units based on 
the income approach. Under the income approach, the company 
calculates the fair value of a reporting unit based on the present 
value of estimated future cash flows. If the fair value of the report­
ing unit exceeds the carrying value of the net assets assigned 
53


===== PAGE 56 =====
to that unit, goodwill is not impaired. If the carrying value of the 
net assets assigned to the reporting unit exceeds the fair value 
of the reporting unit, then the second step of the impairment 
test is performed in order to determine the implied fair value of 
the reporting unit’s goodwill. If the carrying value of a reporting 
unit’s goodwill exceeds its implied fair value, then the company 
records an impairment loss equal to the difference. 
	
Determining the fair value of a reporting unit is judgmental 
in nature and involves the use of significant estimates and 
assumptions. These estimates and assumptions include rev­
enue growth rates and operating margins used to calculate 
projected future cash flows, discount rates and future economic 
and market conditions. The company’s estimates are based 
upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which are 
inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require 
the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect 
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur. 
	
The annual goodwill impairment analysis, which the company 
performed during the fourth quarter of 2009, did not result in an 
impairment charge. Utilizing the balances as of September 30, 
2009, the excess of fair value over carrying value for each of the 
company’s reporting units ranged from approximately $0.4 billion 
to approximately $74.7 billion. In order to evaluate the sensitivity 
of the fair value calculations on the goodwill impairment test, 
the company applied a hypothetical 10 percent decrease to the 
fair values of each reporting unit. This hypothetical 10 percent 
decrease would result in excess fair value over carrying value 
ranging from approximately $0.4 billion to approximately $66.3 
billion for each of the company’s reporting units.
Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal 
proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each 
significant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. 
If the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is con­
sidered probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant 
judgment is required in both the determination of probability 
and the determination as to whether an exposure is reasonably 
estimable. Because of uncertainties related to these matters, 
accruals are based only on the best information available at the 
time. As additional information becomes available, the company 
reassesses the potential liability related to its pending claims 
and litigation and may revise its estimates. These revisions in the 
estimates of the potential liabilities could have a material impact 
on the company’s results of operations and financial position. 
Financing Receivables Reserves 
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables 
port­folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A 
description of the methods used by management to estimate 
the amount of uncollectible receivables is included on pages 78 
and 79. Factors that could result in actual receivable losses that 
are materially different from the estim­ated reserve include sharp 
changes in the economy, or a significant change in the economic 
health of a particular client or industry segment that represents a 
concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
	
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from manage­
ment’s estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global 
Financing’s segment pre-tax income and the company’s consol­
idated income from continuing operations before income taxes 
would be higher or lower by an estimated $54 million (using 
2009 data), depending upon whether the actual collectibility was 
better or worse, respectively, than the estimates.
Residual Value 
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment 
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates 
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as 
operating or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair 
value of leased equipment by using historical models, analyzing 
the current market for new and used equipment and obtaining 
forward-looking product information such as marketing plans 
and technological innovations. Residual value estimates are 
periodically reviewed and “other than temporary” declines in 
estimated future residual values are recognized upon identifi­
cation. Anticipated increases in future residual values are not 
recognized until the equipment is remarketed. Factors that 
could cause actual results to materially differ from the estimates 
include significant changes in the used-equipment market 
brought on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations 
and any resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
	
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than 
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s seg­
ment pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income 
from continuing operations before income taxes would be lower 
by an estimated $120 million (using 2009 data). If the actual 
residual value recovery is higher than management’s estimates, 
the increase in income will be realized at the end of lease when 
the equipment is remarketed.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the 
U.S. dollar affect the company’s results. At December 31, 2009, 
currency changes resulted in assets and liabilities denominated 
in local currencies being translated into more U.S. dollars 
than at year-end 2008. The company uses financial hedging 
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing 
transactions and other foreign currency-based transactions. 
Further discussion of currency and hedging appears in note L, 
“Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 92 through 96.
54


===== PAGE 57 =====
	
In 2009, the company’s revenue decreased 7.6 percent as 
reported and 5.3 percent adjusted for currency. In the first nine 
months of 2009, revenue decreased 10.6 percent as reported 
and 5.3 percent adjusted for currency. This currency impact 
reversed in the fourth quarter, as revenue increased 0.8 percent 
as reported and declined 5.5 percent adjusted for currency, 
driven from the company’s operations in currencies other than 
the U.S. dollar. The company maintains currency hedging pro­
grams for cash planning purposes which mitigate, but do not 
eliminate, the volatility of currency impacts on the company’s 
financial results. In addition to the translation of earnings, the 
impact of currency changes also may affect the company’s 
pricing and sourcing actions. For example, the company may 
procure components and supplies in multiple functional cur­
rencies and sell products and services in other currencies. The 
company believes that some of these currency-based changes in 
cost impact the price charged to clients. However, the company 
estimates that the effect of currency, before taking pricing or 
sourcing actions into account, and net of hedging activity, had no 
more than a $0.09 impact on earnings per share growth in 2009. 
	
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. 
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, 
translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations. 
Generally, the company manages currency risk in these entities 
by linking prices and contracts to U.S. dollars. 
	
The company is continuing to monitor the current economic 
conditions in Venezuela. In Venezuela, there is an official cur­
rency rate that is fixed by the government, and a parallel market 
of currency exchange that enables companies to obtain foreign 
currency, including dollars. The parallel rate is variable and may 
differ significantly from the official rate. Accounting guidance 
requires that the translation of a non-U.S. entity’s financial state­
ments into the company’s consolidated financial statements be 
at the rate applicable to dividend remittances. Through the first 
11 months of 2009, the company used the official rate for trans­
lation of its Venezuela financial statements as this was the rate 
applicable to prior dividend remittances. Due to the significant 
reduction of currency approvals by the Venezuela government, 
in December the company determined that the rate for transla­
tion should be changed to the parallel rate at December 31, 
2009. This resulted in an immaterial charge to the income state­
ment and a decrease of IBM stockholders’ equity of $93 million. 
Future results are not expected to be materially impacted as a 
result of translation at the parallel rate. 
	
In addition, due to the fact that the blended CPI/NCPI three-
year cumulative inflation rate in Venezuela has reached 100 
per­cent, the country will be considered highly inflationary, con­
sistent with accounting standards, effective January 1, 2010. The 
company’s operations in Venezuela are not significant (less than 
1 percent of total 2008 and 2009 revenue), therefore, the com­
pany does not expect a material impact from the shift to highly 
inflationary. On January 8, 2010, a devaluation of the Venezuelan 
currency was announced. There will be a two-tiered official rate, 
for “essentials” and “non-essentials”. This is not expected to have 
a material impact to future operating results.
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the 
company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to 
the market risk associated with interest rate and currency move­
ments on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated 
assets and liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility 
of accounts receivable and recoverability of residual values on 
leased assets.
	
The company regularly assesses these risks and has estab­
lished policies and business practices to protect against the 
adverse effects of these and other potential exposures. As a 
result, the company does not anticipate any material losses from 
these risks.
	
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing busi­
ness and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, 
contains an element of market risk from changes in interest and 
currency rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through 
the use of a variety of financial instruments including derivatives, 
as explained in note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” 
on pages 92 through 96.
	
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs 
a sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk 
exposures may have on the fair values of the company’s debt 
and other financial instruments.
	
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity 
analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash equiva­
lents, marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, 
commercial financing and installment payment receivables, 
investments, long-term and short-term debt and all derivative 
financial instruments. The company’s portfolio of derivative finan­
cial instruments generally includes interest rate swaps, foreign 
currency swaps and forward contracts.
	
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses 
the risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical 
changes in interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates 
on market-sensitive instruments. The market values for interest 
and foreign currency exchange risk are computed based on the 
present value of future cash flows as affected by the changes 
in rates that are attributable to the market risk being measured. 
55


===== PAGE 58 =====
The discount rates used for the present value computations 
were selected based on market interest and foreign currency 
exchange rates in effect at December 31, 2009 and 2008. The 
differences in this comparison are the hypothetical gains or 
losses associated with each type of risk.
	
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not 
necessarily represent the actual changes in fair value that the 
company would incur under normal market conditions because, 
due to practical limitations, all variables other than the specific 
market risk factor are held constant. In addition, the results 
of the model are constrained by the fact that certain items 
are specifically excluded from the analysis, while the financial 
instruments relating to the financing or hedging of those items 
are included by definition. Excluded items include short-term 
and long-term receivables from sales-type and direct financing 
leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and the com­
pany’s net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, 
reported changes in the values of some of the financial instru­
ments impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not 
matched with the offsetting changes in the values of the items 
that those instruments are designed to finance or hedge.
	
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2009, 
and December 31, 2008, are as follows: 
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2009, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of 
interest rates with all other variables held constant would result 
in a decrease in the fair market value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $274 million as compared with a decrease of 
$353 million at December 31, 2008. A 10 percent increase in 
the levels of interest rates with all other variables held constant 
would result in an increase in the fair value of the company’s 
financial instruments of $251 million as compared to an increase 
of $327 million at December 31, 2008. Changes in the relative 
sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s financial instrument 
portfolio for these theoretical changes in the level of interest 
rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s debt 
maturities, interest rate profile and amount. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2009, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against 
foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would 
result in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial 
instruments of $609 million as compared with a decrease of 
$1,007 million at December 31, 2008. Conversely, a 10 percent 
stronger U.S. dollar against foreign currencies, with all other vari­
ables held constant, would result in an increase in the fair value 
of the company’s financial instruments of $609 million compared 
with an increase of $1,007 million at December 31, 2008. 
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 24 for a discussion 
of the financing risks associated with the Global Financing busi­
ness and management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Employees and Related Workforce
	
	
	
	
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
For the year ended December 31:	
	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009-08	
2008-07
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries	
	
399,409	
398,455	
386,558	
0.2%	
3.1%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries	
	
11,421	
11,642	
11,769	
(1.9)	
(1.1)
Complementary	
	
26,946	
27,983	
28,642	
(3.7)	
(2.3)
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in 
over 170 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the 
higher value segments of enterprise computing. The company 
continually assesses its resource needs with the objective of 
balancing its workforce globally to improve the company’s global 
reach and competitiveness. In 2009, total employees at IBM 
and its wholly owned subsidiaries increased slightly compared 
to the prior year. 
	
The complementary workforce is an approximation of 
equivalent full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time 
and limited-term employment arrangements to meet specific 
business needs in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
56


===== PAGE 59 =====
Global Financing 
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as if it 
were a standalone entity. Accordingly, the information presented 
in this section is consistent with this separate company view.
	
In 2009, as the global economy emerged from a challeng­
ing credit environment, the Global Financing business delivered 
strong financial results. The Global Financing business remained 
focused on its core competencies—providing IT financing to the 
company’s clients and business partners. For the year, Global 
Financing improved gross margin by 4.2 points and pre-tax 
income margin by 6.1 points, while total revenue declined 8.4 
percent. Total pre-tax income of $1,730 million increased 7.0 
percent compared to 2008.
	
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact on 
corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results are 
interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact Global 
Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both financing 
revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations, which 
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like busi­
ness, are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales volumes 
and Global Financing’s participation rates. Participation rates are 
the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their purchases through 
Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or financing 
through a third party. 
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
External revenue	
$2,302	
$2,559	
$2,502
Internal revenue	
1,774	
1,892	
1,482
Total revenue	
4,076	
4,451	
3,984
Cost	 	 	
1,555	
1,887	
1,819
Gross profit	
$2,520	
$2,564	
$2,165
Gross profit margin	
61.8%	
57.6%	
54.4%
Pre-tax income	
$1,730	
$1,617	
$1,386
After-tax income*	
$1,138	
$1,049	
$   877
Return on equity*	
34.4%	
29.4%	
26.1%
*	 See page 61 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity 
calculation. 
The decrease in 2009 revenue, as compared to 2008, was 
primarily due to:
•	 A decline in external revenue of 10.0 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency), due to decreases in financing revenue 
(down 11.6 percent to $1,715 million) and in used equipment 
sales (down 5.2 percent to $588 million); and
•	 A decline in internal revenue of 6.3 percent driven by a 
decrease in financing revenue (down 22.0 percent to $580 
million), partially offset by an increase in used equipment 
sales (up 3.9 percent to $1,194 million).
The decrease in external and internal financing revenue was due 
to lower average asset balances and lower asset yields.
	
Global Financing gross profit decreased 1.7 percent com­
pared to 2008 due to the lower revenue. Gross margin increased 
4.2 points due to higher margins on financing and used equip­
ment sales. 
	
The increase in 2008 revenue, as compared to 2007, was 
primarily due to:
•	 An increase in external revenue of 2.3 percent (flat adjusted 
for currency), due to growth in financing revenue (up 7.9 per­
cent to $1,939 million), partially offset by a decrease in used 
equipment sales (down 12.0 percent to $620 million); and
•	 Growth in internal revenue of 27.7 percent primarily driven 
by an increase in used equipment sales (up 47.2 percent to 
$1,148 million) and an increase in financing revenue (up 6.0 
percent to $744 million).
The increase in external and internal financing revenue was due 
to higher average asset balances and higher asset yields. 
	
Global Financing gross profit increased 18.4 percent in 2008 
versus 2007, with gross margin increasing 3.3 points. This was 
due to higher margins on financing and used equipment sales. 
	
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 7.0 percent in 
2009 versus 2008, following an increase of 16.7 percent in 
2008 versus 2007. The increase in 2009 was primarily driven by 
decreases in financing receivables provisions of $86 million and 
other selling, general and administrative expenses of $67 million, 
partially offset by the decrease in gross profit of $44 million. The 
increase in 2008 was driven by the increase in gross profit of 
$399 million, partially offset by an increase in financing receivables 
provisions of $159 million. The decrease in financing receivables 
provisions in 2009 was primarily due to lower specific reserve 
requirements. Overall allowance for doubtful accounts coverage 
rate is 2.1 percent, an increase of 0.1 points versus 2008.
	
The increase in return on equity from 2008 to 2009 was 
driven by higher after-tax income and a lower average equity 
balance, while the increase from 2007 to 2008 was primarily due 
to higher after-tax income.
57


===== PAGE 60 =====
Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Cash and cash equivalents	
	
$  1,285	
$  1,269
Net investment in sales-type and
	 direct financing leases	
	
9,482	
10,203
Equipment under operating leases:
	 External clients(a)	
	
1,863	
2,139
	 Internal clients(b)(c)	
	
994	
1,709
Client loans	
	
10,413	
10,615
Total client financing assets	
	
22,752	
24,667
Commercial financing receivables	
	
5,662	
5,875
Intercompany financing receivables(b)(c)	
	
3,660	
2,957
Other receivables	
	
370	
396
Other assets	
	
877	
956
Total assets	
	
$34,605	
$36,119
Intercompany payables(b)	
	
$  5,879	
$  5,391
Debt(d)	 	
	
22,383	
24,360
Other liabilities	
	
3,174	
2,875
Total liabilities	
	
31,435	
32,626
Total equity	
	
3,170	
3,493
Total liabilities and equity	
	
$34,605	
$36,119
(a)	Includes intercompany mark-up, priced on an arms-length basis, on products 
purchased from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s 
consolidated results. 
(b)	Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and there­
fore does not appear on page 65.
(c)	These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at 
the value in the table using Global Financing debt. ­
(d)	Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. 
A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal busi­
ness, or related to intercompany mark-up embedded in the Global Financing 
assets. See table on page 60. ­
Sources and Uses of Funds 
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client 
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end 
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, 
but also include non-IBM equipment, software and services to 
meet IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing 
assets are primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating 
leases for systems products, as well as loans for systems, 
software and services with terms generally from two to seven 
years. Global Financing’s client loans are primarily for software 
and services and are unsecured. These loans are subjected to 
additional credit analysis to evaluate the associated risk and, 
when deemed necessary, actions are taken to mitigate risks in 
the loan agreements which include covenants to protect against 
credit deterioration during the life of the obligation. Client financ­
ing also includes internal activity as described on page 24.
	
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory 
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of 
IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory financ­
ing and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 
90 days. These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured 
and are also subjected to additional credit analysis in order to 
evaluate the associated risk.
	
At December 31, 2009, approximately 98 percent of Global 
Financing’s external financing assets are in the segment’s core 
competency of technology equipment and solutions financing, 
and approximately 59 percent of the external portfolio is with 
investment grade clients with no direct exposure to consumers 
or mortgage assets. 
Originations 
The following are total external and internal financing originations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Client financing:
	 External	
$11,760	
$14,790	
$14,171
	 Internal	
755	
1,039	
1,040
Commercial financing	
27,126	
32,078	
30,541
Total		 	
$39,641	
$47,907	
$45,752
Cash collections exceeded new financing originations for both 
client and commercial financing in 2009 which resulted in a 
net decline in financing assets from December 31, 2008. The 
decrease in originations in 2009 from 2008 was primarily due to 
lower demand for IT equipment associated with the economic 
environment. The increase in originations in 2008 versus 2007 
was due to improving external volumes in both client and com­
mercial financing.
	
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2009 was primarily 
deployed to pay the intercompany payables and dividends to IBM.
58


===== PAGE 61 =====
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external financing receivables exclud­
ing residual values and the allowance for doubtful accounts. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Gross financing receivables	
	
$25,508	
$26,599
Specific allowance for doubtful accounts	
	
416	
386
Unallocated allowance for doubtful accounts	
	
120	
144
Total allowance for doubtful accounts	
	
536	
530
Net financing receivables	
	
$24,972	
$26,069
Allowance for doubtful accounts coverage	
	
2.1%	
2.0%
Roll Forward of Financing Receivables Allowance 
for Doubtful Accounts
($ in millions)
	
Allowance	
Additions/	
	
Dec. 31,
Jan. 1, 2009	
Used*	
(Reductions)	
Other**	
2009
$530		 	
$(153)	
$143	
$16	
$536
*	 Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of 
during the period. 
**	Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved increased 
from 2.0 percent at December 31, 2008 to 2.1 percent at 
December 31, 2009 primarily due to the decline in the gross 
financing receivables balance from December 31, 2008. Specific 
reserves increased 7.8 percent from $386 million at December 31, 
2008 to $416 million at December 31, 2009. Unallocated reserves 
decreased 16.6 percent from $144 million at December 31, 
2008, to $120 million at December 31, 2009. Global Financing’s 
bad debt expense was an increase of $143 million for 2009, 
compared to an increase of $229 million for 2008. The year-to-
year decrease was primarily attributed to the decline of required 
specific reserve additions.
Residual Value 
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and 
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accu­
rately project future equipment values at lease inception. Global 
Financing has insight into product plans and cycles for the 
IBM products under lease. Based upon this product information, 
Global Financing continually monitors projections of future equip­
ment values and compares them with the residual values reflected 
in the portfolio. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on 
page 79 for the company’s accounting policy for residual values.
	
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values 
by selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equip­
ment to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with 
current clients. Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced 
from equipment returned at the end of a lease, represented 43.7 
percent of Global Financing’s revenue in 2009 and 39.7 percent 
in 2008. The percentage increase was driven primarily by the 
decrease in financing revenue. The gross margin on these sales 
was 51.3 percent and 50.0 percent in 2009 and 2008, respec­
tively. The increase is primarily driven by a shift in mix toward 
higher margin internal used equipment sales.
	
The table on page 60 presents the recorded amount of 
unguaranteed residual value for sales-type, direct financing and 
operating leases at December 31, 2008 and 2009. In addition, 
the table presents the residual value as a percentage of the 
related original amount financed and a run out of when the 
unguaranteed residual value assigned to equipment on leases 
at December 31, 2009 is expected to be returned to the com­
pany. In addition to the unguaranteed residual value, on a limited 
basis, Global Financing will obtain guarantees of the future value 
of the equipment to be returned at end of lease. These third-
party guarantees are included in minimum lease payments as 
provided for by accounting standards in the determination of 
lease classifications for the covered equipment and provide 
protection against risk of loss arising from declines in equipment 
values for these assets. The residual value guarantee increases 
the minimum lease payments that are utilized in determining the 
classification of a lease as a sales-type lease or operating lease. 
The aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees 
were $569 million and $1,083 million for the financing transac­
tions originated during the years ended December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively. In 2009, the residual value guarantee pro­
gram resulted in the company recognizing approximately $400 
million of revenue that would otherwise have been recognized in 
future periods as operating lease revenue. If the company had 
chosen to not participate in a residual value program in 2009 
and prior years, the 2009 impact would be substantially miti­
gated by the effect of prior year asset values being recognized 
as operating lease revenue in the current year. The associated 
aggregate guaranteed future values at the scheduled end of 
lease were $30 million and $56 million for the financing transac­
tions originated during 2009 and 2008, respectively. The cost 
of guarantees was $4 million for the year ended December 31, 
2009 and $7 million for the year ended December 31, 2008.
59


===== PAGE 62 =====
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
	
Total	
Estimated Run Out of 2009 Balance
	
2008	
2009	
2010	
2011	
2012	 2013 and Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases	
$     916	
$     849	
$203	
$271	
$271	
$104
Operating leases	
378	
351	
166	
112	
62	
11
Total unguaranteed residual value	
$  1,294	
$  1,200	
$369	
$383	
$333	
$115
Related original amount financed	
$21,000	
$20,687
Percentage	
6.2%	
5.8%
Debt
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Debt-to-equity ratio	
	
7.1x	
7.0x
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using 
a debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt 
used to fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercom­
pany loans and external debt. The terms of the intercompany 
loans are set by the company to substantially match the term 
and currency underlying the financing receivable and are based 
on arm’s-length pricing. Both assets and debt are presented in 
the Global Financing Balance Sheet on page 58.
	
The Global Financing business provides funding predominantly 
for the company’s external clients but also provides intercompany 
financing for the company. Since the company measures Global 
Financing as if it were a standalone entity, interest expense relat­
ing to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and 
internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of 
Operations” on page 57 and in note V, “Seg­ment Information,” 
on pages 122 to 126.
	
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on 
page 64, however, the external debt-related interest expense 
supporting Global Financing’s internal financing to the company 
is reclassified from cost of financing to interest expense.
	
The following table provides additional information on total 
company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes 
internal loans and leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of 
Global Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. 
The company believes these assets should be appropriately lev­
eraged in line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
	
	
	
December 31, 2009	
December 31, 2008
Global Financing Segment:	
	
	
	
$22,383	
	
$24,360
	 Debt to support external clients	
	
	
$19,091	
	
$20,892	
	 Debt to support internal clients	
	
	
3,292	
	
3,468	
Non-Global Financing Segments:	
	
	
	
3,717	
	
9,566
	 Debt supporting operations	
	
	
7,008	
	
13,034	
	 Intercompany activity	
	
	
(3,292)	
	
(3,468)	
Total company debt	
	
	
	
$26,099	
	
$33,926
60


===== PAGE 63 =====
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Global Financing is a segment of the company and therefore, is 
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access 
to capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was 
primarily deployed to pay intercompany payables and dividends 
to the company in order to maintain an appropriate debt-to-
equity ratio. 
Return on Equity
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Numerator:
	 Global Financing after-tax income(a)*	
	
$1,138	
$1,049
Denominator:
	 Average Global Financing equity(b)**	
	
$3,312	
$3,572
Global Financing return on equity(a) /(b)	
	
34.4%	
29.4%
*	 Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global 
Financing’s geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is 
determined on a consolidated basis. 
**	Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters.
Looking Forward
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and fund­
ing capacity which enables the company to be well positioned 
in the current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new 
financing volumes are primarily IBM products and services 
financed to the company’s clients and business partners, and 
substantially all financing assets are IT related assets which 
provide a stable base of business for future growth. Global 
Financing’s offerings are competitive and available to clients 
as a result of the company’s borrowing cost and access to the 
capital markets. Overall, Global Financing’s originations will be 
dependent upon the demand for IT products and services as 
well as client participation rates.
	
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial 
paper market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. 
A protracted period where IBM could not access the capital 
markets would likely lead to a slowdown in originations. 
	
Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency 
fluctuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. 
The company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, 
combined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should 
mitigate gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates. 
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global 
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provi­
sion for bad debts. Global Financing will continue to apply rigor­
ous credit policies in both the origination of new business and 
the evaluation of the existing portfolio.
	
As discussed on page 59, Global Financing has historically 
been able to manage residual value risk both through insight into 
the company’s product cycles, as well as through its remarket­
ing business.
	
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of 
the key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined 
with product and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent 
management of the business going forward, even during peri­
ods of uncertainty with respect to the economy.
61


===== PAGE 64 =====
Report of Management
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Management Responsibility for 
Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial 
information presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM man­
agement. The accompanying financial statements have been 
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America, applying certain esti­
mates and judgments as required. 
	
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It con­
sists, in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined 
lines of responsibility and delegation of authority, and compre­
hensive systems and control procedures. An important element 
of the control environment is an ongoing internal audit program. 
Our system also contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and 
actions are taken to correct deficiencies as they are identified.
	
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, 
we carefully select and train our employees, develop and dis­
seminate written policies and procedures, provide appropriate 
communication channels and foster an environment conducive 
to the effective functioning of controls. We believe that it is 
essential for the company to conduct its business affairs in 
accordance with the highest ethical standards, as set forth in the 
IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. These guidelines, translated 
into numerous languages, are distributed to employees through­
out the world, and re-emphasized through internal programs to 
assure that they are understood and followed. 
	
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered 
public accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated 
Financial Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control 
over financial reporting. Its accompanying report is based on 
audits conducted in accordance with the standards of the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). 
	
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is com­
posed solely of independent, non-management directors, and 
is responsible for recommending to the Board the independent 
registered public accounting firm to be retained for the coming 
year, subject to stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee 
meets periodically and privately with the independent registered 
public accounting firm, with the company’s internal auditors, as 
well as with IBM management, to review accounting, auditing, 
internal control structure and financial reporting matters. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control 
Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining 
adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to 
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America.
	
The company’s internal control over financial reporting 
includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the 
maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately 
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets 
of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that trans­
actions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of 
financial statements in accordance with accounting principles 
generally accepted in the United States of America, and that 
receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only 
in accordance with authorizations of management and directors 
of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding 
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, 
or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a mate­
rial effect on the financial statements. 
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over finan­
cial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods 
are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate 
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compli­
ance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
	
Management conducted an evaluation of the effective­
ness of internal control over financial reporting based on the 
framework in Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by 
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway 
Commission (COSO). Based on this evaluation, management 
concluded that the company’s internal control over financial 
reporting was effective as of December 31, 2009.
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman of the Board,
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 23, 2010
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President,
Chief Financial Officer
February 23, 2010
62


===== PAGE 65 =====
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
To the Stockholders and Board of 
Directors of International Business 
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State­
ments appearing on pages 64 through 126 present fairly, in all 
material respects, the financial position of International Business 
Machines Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 
2009 and 2008 and the results of their operations and their cash 
flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 
31, 2009 in conformity with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, 
the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective inter­
nal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2009, 
based on criteria established in Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework issued by the Committee of Spon­soring Organ­
izations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). The Company’s 
management is responsible for these financial statements, for 
maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting and 
for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over 
financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s 
Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting appearing 
on page 62. Our responsibility is to express opinions on these 
financial statements and on the Company’s internal control over 
financial reporting based on our integrated audits. We con­
ducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those 
standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain 
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements 
are free of material misstatement and whether effective internal 
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material 
respects. Our audits of the financial statements included exam­
ining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and 
disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting 
principles used and significant estimates made by management, 
and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our 
audit of internal control over financial reporting included obtain­
ing an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, 
assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing 
and evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal 
control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included 
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary 
in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a rea­
sonable basis for our opinions.
	
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a 
process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding 
the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial 
statements for external purposes in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control 
over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures 
that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable 
detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispo­
sitions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable 
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit 
preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expendi­
tures of the company are being made only in accordance with 
authorizations of management and directors of the company; 
and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or 
timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition 
of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the 
financial statements.
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over finan­
cial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, 
projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods 
are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate 
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compli­
ance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 23, 2010
63


===== PAGE 66 =====
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
Notes	
2009	
2008	
2007
Revenue:
Services	
	
	
	
$55,128	
$  58,892	
$54,057
Sales		 	
	
	
	
38,300	
42,156	
42,202
Financing	
	
	
	
2,331	
2,582	
2,526
Total revenue	
	
	
	
95,758	
103,630	
98,786
Cost:
Services	
	
	
	
37,146	
40,937	
39,160
Sales		 	
	
	
	
13,606	
15,776	
16,552
Financing	
	
	
	
1,220	
1,256	
1,345
Total cost	
	
	
	
51,973	
57,969	
57,057
Gross profit	
 	
	
	
43,785	
45,661	
41,729
Expense and other income:
Selling, general and administrative	
	
	
	
20,952	
23,386	
22,060
Research, development and engineering	
	
	
Q	
5,820	
6,337	
6,153
Intellectual property and custom development income	
	
	
	
(1,177)	
(1,153)	
(958)
Other (income) and expense	
	
	
	
(351)	
(298)	
(626)
Interest expense	
	
	
K&L	
402	
673	
611
Total expense and other income	
	
	
	
25,647	
28,945	
27,240
Income from continuing operations before income taxes	
	
	
	
18,138	
16,715	
14,489
Provision for income taxes	
	
	
P	
4,713	
4,381	
4,071
Income from continuing operations	
	
	
	
13,425	
12,334	
10,418
Discontinued operations:
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations, net of tax	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(00)
Net income 	
	
	
	
$13,425	
$  12,334	
$10,418
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
	
R	
$  10.01	
$      8.89*	
$    7.15*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
	
R 	
—	
—	
(0.00)
	 Total		
	
	
R	
$  10.01	
$      8.89*	
$    7.15*
	 Basic:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
	
R	
$  10.12	
$      9.02*	
$    7.27*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
	
R	
—	
—	
(0.00)
	 Total		
	
	
R	
$  10.12	
$      9.02*	
$    7.27*
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding:
	 Assuming dilution	
	
	
	1,341,352,754	 1,387,797,198*	 1,456,880,751*
	 Basic		
	
	
	1,327,157,410	 1,369,367,069*	 1,433,935,221*
*	 Reflects the adoption of the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions 
are participating securities. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information. 
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
64


===== PAGE 67 =====
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31:	
	
	
	
Notes	
2009	
2008
Assets
Current assets:
Cash and cash equivalents	
	
	
	
	
$  12,183	
$  12,741
Marketable securities	
	
	
	
E	
1,791	
166
Notes and accounts receivable — trade (net of allowances of $217 in 2009 and $226 in 2008)	
	
	
10,736	
10,906
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $438 in 2009 and $351 in 2008)	 	
	
G	
14,914	
15,477
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $15 in 2009 and $55 in 2008)	
	
	
	
1,143	
1,172
Inventories	
	
	
	
F	
2,494	
2,701
Deferred taxes	
	
	
	
P	
1,730	
1,542
Prepaid expenses and other current assets	
	
	
	
	
3,946	
4,299
Total current assets	
	
	
	
	
48,935	
49,004
Plant, rental machines and other property	
	
	
	
H	
39,596	
38,445
Less: Accumulated depreciation	
	
	
	
H	
25,431	
24,140
Plant, rental machines and other property — net	
	
	
	
H	
14,165	
14,305
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $97 in 2009 and $179 in 2008)	
	
	
G	
10,644	
11,183
Prepaid pension assets	
	
	
	
U	
3,001	
1,601
Deferred taxes	
	
	
	
P	
4,195	
7,270
Goodwill	
	
	
	
J	
20,190	
18,226
Intangible assets — net	
	
	
	
J	
2,513	
2,878
Investments and sundry assets	
	
	
	
I	
5,379	
5,058
Total assets	
	
	
	
	
$109,022	
$109,524
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities:
Taxes		 	
	
	
	
P	
$    3,826	
$    2,743
Short-term debt	
	
	
	
K&L	
4,168	
11,236
Accounts payable	
	
	
	
	
7,436	
7,014
Compensation and benefits	
	
	
	
	
4,505	
4,623
Deferred income	
	
	
	
	
10,845	
10,239
Other accrued expenses and liabilities	
	
	
	
	
5,223	
6,580
Total current liabilities	
	
	
	
	
36,002	
42,435
Long-term debt	
	
	
	
K&L	
21,932	
22,689
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations	
	
	
	
U	
15,953	
19,452
Deferred income	
	
	
	
	
3,562	
3,171
Other liabilities	
	
	
	
M	
8,819	
8,192*
Total liabilities	
	
	
	
	
86,267	
95,939*
Contingencies and Commitments	
	
	
	
O
Equity:	 	
	
	
	
N
IBM Stockholders’ equity:	
	
	
	
	 Common stock, par value $.20 per share and additional paid-in capital	
	
	
	
41,810	
39,129
	 	 Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
	 	 Shares issued (2009 — 2,127,016,668; 2008— 2,096,981,860)
	 Retained earnings	
	
	
	
	
80,900	
70,353
	 Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2009 — 821,679,245; 2008 — 757,885,937)	
	
	
	
(81,243)	
(74,171)
	 Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
(18,830)	
(21,845)
	 Total IBM stockholders’ equity	
	
	
	
	
22,637	
13,465*
Noncontrolling interests*	
	
	
	
	
118	
119*
Total equity	
	
	
	
	
22,755	
13,584*
Total liabilities and equity	
	
	
	
	
$109,022	
$109,524
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information. 
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
65


===== PAGE 68 =====
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
	
2009	
2008	
2007
Cash flow from operating activities from continuing operations:
Net income 	
	
	
	
$ 13,425	
$ 12,334	
$ 10,418
(Income)/loss from discontinued operations	
	
	
	
—	
—	
00
Adjustments to reconcile income from continuing operations 
	 to cash provided by operating activities:
Depreciation	
	
	
	
3,773	
4,140	
4,038
Amortization of intangibles	
	
	
	
1,221	
1,310	
1,163
Stock-based compensation	
	
	
	
558	
659	
713
Deferred taxes	
	
	
	
1,773	
1,900	
740
Net gain on asset sales and other	
	
	
	
(395)	
(338)	
(89)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures:
	 Receivables (including financing receivables)	
	
	
	
2,131	
274	
(1,408)
	 Retirement related	
	
	
	
(2,465)	
(1,773)	
(228)
	 Inventories	
	
	
	
263	
(102)	
182
	 Other assets/other liabilities	
	
	
	
319	
1,268	
706
	 Accounts payable	
	
	
	
170	
(860)	
(142)
Net cash provided by operating activities from continuing operations	
	
	
20,773	
18,812	
16,094
Cash flow from investing activities from continuing operations:
Payments for plant, rental machines and other property	
	
	
	
(3,447)	
(4,171)	
(4,630)
Proceeds from disposition of plant, rental machines and other property	 	
	
	
330	
350	
537
Investment in software	
	
	
	
(630)	
(716)	
(875)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments	
	
	
	
(5,604)	
(4,590)	
(24,117)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments	
	
	
3,599	
6,100	
24,984
Non-operating finance receivables — net	
	
	
	
(184)	
(16)	
125
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred	
	
	
	
400	
71	
310
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired	
	
	
	
(1,194)	
(6,313)	
(1,009)
Net cash used in investing activities from continuing operations	
	
	
	
(6,729)	
(9,285)	
(4,675)
Cash flow from financing activities from continuing operations:
Proceeds from new debt	
	
	
	
6,683	
13,829	
21,744
Payments to settle debt	
	
	
	
(13,495)	
(10,248)	
(11,306)
Short-term (repayments)/borrowings less than 90 days — net	
	
	
	
(651)	
(6,025)	
1,674
Common stock repurchases	
	
	
	
(7,429)	
(10,578)	
(18,828)
Common stock transactions — other	
	
	
	
3,052	
3,774	
4,123
Cash dividends paid	
	
	
	
(2,860)	
(2,585)	
(2,147)
Net cash used in financing activities from continuing operations	
	
	
	
(14,700)	
(11,834)	
(4,740)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents	
	
	
	
98	
58	
294
Net cash used in discontinued operations from: operating activities	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(5)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents	
	
	
	
(558)	
(2,250)	
6,969
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1	
	
	
	
12,741	
14,991	
8,022
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31	
	
	
	
$ 12,183	
$ 12,741	
$ 14,991
Supplemental data:
Income taxes paid — net of refunds received	
	
	
	
$   1,567	
$   2,111	
$   2,608
Interest paid on debt	
	
	
	
$   1,240	
$   1,460	
$   1,485
Capital lease obligations	
	
	
	
$        15	
$        41	
$        57
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
66


===== PAGE 69 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
	
Common	
	
	
Accumulated
	
Stock and	
	
	
Other 
	
Additional	
	
	 Comprehensive	
Total IBM	
Non-
	
Paid-in	
Retained	
Treasury	
Income/	
Stockholders’	
controlling	
Total
	
Capital	
Earnings	
Stock	
(Loss)	
Equity*	
Interests*	
Equity*
2007**	
Equity, January 1, 2007	
$31,271	
$52,432	
$(46,296)	
$(8,901)	
$ 28,506	
$129	
$ 28,635
Cumulative effect of change in accounting 
	 principle+	
	
117	
	
	
117	
	
117
Net income plus other comprehensive
	 income/(loss):
	 Net income	
	
10,418	
	
	
$ 10,418	
	
$ 10,418
	 Other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss), net of tax:
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow 
	 	 	 hedge derivatives (net of tax benefit of $32)	
	
	
	
(123)	
(123)	
	
(123)
	 	 Foreign currency translation adjustments
	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $553++)	
	
	
	
726	
726	
	
726
	 	 Retirement-related benefit plans:
	 	 	 Prior service costs/(credits) (net of tax expense 
	 	 	 	 of $31)	
	
	
	
44	
44	
	
44
	 	 	 Net gains/(losses) (net of tax expense 
	 	 	 	 of $1,913)	
	
	
	
3,611	
3,611	
	
3,611
	 	 	 Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
	 	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $50)	
	
	
	
(85)	
(85)	
	
(85)
	 	 	 Amortization of net gains/(losses)
	 	 	 	 (net of tax expense of $654)	
	
	
	
1,110	
1,110	
	
1,110
	 	 	 Amortization of transition assets
	 	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $1)	
	
	
	
(2)	
(2)	
	
(2)
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on marketable 
	 	 	 securities (net of tax expense of $132)	
	
	
	
206	
206	
	
206
	 Total other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
5,487	
	
5,487
Subtotal: Net income plus other
	 comprehensive income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
$ 15,905	
	
$ 15,905
Cash dividends declared—common stock	
	
(2,147)	
	
	
(2,147)	
	
(2,147)
Common stock issued under employee plans 
	 (49,137,038 shares)	
4,332	
	
	
	
4,332	
	
4,332
Purchases (1,282,131 shares) and sales 
	 (9,282,055 shares) of treasury stock under 
	 employee plans — net	
	
(179)	
729	
	
550	
	
550
Other treasury shares purchased, not retired 
	 (178,385,436 shares)	
(405)	
	
(18,378)	
	
(18,783)	
	
(18,783)
Changes in other equity	
(10)	
	
	
	
(10)	
	
(10)
Changes in noncontrolling interests	
	
	
	
	
	
16	
16
Equity, December 31, 2007	
$35,188	
$60,640	
$(63,945)	
$(3,414)	
$ 28,470	
$145	
$ 28,615
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information.
**	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
+	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance for uncertain tax positions. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
++Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
67


===== PAGE 70 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
	
Common	
	
	
Accumulated
	
Stock and	
	
	
Other
	
Additional	
	
	 Comprehensive	
Total IBM	
Non-
	
Paid-in	
Retained	
Treasury	
Income/	
Stockholders’	
controlling	
Total 
	
Capital	
Earnings	
Stock	
(Loss)	
Equity*	
Interests*	
Equity*
2008**	
Equity, January 1, 2008	
$ 35,188	
$ 60,640	
$(63,945)	
$  (3,414)	
$ 28,470	
$  145	
$ 28,615
Net income plus other comprehensive
	 income/(loss):
	 Net income	
	
12,334	
	
	
$ 12,334	
	
$ 12,334
	 Other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss), net of tax:
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow 
	 	 	 hedge derivatives (net of tax expense of $79)	
	
	
	
301	
301	
	
301
	 	 Foreign currency translation adjustments
	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $153+)	
	
	
	
(3,552)	
(3,552)	
	
(3,552)
	 	 Retirement-related benefit plans:
	 	 	 Prior service (credits)/costs (net of 
	 	 	 	 tax benefit of $86)	
	
	
	
(136)	
(136)	
	
(136)
	 	 	 Net (losses)/gains (net of tax benefit of $8,436)	
	
	
	
(15,245)	
(15,245)	
	
(15,245)
	 	 	 Curtailments and settlements
	 	 	 	 (net of tax expense of $9)	
	
	
	
16	
16	
	
16
	 	 	 Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
	 	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $73)	
	
	
	
(132)	
(132)	
	
(132)
	 	 	 Amortization of net gains/(losses)
	 	 	 	 (net of tax expense of $358)	
	
	
	
640	
640	
	
640
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on marketable 
	 	 	 securities (net of tax benefit of $207)	
	
	
	
(324)	
(324)	
	
(324)
	 Total other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
(18,431)	
	
(18,431)
Subtotal: Net income plus other
	 comprehensive income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
$  (6,097)	
	
$  (6,097)
Cash dividends declared—common stock	
	
(2,585)	
	
	
(2,585)	
	
(2,585)
Common stock issued under employee plans 
	 (39,374,439 shares)	
3,919	
	
	
	
3,919	
	
3,919
Purchases (1,505,107 shares) and sales 
	 (5,882,800 shares) of treasury stock under 
	 employee plans — net	
	
(36)	
391	
	
355	
	
355
Other treasury shares purchased, 
	 not retired (89,890,347 shares)	
54	
	
(10,618)	
	
(10,563)	
	
(10,563)
Changes in other equity	
(33)	
	
	
	
(33)	
	
(33)
Changes in noncontrolling interests	
	
	
	
	
	
(26)	
(26)
Equity, December 31, 2008	
$ 39,129	
$ 70,353	
$(74,171)	
$(21,845)	
$ 13,465	
$ 119	
$ 13,584
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information.
**	Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
+	Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
68


===== PAGE 71 =====
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
	
Common	
	
	
Accumulated
	
Stock and	
	
	
Other
	
Additional	
	
	 Comprehensive	
Total IBM	
Non-
	
Paid-in	
Retained	
Treasury	
Income/	
Stockholders’	
controlling	
Total
	
Capital	
Earnings	
Stock	
(Loss)	
Equity*	
Interests*	
Equity*
2009	
Equity, January 1, 2009	
$ 39,129	
$ 70,353	
$(74,171)	
$(21,845)	
$ 13,465	
$119	
$ 13,584
Net income plus other comprehensive
	 income/(loss):
	 Net income	
	
13,425	
	
	
$ 13,425	
	
$ 13,425
	 Other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss), net of tax:
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow 
	 	 	 hedge derivatives (net of tax benefit of $256)	
	
	
	
(556)	
(556)	
	
(556)
	 	 Foreign currency translation adjustments
	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $57**)	
	
	
	
1,732	
1,732	
	
1,732
	 	 Retirement-related benefit plans:
	 	 	 Prior service costs/(credits) (net of 
	 	 	 	 tax expense of $146)	
	
	
	
229	
229	
	
229
	 	 	 Net (losses)/gains (net of tax expense of $439)	
	
	
	
994	
994	
	
994
	 	 	 Curtailments and settlements
	 	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $33)	
	
	
	
(93)	
(93)	
	
(93)
	 	 	 Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
	 	 	 	 (net of tax benefit of $55)	
	
	
	
(107)	
(107)	
	
(107)
	 	 	 Amortization of net gains/(losses)
	 	 	 	 (net of tax expense of $402)	
	
	
	
704	
704	
	
704
	 	 Net unrealized gains/(losses) on marketable 
	 	 	 securities (net of tax expense of $71)	
	
	
	
111	
111	
	
111
	 Total other comprehensive 
	 	 income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
3,015	
	
3,015
Subtotal: Net income plus other
	 comprehensive income/(loss)	
	
	
	
	
$ 16,440	
	
$ 16,440
Cash dividends declared—common stock	
	
(2,860)	
	
	
(2,860)	
	
(2,860)
Common stock issued under employee plans 
	 (30,034,808 shares)	
3,011	
	
	
	
3,011	
	
3,011
Purchases (1,550,846 shares) and sales 
	 (6,408,265 shares) of treasury stock under 
	 employee plans — net	
	
(19)	
462	
	
443	
	
443
Other treasury shares purchased, 
	 not retired (68,650,727 shares)	
	
	
(7,534)	
	
(7,534)	
	
(7,534)
Changes in other equity	
(330)	
	
	
	
(330)	
	
(330)
Changes in noncontrolling interests	
	
	
	
	
	
(1)	
(1)
Equity, December 31, 2009	
$ 41,810	
$ 80,900	
$(81,243)	
$(18,830)	
$ 22,637	
$118	
$ 22,755
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information.
**	Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax.
The accompanying notes on pages 70 through 126 are an integral part of the financial statements.
69


===== PAGE 72 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Note A.
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot­
notes thereto of the International Business Machines Corpor­ation 
(IBM and/or the company) have been prepared in accordance 
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States 
of America (GAAP).
	
On December 31, 2002, the company sold its hard disk drive 
(HDD) business to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). The HDD business was 
accounted for as a discontinued operation and therefore, the 
HDD results of operations and cash flows have been removed 
from the company’s results of continuing operations and cash 
flows for 2007. There was no activity in 2008 or 2009.
	
The company evaluated subsequent events through February 
23, 2010, which is the date the financial statements were issued.
	
Within the financial tables presented, certain columns and 
rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers for dis­
closure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from 
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts 
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presenta­
tion. This is annotated where applicable. 
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of 
IBM and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally major­
ity owned. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are 
included in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. 
Investments in business entities in which the company does not 
have control, but has the ability to exercise significant influence 
over operating and financial policies, are accounted for using 
the equity method and the company’s proportionate share 
of income or loss is recorded in other (income) and expense. 
The accounting policy for other investments in equity securi­
ties is described on page 78 within “Marketable Securities.” 
Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are primarily 
accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany transac­
tions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses 
and other comprehensive income/(loss) that are reported in 
the Consol­idated Financial Statements and accompanying 
disclosures. These estimates are based on management’s best 
knowledge of current events, historical experience, actions that 
the company may undertake in the future and on various other 
assumptions that are believed to be reasonable under the cir­
cumstances. As a result, actual results may be different from 
these estimates. See pages 52 to 54 for a discussion of the 
company’s critical accounting estimates.
Revenue
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realiz­
able and earned. The company considers revenue realized or 
realizable and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an 
arrangement, delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or 
determinable and collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery 
does not occur until products have been shipped or services 
have been provided to the client, risk of loss has transferred to 
the client, and either client acceptance has been obtained, client 
acceptance provisions have lapsed, or the company has objec­
tive evidence that the criteria specified in the client acceptance 
provisions have been satisfied. The sales price is not considered 
to be fixed or determinable until all contingencies related to the 
sale have been resolved.
	
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution provid­
ers, resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) 
when the reseller has economic substance apart from the com­
pany, credit risk, title and risk of loss to the inventory, the fee to 
the company is not contingent upon resale or payment by the end 
user, the company has no further obligations related to bringing 
about resale or delivery and all other revenue recognition criteria 
have been met.
	
The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, 
stock rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allow­
ances. (See Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and 
Reserves” included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 
10-K). Revenue is recognized only if these estimates can be 
reasonably and reliably determined. The company bases its esti­
mates on historical results taking into consideration the type of 
client, the type of transaction and the specifics of each arrange­
ment. Payments made under cooperative marketing programs 
are recognized as an expense only if the company receives from 
the client an identifiable benefit sufficiently separable from the 
product sale whose fair value can be reasonably and reliably 
estimated. If the company does not receive an identifiable ben­
efit sufficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value 
can be reasonably estimated, such payments are recorded as a 
reduction of revenue.
	
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or ser­
vices is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as 
an agent between the client and vendor and gross when the 
company is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are 
considered to determine whether the company is an agent or 
principal, most notably whether the company is the primary 
obligor to the client, or has inventory risk. Consideration is also 
given to whether the company adds meaningful value to the 
vendor’s product or service, was involved in the selection of the 
vendor’s product or service, has latitude in establishing the sales 
price or has credit risk.
70


===== PAGE 73 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based 
taxes assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on 
and concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In 
addition to the aforementioned general policies, the following 
are the specific revenue recognition policies for multiple-element 
arrangements and for each major category of revenue.
Multiple-Element Arrangements
The company enters into multiple-element revenue arrange­
ments, which may include any combination of services, software, 
hardware and/or financing. To the extent that a deliverable in a 
multiple-element arrangement is subject to specific guidance, 
such as, leased hardware which is subject to specific leas­
ing guidance or software which is subject to specific software 
revenue recognition guidance (see “Software” on page 72) on 
whether and/or how to separate multiple deliverable arrange­
ments into separate units of accounting (separability) and how to 
allocate the arrangement consideration among those separate 
units of accounting (allocation), that deliverable is accounted for 
in accordance with such specific guidance. For all other deliv­
erables in multiple-element arrangements, the guidance below 
is applied to determine separability and allocation. A multiple-
element arrangement is separated into more than one unit of 
accounting if all of the following criteria are met:
•	 The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone 
basis; 
•	 There is objective and reliable evidence of the fair value of the 
undelivered item(s); and 
•	 If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative 
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the unde­
livered item(s) is considered probable and substantially in the 
control of the company. 
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for 
as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being 
recognized on a straight-line basis or being deferred until the 
earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered 
element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element 
and there is objective and reliable evidence of fair value for all 
units of accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consid­
eration is allocated to the separate units of accounting based 
on each unit’s relative fair value. There may be cases, however, 
in which there is objective and reliable evidence of fair value of 
the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the delivered 
item(s). In those cases, the residual method is used to allocate 
the arrangement consideration. Under the residual method, the 
amount of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals 
the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate fair value 
of the undelivered item(s). The revenue policies described below 
are then applied to each unit of accounting, as applicable. 
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include information 
technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing, 
application management services, consulting and systems inte­
gration, technology infrastructure and system maintenance, Web 
hosting and the design and development of complex IT systems 
to a client’s specifications (design and build). These services are 
provided on a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract 
or as a fixed-price per measure of output contract and the 
contract terms range from less than one year to over 10 years.
	
Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourc­
ing contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided 
using either an objective measure of output or a straight-line basis 
over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the 
amount of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered 
in the period.
	
Revenue from application management services, technol­
ogy infra­structure and system maintenance and Web hosting 
contracts is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms 
of the contracts. Revenue from time-and-material contracts is 
recognized as labor hours are delivered and direct expenses are 
incurred. Revenue related to extended warranty and product 
maintenance contracts is recognized on a straight-line basis 
over the delivery period.
	
Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is 
recognized under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. 
Under the POC method, revenue is recognized based on the 
labor costs incurred to date as a percentage of the total esti­
mated labor costs to fulfill the contract. If circumstances arise 
that change the original estimates of revenues, costs, or extent 
of progress toward completion, revisions to the estimates are 
made. These revisions may result in increases or decreases in 
estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions are reflected in 
income in the period in which the circumstances that gave rise 
to the revision become known by management.
	
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its 
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in 
order to determine whether the latest estimates of revenue, 
costs and profits require updating. If at any time these esti­
mates indicate that the contract will be unprofitable, the entire 
estimated loss for the remainder of the contract is recorded 
immediately. For non-POC method service contracts, losses are 
recorded as incurred.
	
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior 
to recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred 
income of $7,066 million and $6,403 million at December 31, 
2009 and 2008, respectively, is included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position. The year-to-year increase was 
driven by growth in the Global Services business and the impacts 
of currency. In other services contracts, the company performs 
the services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable 
of $2,020 million and $2,090 million at December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively, are included in notes and accounts receiv­
able-trade in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
71


===== PAGE 74 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs 
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. 
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months.
Hardware
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recog­
nized when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there 
are no unfulfilled company obligations that affect the client’s final 
acceptance of the arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties 
and remaining obligations that are inconsequential or perfunc­
tory are accrued when the corresponding revenue is recognized. 
Revenue from rentals and operating leases is recognized on a 
straight-line basis over the term of the rental or lease.
Software
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is 
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue 
recognition criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring 
license charge) license software is recognized on a subscrip­
tion basis over the period that the client is entitled to use the 
license. Revenue from subscription and support, which includes 
unspecified upgrades on a when-and-if-available basis and 
technical support, is recognized on a straight-line basis over 
the period such items are delivered. In multiple-element revenue 
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental 
to the products or services as a whole (software multiple-
element arrangements), software and software-related elements 
are accounted for in accordance with guidance on software 
revenue recognition. Software-related elements include software 
products and services, as well as any non-software deliverable 
for which a software deliverable is essential to its functionality.
	
A software multiple-element arrangement is separated into 
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria 
are met:
•	 The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent 
on the undelivered element(s);
•	 There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair 
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is 
based on the price charged when the deliverable is sold 
separately by the company on a regular basis and not as 
part of the multiple-element arrangement; and 
•	 Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmina­
tion of the earnings process for that element(s).
If any one of these criteria are not met, the arrangement is 
accounted for as one unit of accounting which would result 
in revenue being recognized on a straight-line basis or being 
deferred until the earlier of when such criteria are met or when 
the last undelivered element is delivered. If these criteria are met 
for each element and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of 
accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement consideration 
is allocated to the separate units of accounting based on each 
unit’s relative VSOE of fair value. There may be cases, however, 
in which there is VSOE of fair value of the undelivered item(s) but 
no such evidence for the delivered item(s). In these cases, the 
residual method is used to allocate the arrangement consider­
ation. Under the residual method, the amount of consideration 
allocated to the delivered item(s) equals the total arrangement 
consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair value of the unde­
livered elements.
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financ­
ing leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the 
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized 
on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs 
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. 
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external 
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method 
are deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred 
to date, as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to 
fulfill the contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in 
the initial phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and sub­
sequently amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup 
costs related to the installation of systems and processes and 
are amortized on a straight-line basis over the expected period 
of benefit, not to exceed the term of the contract. Additionally, 
fixed assets associated with outsourcing contracts are capital­
ized and depreciated on a straight-line basis over the expected 
useful life of the asset. If an asset is contract specific, then the 
depreciation period is the shorter of the useful life of the asset or 
the contract term. Amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair 
value of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements are 
deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis as a reduction of 
revenue over the expected period of benefit not to exceed the 
term of the contract. The company performs periodic reviews 
to assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition and 
setup costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated 
minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to 
the unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted 
cash flows are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, 
a loss is recognized.
	
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,432 
million and $2,023 million at December 31, 2009 and December 
31, 2008, respectively. The primary driver of the increase 
was the continued growth of the Global Services business. 
Amortization expense of deferred services transition and setup 
costs is estimated at December 31, 2009 to be $689 million in 
2010, $562 million in 2011, $464 million in 2012, $430 million in 
2013 and $287 million thereafter.
	
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value 
of acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $72 
million and $119 million at December 31, 2009 and December 
31, 2008, respectively. Amortization of deferred amounts paid to 
72


===== PAGE 75 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
clients in excess of the fair value of acquired assets is recorded 
as an offset of revenue and is estimated at December 31, 2009 
to be $39 million in 2010, $23 million in 2011, $7 million in 2012, 
$2 million in 2013 and $1 million thereafter.
	
In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, 
the terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse 
the company for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, 
unamortized deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets 
utilized in the delivery of services and to pay any additional costs 
incurred by the company to transition the services.
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design 
of licensed programs are expensed as incurred to research, 
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred 
to produce the finished product after technological feasibility 
has been established are capitalized as an intangible asset. 
Capitalized amounts are amortized using the straight-line 
method, which is applied over periods ranging up to three years. 
The company performs periodic reviews to ensure that unam­
ortized program costs remain recoverable from future revenue. 
Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged to 
software cost as incurred.
	
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to 
purchase or to create and implement internal-use computer 
software, which includes software coding, installation, testing 
and certain data conversions. These capitalized costs are amor­
tized on a straight-line basis over two years and are recorded 
in selling, general and administrative expense. See note J, 
“Intangible Assets Including Goodwill,” on pages 89 to 90. 
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that 
range up to three years, with the majority being either one or 
three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to 
the deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the 
related deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs 
standard to the deliverable based on historical warranty claim 
experience and applies this estimate to the revenue stream for 
products under warranty. Estimated future costs for warran­
ties applicable to revenue recognized in the current period are 
charged to cost of revenue. The warranty accrual is reviewed 
quarterly to verify that it properly reflects the remaining obligation 
based on the anticipated expenditures over the balance of the 
obligation period. Adjustments are made when actual warranty 
claim experience differs from estimates. Costs from fixed-price 
support or maintenance contracts, including extended warranty 
contracts, are recognized as incurred.
	
Revenue from extended warranty contracts, for which the 
company is obligated to perform, is recorded as deferred income 
and subsequently recognized on a straight-line basis over the 
delivery period. 
	
Changes in the company’s deferred income for extended 
warranty contracts and warranty liability for standard warran­
ties, which are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities 
and other liabilities on the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position, are presented in the following tables:
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
	
	
2009	
2008
Balance at January 1	
	
$ 358	
$ 412
Current period accruals	
	
374	
390
Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience		
(11)	
16
Charges incurred	
	
(406)	
(460)
Balance at December 31	
	
$ 316	
$ 358
Extended Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
	
	
2009	
2008
Aggregate deferred revenue at January 1	
	
$ 589	
$ 409
Revenue deferred for new extended 
	 warranty contracts	
	
283	
335
Amortization of deferred revenue	
	
(226)	
(134)
Other*	 	
	
18	
(21)
Balance at December 31	
	
$ 665	
$ 589
Current portion	
	
$ 310	
$ 234
Noncurrent portion	
	
355	
355
Balance at December 31	
	
$ 665	
$ 589
*	
Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as 
incurred and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to 
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products 
and services are classified as selling expense and include such 
items as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and 
travel. General and administrative expense includes such items 
as compensation, office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance 
and office rental. In addition, general and administrative expense 
includes other operating items such as a provision for doubtful 
accounts, workforce accruals for contractually obligated pay­
ments to employees terminated in the ongoing course of business, 
acquisition costs related to business combinations, amortization 
of certain intangible assets and environmental remediation costs.
73


===== PAGE 76 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs 
when incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from 
vendors are recorded net of advertising and promotional 
expense in the period the related advertising and promotional 
expense is incurred. Advertising and promotional expense, 
which includes media, agency and promotional expense, was 
$1,252 million, $1,259 million and $1,242 million in 2009, 2008 
and 2007, respectively, and is recorded in SG&A expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are 
expensed as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to pro­
duce the finished product after technological feasibility has been 
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. See “Software 
Costs” on page 73. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intel­
lectual property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade 
secrets and technological know-how. Certain transfers of IP 
to third parties are licensing/royalty-based and other trans­fers 
are transaction-based sales and other transfers. Licensing/
royalty-based fees involve transfers in which the company earns 
the income over time, or the amount of income is not fixed 
or determinable until the licensee sells future related products 
(i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s revenue). Sales and 
other transfers typically include transfers of IP whereby the com­
pany has fulfilled its obligations and the fee received is fixed or 
determinable at the transfer date. The company also enters into 
cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from these 
arrangements is recorded only to the extent cash is received. 
Furthermore, the company earns income from certain custom 
development projects for strategic technology partners and 
specific clients. The company records the income from these 
projects when the fee is realized or realizable and earned, is not 
refundable and is not dependent upon the success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other 
than from Global Financing external business transactions), 
gains and losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and 
losses from securities and other investments, gains and losses 
from certain real estate transactions, foreign currency transaction 
gains and losses, gains and losses from the sale of businesses 
and amounts related to accretion of asset retirement obligations. 
Business Combinations and 
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the 
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets 
acquired, the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest 
in the acquiree are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. 
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price over 
the fair value of net assets, including the amount assigned to 
identifiable intangible assets. The primary drivers that generate 
goodwill are the value of synergies between the acquired enti­
ties and the company and the acquired assembled workforce, 
neither of which qualifies as an identifiable intangible asset. 
Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are amortized 
over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology is 
recorded in cost and amortization of all other intangible assets 
is recorded in selling, general and administrative expense. See 
note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” on pages 82 to 86 and note 
J, “Intangible Assets Including Goodwill,” on pages 89 to 90, for 
additional information. Acquisition-related costs, including advi­
sory, legal, accounting, valuation and other costs, are expensed 
in the periods in which the costs are incurred. The results of 
operations of acquired businesses are included in the Consoli­
dated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment 
based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, written down 
to fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised 
values. Goodwill is tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for 
impairment, or sooner when circumstances indicate an impair­
ment may exist, using a fair-value approach at the reporting 
unit level. A reporting unit is the operating segment, or a busi­
ness, which is one level below that operating segment (the 
“component” level) if discrete financial information is prepared 
and regularly reviewed by management at the segment level. 
Components are aggregated as a single reporting unit if they 
have similar economic characteristics.
Depreciation and Amortization
Plant, rental machines and other property are carried at cost 
and depreciated over their estimated useful lives using the 
straight-line method. The estimated useful lives of certain depre­
ciable assets are as follows: buildings, 30 to 50 years; building 
equipment, 10 to 20 years; land improvements, 20 years; plant, 
laboratory and office equipment, 2 to 20 years; and computer 
equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold improvements are amor­
tized over the shorter of their estimated useful lives or the related 
lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years.
	
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after tech­
nological feasibility has been established are amortized over 
periods ranging up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use 
software are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods up 
to 2 years. (See “Software Costs” on page 73 for additional 
information). Other intangible assets are amortized over periods 
between 2 and 7 years. 
74


===== PAGE 77 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are 
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup 
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company 
will incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably 
estimated, the company accrues remediation costs for known 
environmental liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for 
all environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts 
are recorded for environmental liabilities that are not probable 
or estimable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associ­
ated with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities 
are initially recorded at fair value and the related asset retire­
ment costs are capitalized by increasing the carrying amount 
of the related assets by the same amount as the liability. Asset 
retirement costs are subsequently depreciated over the useful 
lives of the related assets. Subsequent to initial recognition, the 
company records period-to-period changes in the ARO liability 
resulting from the passage of time in interest expense and revi­
sions to either the timing or the amount of the original expected 
cash flows to the related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related 
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the dif­
ference between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit 
obligation at December 31, the measurement date. For defined 
benefit pension plans, the benefit obligation is the projected 
benefit obligation (PBO), which represents the actuarial present 
value of benefits expected to be paid upon retirement based on 
estimated future compensation levels. For the nonpension post­
retirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is the accumulated 
postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which represents the 
actuarial present value of postretirement benefits attributed to 
employee services already rendered. The fair value of plan assets 
represents the current market value of cumulative company and 
participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust fund, held 
for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by the 
trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets 
exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as 
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, 
with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, 
are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess.
	
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post­
retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present 
value of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the 
fair value of plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. 
This obligation is recorded in compensation and benefits in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
	
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement ben­
efit cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings and includes service cost, interest cost, expected 
return on plan assets, amortization of prior service costs/(cred­
its) and (gains)/losses previously recognized as a component 
of other comprehensive income/(loss) and amortization of the 
net transition asset remaining in accumulated other compre­
hensive income/(loss). Service cost represents the actuarial 
present value of participant benefits earned in the current year. 
Interest cost represents the time value of money cost associ­
ated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as changes 
in employee base, plan amendments and changes in actuarial 
assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation and the 
corresponding change in other comprehensive income/(loss). 
The result of these events is amortized as a component of net 
periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy of 
the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts 
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or 
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded 
in cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings based on the employees’ respective function.
	
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a compo­
nent of other comprehensive income/(loss) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Changes in Equity, net of tax. Those (gains)/losses 
and prior service costs/(credits) are subsequently recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) pursuant to the 
recognition and amortization provisions of applicable accounting 
guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result of differences between 
actual experience and assumptions or as a result of changes 
in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) represent 
the cost of benefit improvements attributable to prior service 
granted in plan amendments.
	
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic 
cost/(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved 
by the company’s management. These valuations reflect the 
terms of the plans and use participant-specific information such 
as compensation, age and years of service, as well as certain 
assumptions, including estimates of discount rates, expected 
return on plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest 
crediting rates and mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company records expense for defined contribution plans for 
the company’s contribution when the employee renders service 
to the company, essentially coinciding with the cash contribu­
tions to the plans. The expense is recorded in cost, SG&A and 
RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the 
employees’ respective function.
75


===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures 
stock-based compensation cost at grant date, based on the 
estimated fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a 
straight-line basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee 
requisite service period. The company estimates the fair value of 
stock options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The cost 
is recorded in cost, SG&A, and RD&E in the Consolidated State­
ment of Earnings based on the employees’ respective function. 
	
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that 
result in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based 
on the amount of compensation cost recognized and the statu­
tory tax rate in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. 
Differences between the deferred tax assets recognized for finan­
cial reporting purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on 
the income tax return are recorded in additional paid-in capital 
(if the tax deduction exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset 
exceeds the tax deduction and no additional paid-in capital 
exists from previous awards).
	
See note T, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 105 to 
109 for additional information.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income 
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary 
differences between asset and liability amounts that are rec­
ognized for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that 
are recognized for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes 
are measured by applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation 
allowances are recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the 
amount that will more likely than not be realized. In assessing 
the need for a valuation allowance, management considers all 
available evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating 
results, estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of 
ongoing tax planning strategies. When the company changes 
its determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that 
can be realized, the valuation allowance is adjusted with a cor­
responding impact to income tax expense in the period in which 
such determination is made.
	
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the 
company’s belief that its tax return positions are supportable, 
the company believes that certain positions may not be fully 
sustained upon review by tax authorities. Benefits from tax 
positions are measured at the largest amount of benefit that is 
greater than 50 percent likely of being realized upon settlement. 
The current portion of tax liabilities is included in taxes and the 
noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is included in other liabilities in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. To the extent 
that new information becomes available which causes the com­
pany to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing 
tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income 
tax expense in the period in which such determination is made. 
Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for 
potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense.
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local 
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dol­
lars at year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are 
recorded in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) 
in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity. Income 
and expense items are translated at weighted-average rates of 
exchange prevailing during the year. 
	
Inventories, plant, rental machines and other property—net 
and other non-monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsid­
iaries and branches that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at 
the approximate exchange rates prevailing when the company 
acquired the assets or liabilities. All other assets and liabilities 
denominated in a currency other than U.S. dollars are trans­
lated at year-end exchange rates with the transaction gain or 
loss recognized in other (income) and expense. Cost of sales 
and depreciation are translated at historical exchange rates. All 
other income and expense items are translated at the weighted-
average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. These 
translation gains and losses are included in net income for the 
period in which exchange rates change.
Derivatives
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement 
of Finan­cial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid 
expenses and other current assets, investments and sundry 
assets, other accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. 
Classification of each derivative as current or noncurrent is based 
upon whether the maturity of the instrument is less than or greater 
than 12 months. To qualify for hedge accounting, the company 
requires that the instruments be effective in reducing the risk 
exposure that they are designated to hedge. For instruments that 
hedge cash flows, hedge effectiveness criteria also require that it 
be probable that the underlying transaction will occur. Instruments 
that meet established accounting criteria are formally designated 
as hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the derivative is 
expected to be highly effective at offsetting changes in fair value 
or cash flows of the underlying exposure both at inception of the 
hedging relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of 
assessing hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffective­
ness is formally documented at hedge inception. The company 
assesses hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffective­
ness at least quarterly throughout the designated hedge period.
	
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company 
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a 
recognized financial asset or liability or of an unrecognized firm 
commitment (fair value hedge); (2) the variability of anticipated 
cash flows of a forecasted transaction or the cash flows to be 
received or paid related to a recognized financial asset or liability 
(cash flow hedge); or (3) a hedge of a long-term investment 
76


===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
(net investment hedge) in a foreign operation. In addition, the 
company may enter into derivative contracts that economically 
hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge accounting does 
not apply or the company elects not to apply hedge account­
ing. In these cases, there exists a natural hedging relationship 
in which changes in the fair value of the derivative, which are 
recognized currently in net income, act as an economic offset to 
changes in the fair value of the underlying hedged item(s).
	
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of 
the underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each 
period. For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments 
are recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of 
financing in the Consoli­dated Statement of Earnings. For hedges 
of currency risk associated with recorded financial assets or 
liabilities, derivative fair value adjustments are recognized in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
cash flow hedge are recorded, net of applicable taxes, in accu­
mulated other comprehensive income/(loss), a component of 
equity. When net income is affected by the variability of the under­
lying cash flow, the applicable offsetting amount of the gain or 
loss from the derivative that is deferred in equity is released to net 
income and reported in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense 
or other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings based on the nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. 
Effectiveness for net investment hedging derivatives is measured 
on a spot-to-spot basis. The effective portion of changes in the 
fair value of net investment hedging derivatives and other non-
derivative financial instruments designated as net investment 
hedges are recorded as foreign currency translation adjustments, 
net of applicable taxes, in accumulated other comprehensive 
income/(loss) in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in 
Equity. Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net investment 
hedging derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment 
are recorded in interest expense.
	
When the underlying hedged item ceases to exist, all changes 
in the fair value of the derivative are included in net income each 
period until the instrument matures. When the derivative trans­
action ceases to exist, a hedged asset or liability is no longer 
adjusted for changes in its fair value except as required under 
other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that are not 
designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of 
derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value 
of the underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge 
period (collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income 
each period and are reported in other (income) and expense.
	
The company reports cash flows arising from derivative 
financial instruments designated as fair value or cash flow 
hedges consistent with the classification of cash flows from the 
underlying hedged items that these derivatives are hedging. 
Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives desig­
nated as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in cash 
flows from operating activities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows. Cash flows from derivatives designated as net 
investment hedges and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges 
are reported in investing activities. For currency swaps desig­
nated as hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included 
in the company’s debt risk management program as addressed 
in note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 92 
through 96), cash flows directly associated with the settlement 
of the principal element of these swaps are reported in payments 
to settle debt in the cash flow from financing activities section of 
the Consolidated State­ment of Cash Flows. 
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the 
company uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are 
based on market conditions and risks existing at each balance 
sheet date. Refer to note E, “Financial Instruments (Excluding 
Derivatives),” on pages 87 and 88 for further information. All 
methods of assessing fair value result in a general approximation 
of value, and such value may never actually be realized.
Fair Value Measurement 
Exit prices are used to measure assets and liabilities that fall 
within the scope of the fair value measurements guidance. 
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain 
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
•	 Level 1—Quoted prices in active markets that are unad­
justed and accessible at the measurement date for identical, 
unrestricted assets or liabilities;
•	 Level 2—Quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities in 
markets that are not active, quoted prices for similar assets 
and liabilities in active markets or financial instruments for 
which significant inputs are observable, either directly or 
indirectly; and
•	 Level 3—Prices or valuations that require inputs that are both 
significant to the fair value measurement and unobservable.
This guidance requires the use of observable market data if such 
data is available without undue cost and effort.
	
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted mar­
ket prices to measure the fair value and classifies such items 
within Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair 
value is based upon internally developed models that use cur­
rent market-based or independently sourced market parameters 
such as interest rates and currency rates. Items valued using 
internally generated models are classified according to the low­
est level input or value driver that is significant to the valuation. 
	
The determination of fair value considers various factors 
including interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the 
financial instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the 
company uses a discounted cash flow analysis using discount 
rates commensurate with the duration of the instrument. In the 
event of an other-than-temporary impairment of a nonpublic 
equity method investment, the company uses the net asset 
77


===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
value of its investment in the investee adjusted using discounted 
cash flows for the company’s estimate of the price that it would 
receive to sell the investment to a market participant that would 
consider all factors that would impact the investment’s fair value. 
	
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the 
company considers certain market valuation adjustments to the 
‘base valuations’ calculated using the methodologies described 
below for several parameters that market participants would 
consider in determining fair value.
•	 Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to financial 
instru­ments, taking into account the actual credit risk of a 
counterparty as observed in the credit default swap market 
to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
•	 Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s 
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at fair 
value. The methodology is consistent with that applied in 
developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but incor­
porates the company’s own credit risk as observed in the 
credit default swap market.
Certain assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring 
basis. These assets include equity method investments that are 
recognized at fair value at the end of the period to the extent that 
they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain 
assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be 
subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets 
include public cost method investments that are deemed to be 
other-than-temporarily impaired.
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less 
at the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents. 
Marketable Securities
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that 
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance 
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to 
be realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securi­
ties are included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and 
marketable equity securities are considered available for sale and 
are reported at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of 
applicable taxes, recorded in other comprehensive income/(loss), 
a component of equity. The realized gains and losses for available 
for sale securities are included in other (income) and expense 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Realized gains and 
losses are calculated based on the specific identification method. 
	
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in 
market value has occurred, the company considers the duration 
that, and extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below 
its cost, the financial condition and near-term prospects of the 
issuer or underlying collateral of a security; and the company’s 
intent and ability to retain the security in order to allow for an 
anticipated recovery in fair value. Other-than-temporary declines 
in fair value from amortized cost for available for sale equity and 
debt securities that the company intends to sell or would more-
likely-than-not be required to sell before the expected recovery 
of the amortized cost basis are charged to other (income) and 
expense in the period in which the loss occurs. For debt securi­
ties that the company has no intent to sell and believes that it 
more-likely-than-not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, 
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized 
in other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is rec­
ognized in other comprehensive income/(loss). The credit loss 
component recognized in other (income) and expense is identi­
fied as the amount of the principal cash flows not expected to be 
received over the remaining term of the debt security as projected 
using the company’s cash flow projections. 
Inventories
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at 
the lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the 
sale of inventories are reflected in net cash from operating activi­
ties from continuing operations in the Consolidated Statement 
of Cash Flows. 
Allowance for Uncollectible Receivables
Trade
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated 
based on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and 
any specific, known troubled accounts.
Financing
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans. The methodologies that the company uses to 
calculate both its specific and its unallocated reserves, which 
are applied consistently to its different portfolios are as follows: 
SPECIFIC—The company reviews all financing receivables con­
sidered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily consists 
of an analysis based upon current information available about 
the client, such as financial statements, news reports, published 
credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as well as 
the current economic environment, collateral net of reposses­
sion cost and prior collection history. For loans that are collateral 
dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of the 
collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, 
the company determines the expected cash flow for the receiv­
able and calculates a recommended estimate of the potential 
loss and the probability of loss. For those accounts in which the 
loss is probable, the company records a specific reserve. 
UNALLOCATED—The company records an unallocated reserve 
that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different port­
folios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. 
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, 
term, asset characteristics and loss history.
78


===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
Receivable losses are charged against the allowance when 
management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable is con­
firmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance.
	
Certain receivables for which the company recorded specific 
reserves may also be placed on non-accrual status. Non-accrual 
assets are those receivables (impaired loans or non-performing 
leases) with specific reserves and other accounts for which it 
is likely that the company will be unable to collect all amounts 
due according to original terms of the lease or loan agreement. 
Income recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash 
collections are first applied as a reduction to principal out­
standing. Any cash received in excess of principal payments 
outstanding is recognized as interest income. Receivables may 
be removed from non-accrual status, if appropriate, based upon 
changes in client circumstances.
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
The recorded residual values of the company’s lease assets are 
estimated at the inception of the lease to be the expected fair 
value of the assets at the end of the lease term. The company 
periodically reassesses the realizable value of its lease residual 
values. Any anticipated increases in specific future residual values 
are not recognized before realization through remarketing efforts. 
Anticipated decreases in specific future residual values that are 
considered to be other-than-temporary are recognized immedi­
ately upon identification and are recorded as an adjustment to 
the residual-value estimate. For sales-type and direct financing 
leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net investment and is 
recognized as a loss charged to financing income in the period 
in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjustment to 
unearned income to reduce future-period financing income.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital 
stock as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. 
Treasury stock is accounted for using the cost method. When 
treasury stock is reissued, the value is computed and recorded 
using a weighted-average basis. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Basic earnings per share of common stock  is computed by 
dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common 
shares outstanding for the period. Diluted earnings per share of 
common stock is computed on the basis of the weighted-aver­
age number of shares of common stock plus the effect of dilutive 
potential common shares outstanding during the period using 
the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common shares 
include outstanding stock options, stock awards and convertible 
notes. See note R, “Earnings Per Share of Common Stock,” on 
page 104 for additional information. 
Note B. 
Accounting Changes
New Standards to be Implemented
In January 2010, the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB) issued additional disclosure requirements for fair value 
measurements. According to the guidance, the fair value hierar­
chy disclosures are to be further disaggregated by class of assets 
and liabilities. A class is often a subset of assets or liabilities within 
a line item in the statement of financial position. In addition, signif­
icant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 of the fair value hierarchy 
will be required to be disclosed. These additional requirements are 
effective January 1, 2010 for quarterly and annual reporting. These 
amendments will not have an impact on the consolidated finan­
cial results as this guidance relates only to additional disclosures. 
In addition, the guidance requires more detailed disclosures of the 
changes in Level 3 instruments. These changes will be effective 
January 1, 2011 and are not expected to have a material impact 
on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
In October 2009, the FASB issued amended revenue rec­
ognition guidance for arrangements with multiple deliverables. 
The new guidance eliminates the residual method of revenue 
recognition and allows the use of management’s best estimate 
of selling price for individual elements of an arrangement when 
vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE), vendor objective 
evidence (VOE) or third-party evidence (TPE) is unavailable. In 
accordance with the guidance, the company has elected to early 
adopt its provisions as of January 1, 2010 on a prospective basis 
for all new or materially modified arrangements entered into on or 
after that date. The company does not expect a material impact 
on the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
	
In October 2009, the FASB issued guidance which amends 
the scope of existing software revenue recognition account­
ing. Tangible products containing software components and 
non-software components that function together to deliver the 
product’s essential functionality would be scoped out of the 
accounting guidance on software and accounted for based on 
other appropriate revenue recognition guidance. This guidance 
must be adopted in the same period that the company adopts 
the amended accounting for arrangements with multiple deliv­
erables described in the preceding paragraph. Therefore, the 
company will also early adopt this guidance as of January 1, 
2010 on a prospective basis for all new or materially modified 
arrangements entered into on or after that date. The com­
pany does not expect a material impact on the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.
	
In June 2009, the FASB issued amendments to the account­
ing rules for variable interest entities (VIEs) and for transfers of 
financial assets. The new guidance for VIEs eliminates the quan­
titative approach previously required for determining the primary 
beneficiary of a variable interest entity and requires ongoing 
qualitative reassessments of whether an enterprise is the primary 
beneficiary. In addition, qualifying special purpose entities (QSPEs) 
79


===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
are no longer exempt from consolidation under the amended 
guidance. The amendments also limit the circumstances in which 
a financial asset, or a portion of a financial asset, should be derec­
ognized when the transferor has not transferred the entire original 
financial asset to an entity that is not consolidated with the trans­
feror in the financial statements being presented, and/or when 
the transferor has continuing involvement with the transferred 
financial asset. The company will adopt these amendments 
for interim and annual reporting periods beginning on January 
1, 2010. The company does not expect the adoption of these 
amendments to have a material impact on the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.
Standards Implemented
In September 2009, the FASB issued amended guidance con­
cerning fair value measurements of investments in certain entities 
that calculate net asset value per share (or its equivalent). If fair 
value is not readily determinable, the amended guidance permits, 
as a practical expedient, a reporting entity to measure the fair 
value of an investment using the net asset value per share (or its 
equivalent) provided by the investee without further adjustment. 
In accordance with the guidance, the company adopted these 
amendments for the year ended December 31, 2009. There was 
no material impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
On July 1, 2009, the FASB issued the FASB Accounting 
Standards Codification (the Codification). The Codification became 
the single source of authoritative nongovernmental U.S. GAAP, 
superseding existing FASB, American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA), Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF) and 
related literature. The Codification eliminates the previous U.S. 
GAAP hierarchy and establishes one level of authoritative GAAP. 
All other literature is considered non-authoritative. The Codifica­
tion was effective for interim and annual periods ending after 
September 15, 2009. The company adopted the Codification for 
the quarter ending September 30, 2009. There was no impact 
to the consolidated financial results. 
	
In May 2009, the FASB issued guidelines on subsequent 
event accounting which sets forth: 1) the period after the bal­
ance sheet date during which management of a reporting entity 
should evaluate events or transactions that may occur for poten­
tial recognition or disclosure in the financial statements; 2) the 
circumstances under which an entity should recognize events 
or transactions occurring after the balance sheet date in its 
financial statements; and 3) the disclosures that an entity should 
make about events or transactions that occurred after the bal­
ance sheet date. These guidelines were effective for interim and 
annual periods ending after June 15, 2009, and the company 
adopted them in the quarter ended June 30, 2009. There was 
no impact on the consolidated financial results.
	
In April 2009, the FASB issued additional requirements regard­
ing interim disclosures about the fair value of financial instruments 
which were previously only disclosed on an annual basis. Entities 
are now required to disclose the fair value of financial instruments 
which are not recorded at fair value in the financial statements in 
both interim and annual financial statements. The new require­
ments were effective for interim and annual periods ending after 
June 15, 2009 on a prospective basis. The company adopted 
these requirements in the quarter ended June 30, 2009. There 
was no impact on the consolidated financial results as this relates 
only to additional disclosures in the quarterly financial statements. 
See note E, “Financial Instruments (Excluding Derivatives)”, on 
pages 87 and 88. 
	
On January 1, 2009, the company adopted the revised FASB 
guidance regarding business combinations which was required 
to be applied to business combinations on a prospective basis. 
The revised guidance requires that the acquisition method of 
accounting be applied to a broader set of business combina­
tions, amends the definition of a business combination, provides 
a definition of a business, requires an acquirer to recognize 
an acquired business at its fair value at the acquisition date 
and requires the assets and liabilities assumed in a business 
combination to be measured and recognized at their fair values 
as of the acquisition date (with limited exceptions). There was 
no impact upon adoption and the effects of this guidance will 
depend on the nature and significance of business combinations 
occurring after the effective date. See note C, “Acquisitions/
Divestitures”, on pages 82 to 86 for further information regarding 
2009 business combinations.
	
In April 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to the revised 
business combination guidance regarding the accounting for 
assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combi­
nation that arise from contingencies. The requirements of this 
amended guidance carry forward without significant revision 
the guidance on contingencies which existed prior to January 
1, 2009. Assets acquired and liabilities assumed in a business 
combination that arise from contingencies are recognized at fair 
value if fair value can be reasonably estimated. If fair value can­
not be reasonably estimated, the asset or liability would generally 
be recognized in accordance with the Accounting Standards 
Codification (ASC) Topic 450 on contingencies. There was no 
impact upon adoption. See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures”, 
on pages 82 to 86 for further information regarding 2009 busi­
ness combinations.
	
In April 2008, the FASB issued new requirements regard­
ing the determination of the useful lives of intangible assets. In 
developing assumptions about renewal or extension options 
used to determine the useful life of an intangible asset, an entity 
needs to consider its own historical experience adjusted for 
entity-specific factors. In the absence of that experience, an 
entity shall consider the assumptions that market participants 
would use about renewal or extension options. The new require­
ments apply to intangible assets acquired after January 1, 2009. 
The adoption of these new rules did not have a material impact 
on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
80


===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
In December 2007, the FASB issued new guidance on non­
controlling interests in consolidated financial statements. This 
guidance requires that the noncontrolling interest in the equity of 
a subsidiary be accounted for and reported as equity, provides 
revised guidance on the treatment of net income and losses 
attributable to the noncontrolling interest and changes in owner­
ship interests in a subsidiary and requires additional disclosures 
that identify and distinguish between the interests of the con­
trolling and noncontrolling owners. Pursuant to the transition 
provisions, the company adopted this new guidance on January 
1, 2009 via retrospective application of the presentation and 
disclosure requirements. Noncontrolling interests of $119 million 
at January 1, 2009, $145 million at January 1, 2008 and $129 
million at January 1, 2007 were reclassified from the Liabilities 
section to the Equity section in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position.
	
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $5 million, $14 
million and $17 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 
31, 2009, December 31, 2008 and December 31, 2007, respec­
tively, are not presented separately in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings due to immateriality, but are reflected within the other 
(income) and expense line item. Additionally, changes to noncon­
trolling interests in the Consolidated Statement of Changes in 
Equity were $(1) million, $(26) million and $16 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2009, December 31, 2008 and December 
31, 2007, respectively. A separate roll forward is not presented 
due to immateriality.
	
In March 2008, the FASB issued new disclosure requirements 
regarding derivative instruments and hedging activities. Entities 
must now provide enhanced disclosures on an interim and 
annual basis regarding how and why the entity uses derivatives; 
how derivatives and related hedged items are accounted for, 
and how derivatives and related hedged items affect the entity’s 
financial position, financial results and cash flow. Pursuant to 
the transition provisions, the company adopted these new 
requirements on January 1, 2009. The required disclosures are 
presented in note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on 
pages 92 through 96 on a prospective basis. These new require­
ments did not impact the consolidated financial results as they 
relate only to additional disclosures. 
	
In June 2008, the FASB issued guidance in determining 
whether instruments granted in share-based payment transac­
tions are participating securities. The guidance became effective 
on January 1, 2009 via retrospective application. According to 
the new guidance, unvested share-based payment awards that 
contain non-forfeitable rights to dividends or dividend equiva­
lents are participating securities and, therefore, are included in 
computing earnings per share (EPS) pursuant to the two-class 
method. The two-class method determines EPS for each class 
of common stock and participating securities according to divi­
dends or dividend equivalents and their respective participation 
rights in undistributed earnings. Restricted Stock Units (RSUs) 
granted to employees prior to December 31, 2007 are considered 
participating securities as they receive non-forfeitable dividend 
equivalents at the same rate as common stock. RSUs granted 
after December 31, 2007 do not receive dividend equivalents 
and are not considered participating securities. The company 
retrospectively adopted this guidance on January 1, 2009. The 
impact of adoption decreased previously reported diluted EPS 
by $0.04 for the year ended December 31, 2008 and by $0.03 
for the year ended December 31, 2007. Previously reported 
basic EPS decreased by $0.05 for the year ended December 
31, 2008 and by $0.05 for the year ended December 31, 2007.
	
In November 2008, the FASB issued guidance on accounting 
for defensive intangible assets. A defensive intangible asset is an 
asset acquired in a business combination or in an asset acquisi­
tion that an entity does not intend to actively use. According to 
the guidance, defensive intangible assets are considered to be a 
separate unit of account and valued based on their highest and 
best use from the perspective of an external market participant. 
The company adopted this guidance on January 1, 2009, and 
there was no impact upon adoption.
	
In December 2008, the FASB issued guidance regard­
ing employers’ disclosures about postretirement benefit plan 
assets. This guidance requires more detailed disclosures about 
the fair value measurements of employers’ plan assets includ­
ing: (a) investment policies and strategies; (b) major categories 
of plan assets; (c) information about valuation techniques and 
inputs to those techniques, including the fair value hierarchy 
classifications (as defined in the Codification) of the major cat­
egories of plan assets; (d) the effects of fair value measurements 
using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) on changes in 
plan assets; and (e) significant concentrations of risk within plan 
assets. The disclosures are required annually and have been 
included in the December 31, 2009 Consolidated Financial State­
ments. See note U “Retirement-Related Benefits” on pages 109 
through 121 for further information. There was no impact on 
the consolidated financial results as the guidance relates only to 
additional disclosures.
	
In September 2006, the FASB issued guidance that defines 
fair value, establishes a framework for measuring fair value and 
expands disclosures about fair value measurements; however, 
it does not require any new fair value measurements. This 
guidance became effective January 1, 2008 and was applied 
prospectively to fair value measurements and disclosures of (a) 
financial assets and financial liabilities and (b) nonfinancial assets 
and nonfinancial liabilities which are recognized or disclosed at 
fair value in the financial statements on a recurring basis (at least 
annually). The application of this guidance did not have a mate­
rial effect on the Consolidated Financial Statements. See note D, 
“Fair Value,” on pages 86 and 87 for additional information. 
	
In February 2008, the FASB issued two amendments to 
the fair value guidance described above. The first amendment 
removed leasing from the scope of the fair value guidance. The 
second amendment delayed the effective date regarding fair 
value measurements and disclosures of nonfinancial assets 
and nonfinancial liabilities, except those that are recognized or 
disclosed at fair value in the financial statements on a recurring 
81


===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
basis (at least annually), to January 1, 2009. The application 
of these amendments did not have a material impact on the 
Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
In February 2007, the FASB issued guidance that permits 
entities to measure eligible financial assets, financial liabilities 
and firm commitments at fair value, on an instrument-by-instru­
ment basis, that are otherwise not permitted to be accounted 
for at fair value under other generally accepted accounting prin­
ciples. The fair value measurement election is irrevocable and 
subsequent changes in fair value must be recorded in earnings. 
The company adopted this guidance as of January 1, 2008 but 
has not applied the fair value option to any eligible assets or 
liabilities. Thus, the adoption of this guidance did not affect the 
Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
In the first quarter of 2007, the company adopted the guid­
ance on accounting for separately recognized servicing assets 
and servicing liabilities. Separately recognized servicing assets 
and servicing liabilities must be initially measured at fair value, 
if practicable. Subsequent to initial recognition, the company 
may use either the amortization method or the fair value mea­
surement method to account for servicing assets and servicing 
liabilities within the scope of this Statement. The adoption of 
this guidance did not have a material effect on the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.
	
On January 1, 2007, the company adopted the guidance 
on the accounting and reporting of uncertainties in income tax 
law. The guidance prescribes a comprehensive model for the 
financial statement recognition, measurement, presentation and 
disclosure of uncertain tax positions taken or expected to be 
taken in income tax returns. See note P, “Taxes”, on pages 101 
to 103 for further information. The cumulative effect of adopting 
this guidance was a decrease in tax reserves and an increase of 
$117 million to the January 1, 2007 retained earnings balance.
Note C. 
Acquisitions/Divestitures
Acquisitions
2009
In 2009, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggre­
gate cost of $1,471 million. The SPSS, Inc. acquisition is shown 
separately given its significant purchase price.
SPSS, INC. (SPSS)—On October 2, 2009, the company acquired 
100 percent of the outstanding common shares of SPSS for 
cash consideration of $1,177 million. SPSS is a leading global 
provider of predictive analytics software and solutions and this 
acquisition will strengthen the company’s business analytics and 
optimization capabilities. SPSS was integrated into the Software 
segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table 
below, has been entirely assigned to the Software segment. 
Substantially all of the goodwill is not deductible for tax pur­
poses. The overall weighted average useful life of the intangible 
assets acquired, excluding goodwill, is 7.0 years. 
OTHER ACQUISITIONS—The Software segment also completed 
acquisitions of four privately held companies: in the second quar­
ter, Outblaze Limited, a messaging software provider, and Exeros, 
Inc., a data discovery firm; in the third quarter, security provider 
Ounce Labs, Inc.; and in the fourth quarter, Guardium, Inc., a 
database security company. Global Technology Services com­
pleted one acquisition in the fourth quarter: RedPill Solutions PTE 
Limited, a privately held company focused on business analytics.
	
Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions,” as 
reflected in the table below, was paid all in cash. All acquisitions 
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net 
of acquired cash and cash equivalents.
2009 ACQUISITIONS
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Amortization	
	
	
Other
	
	
	
Life (in Years)	
	
SPSS	
Acquisitions
Current assets	
	
	
	
	
$   397	
$  13
Fixed assets/noncurrent	
	
	
	
	
20	
1
Intangible assets:
	 Goodwill	
 	
	
N/A	
	
748	
255
	 Completed technology	
 	
	
4 to 7	
	
105	
39
	 Client relationships	
	
	
5 to 7	
	
30	
20
	 In-process R&D 	
 	
	
N/A	
	
—	
—
	 Other identifiable assets	
 	
	
1 to 7	
	
36	
1 
Total assets acquired	
	
	
	
	
1,336	
330
Current liabilities	
	
	
	
	
(157)	
(34)
Noncurrent liabilities	
	
	
	
	
(2)	
(0)
Total liabilities assumed	
	
	
	
	
(160)	
(35)
Total purchase price	
	
	
	
	
$1,177	
$295
N/A—Not applicable
82


===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
The acquisitions were accounted for as business combina­
tions, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the acquired 
entities were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date of 
acquisition. The primary items that generated the goodwill are the 
value of the synergies between the acquired companies and IBM 
and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of which qualify 
as an amortizable intangible asset. For the “Other Acquisitions”, 
the overall weighted-average life of the identified amortizable 
intangible assets acquired is 6.5 years. With the exception of 
goodwill, these identified intangible assets will be amortized on 
a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of $255 mil­
lion has been assigned to the Software ($246 million) and Global 
Technology Services ($10 million) segments. Substantially all of 
the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes.
	
On October 5, 2009, the company announced that it had 
signed an agreement with Bank of America Corporation to 
acquire the core operating assets of Wilshire Credit Corporation, 
including the Wilshire mortgage servicing platform. This acquisi­
tion continues the company’s strategic focus on the mortgage 
services industry and strengthens its commitment to deliver 
mortgage business process outsourcing solutions. The agree­
ment is subject to customary closing conditions and is not 
expected to close until the first quarter of 2010.
2008
In 2008, the company completed 15 acquisitions at an aggre­
gate cost of $6,796 million. The Cognos, Inc. and Telelogic, AB 
acquisitions are shown separately given their significant pur­
chase prices.
COGNOS, INC. (COGNOS)—On January 31, 2008, the company 
ac­quired 100 percent of the outstanding common shares 
of Cognos for consideration of $5,021 million consisting of 
$4,998 million of cash and $24 million of equity instruments. 
Through this acquisition, IBM and Cognos will become a lead­
ing provider of technology and services for business intelligence 
and performance management, delivering the industry’s most 
complete, open standards-based platform with the broadest 
range of expertise to help companies expand the value of their 
information, optimize their business processes and maximize 
performance across their enterprises. The company acquired 
Cognos to accelerate its Information on Demand strategy, a 
cross-company initiative that combines the company’s strength 
in information integration, content and data management and 
business consulting services to unlock the business value of 
information. Cognos was integrated into the Software segment 
upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on 
page 84, has been entirely assigned to the Software segment. 
Approximately 25–30 percent of the goodwill was deductible 
for tax purposes. The overall weighted-average useful life of 
the intangible assets acquired, excluding goodwill, is 6.5 years. 
TELELOGIC, AB (TELELOGIC)—On April 3, 2008, IBM acquired 100 
percent of the outstanding common shares of Telelogic for cash 
consideration of $885 million. Telelogic is a leading global pro­
vider of solutions that enable organizations to align the develop­
ment of products, complex systems and software with business 
objectives and customer needs. This results in improved quality 
and predictability, while reducing time-to-market and overall 
costs. Clients will benefit from the combined technologies and 
services of both companies, providing them a wider range of 
software and system development capabilities used to build 
complex systems. Telelogic was integrated into the Software 
segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table 
on page 84 has been entirely assigned to the Software segment. 
Substantially all of the goodwill is not deductible for tax pur­
poses. The overall weighted-average useful life of the intangible 
assets acquired, excluding goodwill, is 7.0 years.
OTHER ACQUISITIONS—The company acquired 13 additional 
companies at an aggregate cost of $889 million that are pre­
sented in the table on page 84 as “Other Acquisitions.”
	
The Software segment completed eight other acquisitions, 
seven of which were privately held companies: in the first quarter; 
AptSoft Corporation, Solid Information Technology, Net Integration 
Tech­nologies Inc., and Encentuate, Inc; in the second quarter; 
Infodyne, Beijing Super Info and FilesX. In the fourth quarter, 
ILOG S.A. (ILOG), a publicly held company, was acquired for 
$295 million. ILOG adds significant capability across the com­
pany’s entire software platform and bolsters its existing rules 
management offerings.
	
Global Technology Services completed one acquisition in the 
first quarter: Arsenal Digital Solutions, a privately held company. 
Arsenal provides global clients with security rich information 
protection services designed to handle increasing data retention 
requirements.
	
Global Business Services completed one acquisition in the first 
quarter: u9consult, a privately held company. u9consult comple­
ments the company’s existing capabilities in value chain consulting.
	
Systems and Technology completed three acquisitions: 
in the second quarter; Diligent Technologies Corporation and 
Platform Solutions, Inc (PSI), both privately held companies. 
Diligent will be an important component of IBM’s New Enterprise 
Data Center model, which helps clients improve IT efficiency 
and facilitates the rapid deployment of new IT services for 
future business growth. PSI’s technologies and skills, along 
with its intellectual capital, will be integrated into the company’s 
mainframe product engineering cycles and future product 
plans. In the second quarter, $24 million of the purchase price 
of PSI was attributed to the settlement of a preexisting lawsuit 
83


===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
between IBM and PSI and recorded in SG&A expense. See 
note O, “Contingencies and Commitments,” on pages 99 to 
101 for additional information regarding this litigation. Also, the 
company recorded a $24 million in-process research and devel­
opment (IPR&D) charge related to this acquisition in the second 
quarter. The acquisition of Transitive Corporation (Transitive) 
was completed in the fourth quarter. Transitive’s cross-platform 
technology will allow clients to consolidate their Linux-based 
applications onto the IBM systems that make the most sense 
for their business needs. 
	
Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions” 
was paid all in cash. All acquisitions are reported in the Consol­
idated Statement of Cash Flows net of acquired cash and cash 
equivalents.
2008 ACQUISITIONS
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Amortization	
	
	
Other
	
	
	
Life (in Years)	
Cognos	
Telelogic	
Acquisitions
Current assets	
	
	
	
$   504	
$   242	
$   185
Fixed assets/noncurrent	
	
	
	
126	
7	
75
Intangible assets:
	 Goodwill	
 	
	
N/A	
4,207	
690	
676
	 Completed technology	
 	
	
3 to 7	
534	
108	
94
	 Client relationships	
	
	
3 to 7	
512	
127	
39
	 In-process R&D 	
 	
	
N/A	
—	
—	
24
	 Other		
 	
	
3 to 7	
78	
15	
19 
Total assets acquired	
	
	
	
5,960	
1,189	
1,112
Current liabilities	
	
	
	
(798)	
(141)	
(233)
Noncurrent liabilities	
	
	
	
(141)	
(163)	
(14)
Total liabilities assumed	
	
	
	
(939)	
(304)	
(247)
Settlement of prexisting litigation	
	
	
	
—	
—	
24
Total purchase price	
	
	
	
$5,021	
$   885	
$   889
N/A—Not applicable
The table above reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
Decem­ber 31, 2008.
	
The acquisitions were accounted for as purchase transac­
tions, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the acquired 
entities were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date 
of acquisition. The primary items that generated the goodwill 
are the value of the synergies between the acquired companies 
and IBM and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of 
which qualify as an amortizable intangible asset. For the “Other 
Acquisitions,” the overall weighted-average life of the identified 
amortizable intangible assets acquired is 4.3 years. With the 
exception of goodwill, these identified intangible assets will 
be amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. 
Goodwill of $676 million has been assigned to the Software 
($328 million), Global Technology Services ($68 million) and 
Systems and Technology ($280 million) segments. Substantially, 
all of the goodwill related to “Other Acquisitions” is not deduct­
ible for tax purposes.
2007
In 2007, the company completed 12 acquisitions at an aggre­
gate cost of $1,144 million.
	
The Software segment completed six acquisitions: in the first 
quarter, Consul Risk Management International BV and Vallent 
Cor­por­ation, both privately held companies. Four acquisitions 
were completed in the third quarter: Watchfire Corporation, 
WebDialogs Inc. and Princeton Softech Inc., all privately held 
companies, and DataMirror Corporation, a publicly held com­
pany. Each acquisition further complemented and enhanced the 
software product portfolio.
	
Global Technology Services completed four acquisitions: in 
the first quarter, Softek Storage Solutions Corporation (Softek) 
and DM Information Systems, Ltd. (DMIS), both privately held 
companies. Two acquisitions were completed in the fourth 
quarter: Novus Consulting Group, Inc. and Serbian Business 
Systems, both privately held companies. Softek augments the 
company’s unified data mobility offerings and worldwide delivery 
expertise for managing data in storage array, host and virtual­
ized IT environments. DMIS will enhance and complement the 
Technology Service offerings. Novus CG, a storage solution 
company, will provide improved access to business information, 
84


===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
enable stronger regulatory and corporate compliance and improve 
overall information technology performance. Serbian Business 
Systems establishes the company’s maintenance and technical 
support services business in Serbia.
	
Global Business Services completed one acquisition in the 
fourth quarter: IT Gruppen AS, which will add to the company’s 
presence in the retail and media sectors.
	
Systems and Technology completed one acquisition in the 
fourth quarter: XIV, Ltd., a privately held company focused on 
storage systems technology.
	
Purchase price consideration was paid in cash. These 
acquisitions are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash 
Flows net of acquired cash and cash equivalents.
	
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these 
acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of 
Dec­ember 31, 2007.
	
The acquisitions were accounted for as purchase transac­
tions, and accordingly, the assets and liabilities of the acquired 
entities were recorded at their estimated fair values at the date 
of acquisition. The primary items that generated the goodwill 
are the value of the synergies between the acquired companies 
and IBM and the acquired assembled workforce, neither of 
which qualify as an amortizable intangible asset. Substantially 
all of the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes. The overall 
weighted-average life of the identified amortizable intangible 
assets acquired is 5.4 years. With the exception of goodwill, 
these identified intangible assets will be amortized over their 
useful lives. Goodwill of $999 million was assigned to the 
Software ($639 million), Global Business Services ($14 million), 
Global Technology Services ($76 million) and Systems and 
Technology ($269 million) segments.
2007 ACQUISITIONS
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
Amortization
	
	
	
	
	
Life (in Years)	
 Acquisitions
Current assets	
	
	
	
	
	
$   184
Fixed assets/noncurrent	
	
	
	
	
	
31
Intangible assets:
	 Goodwill	
 	
	
	
	
N/A	
999
	 Completed technology	
 	
	
	
	
3 to 7	
93
	 Client relationships	
	
	
	
	
3 to 7	
91
	 Other		
	
	
	
	
2 to 5	
17
Total assets acquired	
	
	
	
	
	
1,415
Current liabilities	
	
	
	
	
	
(136)
Noncurrent liabilities	
	
	
	
	
	
(135)
Total liabilities assumed	
	
	
	
	
	
(271)
Total purchase price	
	
	
	
	
	
$1,144
N/A—Not applicable
Divestitures
2009
On October 26, 2009, the company announced that it had 
signed an agreement with Dassault Systemes (DS) under which 
DS would acquire the company’s activities associated with sales 
and support of DS’s product lifecycle management (PLM) soft­
ware solutions, including customer contracts and related assets. 
This transaction is subject to customary closing conditions and 
is expected to close in the first quarter of 2010. The company 
expects to record a gain when this transaction is completed.
	
On October 1, 2009, the company completed the divestiture 
of its UniData and UniVerse software products and related tools 
to Rocket Software, a privately held global software develop­
ment firm. The company recognized a gain on the transaction in 
the fourth quarter.
	
On March 16, 2009, the company completed the sale of cer­
tain processes, resources, assets and third-party contracts related 
to its core logistics operations to Geodis. The company received 
proceeds of $365 million and recognized a net gain of $298 
million on the transaction in the first quarter of 2009. The gain 
was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain 
transaction costs and related real estate charges. As part of this 
transaction, the company outsourced its logistics operations to 
Geodis which enables the company to leverage industry-leading 
skills and scale and improve the productivity of the company’s 
supply chain. 
2007
In January 2007, the company announced an agreement with 
Ricoh Company Limited (Ricoh), a publicly traded company, 
to form a joint venture company based on the Printing System 
Division (a division of the Systems and Technology segment). 
85


===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
The company initially created a wholly owned subsidiary, 
InfoPrint Solutions Company, LLC (InfoPrint), by contributing spe­
cific assets and liabilities from its printer business. The Printing 
Systems Division generated approximately $1 billion of revenue 
in 2006. The InfoPrint portfolio includes solutions for production 
printing for enterprises and commercial printers as well as solu­
tions for office workgroup environments and industrial segments. 
On June 1, 2007 (closing date), the company divested 51 per­
cent of its interest in InfoPrint to Ricoh. The company will divest 
its remaining 49 percent ownership to Ricoh quarterly over the 
next three years from the closing date. At December 31, 2009, 
the company’s ownership in InfoPrint was 8.0 percent.
	
The total consideration the company agreed to on January 
24, 2007 (the date the definitive agreement was signed) was 
$725 million which was paid in cash to the company on the clos­
ing date. The cash received was consideration for the initial 51 
percent acquisition of InfoPrint by Ricoh as well as a prepayment 
for the remaining 49 percent to be acquired and certain royalties 
and services to be provided by the company to InfoPrint. Final 
consideration for this transaction will be determined at the end 
of the three-year period based upon the participation in the 
profits and losses recorded by the equity partners. The com­
pany concluded that InfoPrint met the requirements of a variable 
interest entity, the company is not the primary beneficiary of the 
entity and that deconsolidation of the applicable net assets was 
appropriate. The company’s investment in InfoPrint is accounted 
for under the equity method of accounting. 
	
The company will provide maintenance services for one year, 
certain hardware products for three years and other information 
technology and business process services to InfoPrint for up to 
five years. The company assessed the fair value of these arrange­
ments, and, as a result, deferred $274 million of the proceeds. 
This amount will be recorded as revenue, primarily in the com­
pany’s services segments, as services are provided to InfoPrint. 
	
The royalty agreements are related to the use of certain of 
the company’s trademarks for up to 10 years. The company 
assessed the fair value of these royalty agreements, and, as a 
result, deferred $116 million of the proceeds. This amount will 
be recognized as intellectual property and custom development 
income as it is earned in subsequent periods.
	
Net assets contributed, transaction-related expenses and 
provi­sions were $90 million, resulting in an expected total pre-tax 
gain of $245 million, of which $81 million was recorded in other 
(income) ­and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
in the second quarter of 2007.
	
The deferred pre-tax gain of $164 million at the closing date 
was primarily related to: (1) the transfer of the company’s remain­
ing 49 percent interest in InfoPrint to Ricoh, and, (2) the transfer of 
certain maintenance services employees to InfoPrint. The com­
pany will recognize this amount over a three-year period as the 
remaining ownership interest is divested and the employees are 
transferred. The pre-tax gain will be recorded in other (income) 
and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Note D. 
Fair Value
Financial Assets and Financial Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis 
The following table presents the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis 
at December 31, 2009 and 2008. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2009:	
	
Level 1	
Level 2	
Level 3	
Netting(1)	
Total
Assets:
	 Cash and cash equivalents	
	
$2,780	
$6,497	
$  —	
$    —	
$  9,277
	 Marketable securities	
	
—	
1,791	
—	
—	
1,791
	 Derivative assets(2)	
	
—	
838	
—	
(573)	
265
	 Investments and sundry assets	
	
369	
14	
—	
—	
383
Total assets	
	
$3,149	
$9,140	
$  —	
$(573)	
$11,716
Liabilities:
	 Derivative liabilities(3)	
	
$      —	
$1,555	
$  —	
$(573)	
$     982
Total liabilities	
	
$      —	
$1,555	
$  —	
$(573)	
$     982
(1)	Represents netting of derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement.
(2)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2009 are $273 million and $565 million, respectively. 
(3)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2009 are $906 million and $649 million, respectively. 
86


===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2008:	
	
Level 1	
Level 2	
Level 3	
Netting(1)	
Total
Assets:
	 Cash and cash equivalents	
	
$1,950	
$  8,059	
$  —	
$   —	
$10,009
	 Marketable securities	
	
—	
166	
—	
—	
166
	 Derivative assets(2)	
	
56	
1,834	
—	
(875)	
1,015
	 Investments and sundry assets	
	
165	
6	
—	
—	
171
Total assets	
	
$2,171	
$10,065	
$  —	
$(875)	
$11,361
Liabilities:
	 Derivative liabilities(3)	
	
$      —	
$  2,116	
$  —	
$(875)	
$  1,241
Total liabilities	
	
$      —	
$  2,116	
$  —	
$(875)	
$  1,241
(1)	Represents netting of derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement.
(2)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2008 are $773 million and $1,117 million, respectively. 
(3)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2008 are $1,414 million and $702 million, respectively. 
Items Measured at Fair Value on 
a Nonrecurring Basis 
In the fourth quarter of 2008, the company recorded an other-
than-temporary impairment of $81 million for an equity method 
investment. The resulting investment which was classified as 
Level 3 in the fair value hierarchy was valued using a discounted 
cash flow model. The valuation inputs included an estimate of 
future cash flows, expectations about possible variations in the 
amount and timing of cash flows and a discount rate based on 
the risk-adjusted cost of capital. Potential results were assigned 
probabilities that resulted in a weighted average or most-likely 
discounted cash flow fair value as of December 31, 2008. The 
fair value of the investment after impairment was $7 million at 
December 31, 2008. During 2009, the balance of this invest­
ment was further reduced by an additional impairment of $5 
million and other adjustments primarily related to dividends. The 
balance of this investment was zero at December 31, 2009.
Note E. 
Financial Instruments 
(Excluding Derivatives)
Fair Value of Financial Instruments
Cash and cash equivalents, debt and marketable equity securi­
ties and derivative financial instruments are recognized and 
measured at fair value in the company’s financial statements. 
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are 
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt 
are financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate fair 
value. In the absence of quoted prices in active markets, consid­
erable judgment is required in developing estimates of fair value. 
Estimates are not necessarily indicative of the amounts the com­
pany could realize in a current market transaction. The following 
methods and assumptions are used to estimate fair values:
Loans and Long-term Receivables
Estimates of fair value are based on discounted future cash 
flows using current interest rates offered for similar loans to cli­
ents with similar credit ratings for the same remaining maturities. 
Long-term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted 
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset 
in an active market. For other long-term debt for which a 
quoted market price is not available, an expected present value 
technique that uses rates currently available to the company 
for debt with similar terms and remaining maturies is used to 
estimate fair value. The carrying amount of long-term debt is 
$21,932 million and $22,689 million and the estimated fair value 
is $23,748 million and $23,351 million at December 31, 2009 
and 2008, respectively.
87


===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The following table summarizes the company’s debt and market­
able equity securities all of which are considered available-for-sale 
and re­cord­ed at fair value in the Consolidated Statement of Finan­
cial Position.
($ in millions)
	
Fair Value
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Cash and cash equivalents:*
	 Time deposits and certificates of deposit	
	
$4,324	
$  4,805
	 Commercial paper	
	
2,099	
3,194
	 Money market funds	
	
2,780	
1,950
	 Other securities	
	
74	
60
Total		 	
	
$9,277	
$10,009
Debt securities—current:**
	 Commercial paper	
	
$1,491	
$     166
	 Securities of U.S. Federal government
	 	 and its agencies	
	
300	
—
Total		 	
	
$1,791	
$     166
Debt securities—noncurrent:***
	 Other securities	
	
$       9	
$         6
Total		 	
	
$       9	
$         6
Non-equity method alliance investments***	
	
$   374	
$     165
*	 Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position.
**	 Reported as marketable securities within the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. 
***Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. See note I, “Investments and Sundry Assets,” on page 89.
Gross unrealized gains (before taxes) on debt securities were 
less than $1 million and $1 million at December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively. Gross unrealized gains (before taxes) on 
marketable equity securities were $201 million and $31 million 
at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Gross unrealized 
losses (before taxes) on debt securities were less than $1 mil­
lion at December 31, 2009 and 2008. Gross unrealized losses 
(before taxes) on marketable equity securities were $10 million 
and $27 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 
31, 2009, the company believes that unrealized losses on mar­
ketable equity securities are temporary and do not represent 
a need for an other-than-temporary impairment. See note N, 
“Equity Activity,” on pages 98 and 99 for net change in unreal­
ized gains and losses on debt and marketable equity securities.
	
Proceeds from sales of debt securities and marketable 
equity securities were approximately $24 million and $787 
million during 2009 and 2008, respectively. The gross realized 
gains and losses (before taxes) on these sales totaled $3 million 
and $40 million, respectively in 2009. The gross realized gains 
and losses (before taxes) on these sales totaled $182 million and 
$13 million, respectively, in 2008. 
	
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale 
debt securities are due in less than one year at December 31, 2009.
Note F. 
Inventories
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Finished goods	
	
$   533	
$   524
Work in process and raw materials	
	
1,960	
2,176
Total		 	
	
$2,494	
$2,701
Note G. 
Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Current:
	 Net investment in sales-type and
	 	 direct financing leases	
	
$  4,105	
$  4,226
	 Commercial financing receivables	
	
5,604	
5,781
	 Client loan receivables	
	
4,475	
4,861
	 Installment payment receivables	
	
730	
608
Total		 	
	
$14,914	
$15,477
Noncurrent:
	 Net investment in sales-type and
	 	 direct financing leases	
	
$  5,331	
$  5,938
	 Commercial financing receivables	
	
58	
94
	 Client loan receivables	
	
4,759	
4,718
	 Installment payment receivables	
	
496	
433
Total		 	
	
$10,644	
$11,183
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases is for 
leases that relate principally to the company’s systems products 
and are for terms ranging generally from two to six years. Net 
investment in sales-type and direct financing leases includes 
unguaranteed residual values of $849 million and $916 million 
at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively, and is reflected 
net of unearned income of $905 million and $1,049 million and 
of allowance for doubtful accounts receivable of $159 million 
and $217 million at those dates, respectively. Scheduled maturi­
ties of minimum lease payments outstanding at December 31, 
2009, expressed as a percentage of the total, are approximately: 
2010, 49 percent; 2011, 27 percent; 2012, 15 percent; 2013, 6 
percent; and 2014 and beyond, 2 percent.
	
Commercial financing receivables relate primarily to inventory 
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers 
of IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory and 
accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days.
	
Client loan receivables are loans that are provided by Global 
Financing primarily to clients to finance the purchase of soft­
ware and services. Separate contractual relationships on these 
88


===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
financing arrangements are for terms ranging generally from two 
to seven years. Each financing contract is priced independently at 
competitive market rates. The company has a history of enforcing 
the terms of these separate financing agreements.
	
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as 
collateral for non-recourse borrowings. Financing receivables 
pledged as collateral for borrowings were $271 million and $373 
million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. These bor­
rowings are included in note K, “Borrowings,” on pages 90 to 92.
	
The company did not have any financing receivables held for 
sale as of December 31, 2009 and 2008. 
Note H. 
Plant, Rental Machines and 
Other Property
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Land and land improvements	
	
$     737	
$     729
Buildings and building improvements	
	
9,314	
8,819
Plant, laboratory and office equipment	
	
25,888	
24,950
	 	 	 	 	
	
35,940	
34,499
Less: Accumulated depreciation	
	
23,485	
22,178
Plant and other property — net	
	
12,455	
12,321
Rental machines	
	
3,656	
3,946
Less: Accumulated depreciation	
	
1,946	
1,962
Rental machines — net	
	
1,710	
1,984
Total— net	
	
$14,165	
$14,305
Note I. 
Investments and Sundry Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008*
Deferred transition and setup costs
	 and other deferred arrangements**	
	
$1,772	
$1,548
Derivatives — noncurrent +	
	
565	
1,117
Alliance investments:
	 Equity method	
	
115	
167
	 Non-equity method	
	
477	
285
Prepaid software	
	
312	
370
Long-term deposits	
	
310	
277
Other receivables	
	
617	
238
Employee benefit-related	
	
427	
372
Other assets	
	
783	
685
Total		 	
	
$5,379	
$5,058
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation. 
**	Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related 
to Global Services client arrangements. Also see note A, “Significant Accounting 
Policies,” on pages 70 to 79 for additional information. 
+	See note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 92 through 96 
for the fair value of all derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position.
Note J. 
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset bal­
ances by major asset class.
($ in millions)
	
At December 31, 2009
	
Gross	
	
Net 
	
Carrying	 Accumulated	
Carrying
Intangible Asset Class	
Amount	
Amortization	
Amount 
Capitalized software	
$1,765	
$   (846)	
$   919
Client-related	
1,367	
(677)	
690
Completed technology	
1,222	
(452)	
770
Patents/trademarks	
174	
(59)	
115
Other*	 	
94	
(75)	
19
Total		 	
$4,622	
$(2,109)	
$2,513
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business 
processes, methodologies and systems, and impacts from currency translation.
($ in millions)
	
At December 31, 2008
	
Gross	
	
Net 
	
Carrying	
Accumulated	
Carrying
Intangible Asset Class	
Amount	
Amortization	
Amount 
Capitalized software	
$1,861	
$   (839)	
$1,022
Client-related	
1,532	
(663)	
869
Completed technology	
1,167	
(327)	
840
Patents/trademarks	
188	
(76)	
112
Other*	 	
154	
(121)	
35
Total		 	
$4,901	
$(2,023)	
$2,878
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business 
processes, methodologies and systems, and impacts from currency translation.
The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $365 
million for the year ended December 31, 2009, primarily due to 
amortization of acquired intangibles. No impairment of intangible 
assets was recorded in any of the periods presented. 
	
Total amortization was $1,221 million and $1,310 million for 
the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 
The aggregate intangible amortization expense for acquired 
intangibles (excluding capitalized software) was $489 million and 
$520 million for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, 
89


===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
respectively. In addition, in 2009 the company retired $1,147 mil­
lion of fully amortized intangible assets, impacting both the gross 
carrying amount and accumulated amortization for this amount. 
	
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding 
years relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be 
the following at December 31, 2009:
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, are as follows:
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
	
Foreign 
	
	
	
	
	
Currency
	
Balance	
	
Purchase	
	
Translation	
Balance
	
January 1,	
Goodwill	
Price	
	
and Other	
December 31,
Segment	
2009	
 Additions	
Adjustments	
Divestitures	
Adjustments	
2009
Global Business Services	
$  3,870	
$      —	
$ —	
$ —	
$   172	
$  4,042
Global Technology Services	
2,616	
10	
1	
—	
150	
2,777
Software	
10,966	
994	
(50)	
(13)	
 708	
12,605
Systems and Technology	
772	
—	
(7)	
—	
1	
766
Total		 	
$18,226	
$1,004	
$(56)	
$(13)	
$1,031	
$20,190
	
	
	
	
	
Foreign 
	
	
	
	
	
Currency
	
Balance	
	
Purchase	
	
Translation	
Balance
	
January 1,	
Goodwill	
Price	
	
and Other	
December 31,
Segment	
2008	
 Additions	
Adjustments	
Divestitures	
Adjustments	
2008
Global Business Services	
$  4,041	
$      —	
$  (4)	
$(16)	
$   (151)	
$  3,870
Global Technology Services	
2,914	
68	
(5)	
—	
(361)	
2,616
Software	
6,846	
5,225	
(85)	
—	
 (1,018)	
10,966
Systems and Technology	
484	
280	
9	
—	
(1)	
772
Total		 	
$14,285	
$5,573	
$(85)	
$(16)	
$(1,531)	
$18,226
Purchase price adjustments recorded in 2009 were related to 
acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, 
2008 and were still subject to the measurement period that ends 
at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date or when 
information becomes available. There were no goodwill impair­
ment losses recorded in 2009 or 2008, and the company has 
no accumulated impairment losses.
Note K. 
Borrowings
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Commercial paper	
	
$   235	
$     468
Short-term loans	
	
1,711	
1,827
Long-term debt — current maturities	
	
2,222	
8,942
Total		 	
	
$4,168	
$11,236
The weighted-average interest rates for commercial paper at 
December 31, 2009 and 2008, were 0.1 percent and 3.1 percent, 
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term 
loans were 1.8 percent and 4.5 percent at December 31, 2009 
and 2008, respectively. 
($ in millions)
	
Capitalized	
 Acquired
	
Software	
Intangibles	
Total
2010		 	
$570	
$422	
$992
2011		 	
277	
373	
650
2012		 	
72	
306	
377
2013		 	
—	
277	
277
2014		 	
—	
149	
149
90


===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
	
	
Maturities	
2009	
2008
U.S. Dollar Notes and Debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2009):
3.33%	 	
	
	
	
2010 – 2012	
$  5,456*	
$10,496
4.99%	 	
	
	
	
2013 – 2014	
3,332	
5,053
6.63%	 	
	
	
	
2015 –2019	
5,396	
5,511
7.00%	 	
	
	
	
2025	
600	
600
6.22%	 	
	
	
	
2027	
469	
469
6.50%	 	
	
	
	
2028	
313	
313
5.875%	
	
	
	
2032	
600	
600
8.00%	 	
	
	
	
2038	
187	
1,000
5.60%	 	
	
	
	
2039	
1,518	
—
7.00%	 	
	
	
	
2045	
27	
150
7.125%		
	
	
	
2096	
350	
850
	 	 	 	 	
	
	
	
	
18,247	
25,041
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2009, in parentheses):
Euros (4.4%)	
	
	
	
2010 – 2014	
3,427	
3,330
Japanese yen (1.5%)	
	
	
	
2010 – 2014	
1,565	
1,457
Swiss francs (3.4%)	
	
	
	
2011 – 2015	
484	
470
Other (5.5%)	
	
	
	
2010 – 2013	
285	
203
	 	 	 	 	
	
	
	
	
24,008	
30,502
Less: Net unamortized discount	
	
	
	
	
527	
81
Add: Fair value adjustment**	
	
	
	
	
673	
1,210
	 	 	 	 	
	
	
	
	
24,154	
31,631
Less: Current maturities	
	
	
	
	
2,222	
8,942
Total		 	
	
	
	
	
$21,932	
$22,689
*	 $1.6 billion in debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance subsidiary of the company, is included in 
2010–2012. Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.
**	The portion of the fixed-rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the debt’s 
carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates. 
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-term Debt, Including Current Portion)
($ in millions)
	
2009	
2008
At December 31:	
	
	
Amount	
Average Rate	
Amount	
Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt*	
	
	
$11,939	
6.13%	
$16,608	
6.16%
Floating-rate debt**	
	
	
12,215	
1.22%	
15,023	
3.35%
Total		 	
	
	
$24,154	
	
$31,631
*	 Includes $0 in 2009 and $1,700 million in 2008 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert floating-rate long-term debt into fixed-rate debt. (See note L, 
“Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 92 through 96). 
**	Includes $9,054 million in 2009 and $7,435 million in 2008 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. 
(See note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” on pages 92 through 96). 
91


===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt out­
standing at December 31, 2009, are as follows: 
($ in millions)
2010		 	
	
	
$  2,251
2011		 	
	
	
3,953
2012		 	
	
	
3,096
2013		 	
	
	
3,778
2014		 	
	
	
1,516
2015 and beyond	
	
	
9,414
Total		 	
	
	
$24,008
Debt Exchange
During the fourth quarter of 2009, the company completed an 
exchange of approximately $500 million principal amount of 
its 7.125 percent debentures due 2096, $123 million principal 
amount of its 7 percent debentures due 2045 and $813 million 
principal amount of its 8 percent notes due 2038, for approxi­
mately $1.5 billion of 5.60 percent senior notes due 2039 and 
cash of approximately $376 million. The exchange was con­
ducted to retire high coupon long-dated debt in a favorable 
interest rate environment. 
	
The debt exchange was accounted for as a non-revolving 
debt modification in accordance with U.S. GAAP and therefore 
it did not result in any gain or loss recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. Cash payments made will be amortized 
over the life of the new debt. Upfront fees with third parties in 
relation to the exchange were expensed as incurred.
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Cost of financing	
$   706	
$   788	
$   811
Interest expense	
404	
687	
753
Net investment derivative activity 	
(1)	
(13)	
(142)
Interest capitalized	
13	
15	
9
Total interest paid and accrued	
$1,122	
$1,477	
$1,431
Refer to the related discussion on page 124 in note V, “Seg­ment 
Infor­mation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing 
segment. See note L, “Derivatives and Hedging Transactions,” 
on pages 92 through 96 for a discussion of the use of currency 
and interest rate swaps in the company’s debt risk manage­
ment program. 
Lines of Credit
The company maintains a five-year, $10 billion Credit Agreement 
(the “Credit Agreement”), which expires on June 28, 2012. The 
total expense recorded by the company related to this facility 
was $6.3 million in 2009, $6.2 million in 2008 and $6.2 million 
in 2007. The amended Credit Agreement permits the company 
and its Subsidiary Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion on a 
revolving basis. Borrowings of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be 
unconditionally backed by the company. The company may also, 
upon the agreement of either existing lenders, or of the additional 
banks not currently party to the Credit Agreement, increase the 
commitments under the Credit Agreement up to an additional 
$2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms of the Credit Agreement, 
the company and Subsidiary Borrowers may borrow, prepay 
and reborrow amounts under the Credit Agreement at any time 
during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates on borrowings under 
the Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing market interest 
rates, as further described in the Credit Agreement. The Credit 
Agreement contains customary representations and warranties, 
covenants, events of default, and indemnification provisions. 
The company believes that circumstances that might give rise 
to breach of these covenants or an event of default, as specified 
in the Credit Agreement are remote. The company’s other lines 
of credit, most of which are uncommitted, totaled approximately 
$9,790 million and $11,031 million at December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively. Interest rates and other terms of borrowing 
under these lines of credit vary from country to country, depend­
ing on local market conditions.
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008
Unused lines:
	 From the committed global credit facility	
	
$  9,910	
$  9,888
	 From other committed and uncommitted lines		
7,405	
8,376
Total unused lines of credit	
	
$17,314	
$18,264
Note L. 
Derivatives and Hedging Transactions
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is 
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the 
normal course of business, the company is exposed to the 
impact of interest rate changes and foreign currency fluctua­
tions, and to a lesser extent equity changes and client credit 
risk. The company limits these risks by following established 
risk management policies and procedures, including the use of 
derivatives, and, where cost effective, financing with debt in the 
currencies in which assets are denominated. For interest rate 
exposures, derivatives are used to better align rate movements 
between the interest rates associated with the company’s lease 
and other financial assets and the interest rates associated 
with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used to manage the 
related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, derivatives 
are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising from 
foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
92


===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company 
is exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts 
will fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the coun­
terparty credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering 
into contracts with carefully selected major financial institutions 
based upon their credit ratings and other factors. The company’s 
established policies and procedures for mitigating credit risk on 
principal transactions include reviewing and establishing limits for 
credit exposure and continually assessing the creditworthiness 
of counterparties. The right of set-off that exists under certain of 
these arrangements enables the legal entities of the company 
subject to the arrangement to net amounts due to and from 
the counterparty reducing the maximum loss from credit risk in 
the event of counterparty default. The company is also a party 
to collateral security arrangements with certain counterparties. 
These arrangements require the company to hold or post col­
lateral (cash or U.S. Treasury securities) when the derivative fair 
values exceed contractually established thresholds. Posting 
thresholds can be fixed or can vary based on credit default 
swap pricing or credit ratings received from the major credit 
agencies. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments 
under these collateralized arrangements that were in a liability 
position at December 31, 2009 was $779 million for which the 
company has posted collateral of $37 million. Full overnight col­
lateralization of these agreements would be required in the event 
that the company’s credit rating falls below investment grade 
or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, 
as applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral security 
arrangements. The aggregate fair value of derivative instruments 
in net asset positions as of December 31, 2009 was $838 mil­
lion. This amount represents the maximum exposure to loss 
at the reporting date as a result of the counterparties failing to 
perform as contracted. This exposure is reduced by $573 million 
of liabilities included in master netting arrangements with those 
counterparties. The company does not offset derivative assets 
against liabilities in master netting arrangements nor does it off­
set receivables or payables recognized upon payment or receipt 
of cash collateral against the fair values of the related derivative 
instruments. At December 31, 2009, the company recorded 
$37 million in cash collateral related to all applicable derivative 
instruments in prepaid expenses and other current assets in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
	
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge 
the volatility in equity resulting from changes in currency exchange 
rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company with 
respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as 
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk 
as the derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon 
maturity which is not offset by a cash flow from the translation 
of the underlying hedged equity. The company monitors the 
cash loss potential on an ongoing basis and may discontinue 
some of these hedging relationships by de-designating the 
derivative instrument to manage this liquidity risk. Although not 
designated as accounting hedges, the company may utilize 
derivatives to offset the changes in fair value of the de-designated 
instruments from the date of de-designation until maturity. The 
company expended $533 million related to maturities of deriva­
tive instruments that existed in qualifying net investment hedge 
relationships in the 12 months ending December 31, 2009. At 
December 31, 2009, the company had assets of $84 million, 
representing the fair value of derivative instruments in qualify­
ing net investment hedge relationships. The weighted-average 
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2009 
was 1.6 years. In addition, at December 31, 2009, the company 
had liabilities of $318 million representing the fair value of deriva­
tive instruments that were previously designated in qualifying net 
investment hedging relationships but were de-designated prior 
to December 31, 2009; of this amount $94 million is expected to 
mature over the next 12 months. The notional amount of these 
instruments at December 31, 2009 was $2.3 billion including 
original and offsetting transactions. 
	
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward con­
tracts, futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency 
swaps, depending upon the underlying exposure. The company 
is not a party to leveraged derivative instruments. 
	
A brief description of the major hedging programs, catego­
rized by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets, prin­
cipally to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to 
cost-effective financing can result in interest rate mismatches 
with the underlying assets. To manage these mismatches and 
to reduce overall interest cost, the company uses interest-
rate swaps to convert specific fixed-rate debt issuances into 
variable-rate debt (i.e., fair value hedges) and to convert specific 
variable-rate debt issuances into fixed-rate debt (i.e., cash flow 
hedges). At December 31, 2009, the total notional amount of the 
company’s interest rate swaps was $9.1 billion. 
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on forecasted 
debt issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use for­
ward starting interest-rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest 
payments related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps 
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The company did not 
have any derivative instruments relating to this program outstand­
ing at December 31, 2009.
93


===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries 
(Net Investment)
A significant portion of the company’s foreign currency denomi­
nated debt portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment 
to reduce the volatility in equity caused by changes in foreign 
currency exchange rates in the functional currency of major 
foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. dollar. The company 
also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign exchange forward 
contracts for this risk management purpose. At December 31, 
2009, the total notional amount of derivative instruments desig­
nated as net investment hedges was $1.0 billion.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional cur­
rency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments 
for royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-
U.S. subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of 
these foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of 
the currency markets, the company selectively employs foreign 
exchange forward contracts to manage its currency risk. These 
forward contracts are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The 
maximum length of time over which the company is hedging its 
exposure to the variability in future cash flows is approximately 
four years. At December 31, 2009, the total notional amount of 
forward contracts designated as cash flow hedges of forecasted 
royalty and cost transactions was $18.7 billion with a weighted-
average remaining maturity of 1.3 years.
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign 
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company 
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign 
currency denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in 
the functional currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps 
are accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length 
of time over which the company is hedging its exposure to the 
variability in future cash flows is approximately five years. At 
December 31, 2009, the total notional amount of cross-currency 
swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency 
denominated debt was $0.3 billion. 
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency 
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the 
cash of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency 
swaps to convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addi­
tion, the company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to 
economically hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency expo­
sure of a portion of the company’s nonfunctional currency assets 
and liabilities. The terms of these forward and swap contracts 
are generally less than two years. The changes in the fair values 
of these contracts and of the underlying exposures are generally 
offsetting and are recorded in other (income) and expense in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2009, 
the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic 
hedges of foreign currency exposure was $13.1 billion.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes primarily 
related to certain obligations to employees. These exposures are 
primarily related to market price movements in certain broad 
equity market indices and in the company’s own common stock. 
Changes in the overall value of these employee compensation 
obligations are recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. Although not designated as accounting 
hedges, the company utilizes derivatives, including equity swaps 
and futures, to economically hedge the exposures related to its 
employee compensation obligations. The derivatives are linked 
to the total return on certain broad market indices or the total 
return on the company’s common stock. They are recorded at 
fair value with gains or losses also reported in SG&A expense in 
the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. At December 31, 2009, 
the total notional amount of derivative instruments in economic 
hedges of these compensation obligations was $0.8 billion.
Other Risks
The company holds warrants to purchase shares of common 
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed 
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settle­
ment provisions. The amount of shares to be purchased under 
these agreements was immaterial at December 31, 2009. The 
company records the changes in the fair value of these warrants 
in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings.
	
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to 
pay amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes 
credit default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. 
These derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are 
recorded at fair value with gains and losses reported in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
The company did not have any derivative instruments relating to 
this program outstanding at December 31, 2009.
	
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the 
derivative and non-derivative instrument related risk management 
activity as of and for the 12 months ended December 31, 2009:
94


===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments on the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
	
Fair value of derivative assets	
Fair value of derivative liabilities
	
Designated	
Not designated	
	
Designated	
Not designated
	
as hedging	
as hedging	
	
as hedging	
as hedging
At December 31, 2009:	
instruments	
instruments	
Total	
instruments	
instruments	
Total
Interest rate contracts:
	 Prepaid expenses and other current assets	
$  43	
$  —	
$  43	
$      —	
$   —	
$      —
	 Investments and sundry assets	
383	
—	
383	
—	
—	
—
	 Other liabilities	
—	
—	
—	
2	
—	
2
Foreign exchange contracts:
	 Prepaid expenses and other current assets	
74	
151	
225	
—	
—	
—
	 Investments and sundry assets	
156	
26	
182	
—	
—	
—
	 Other accrued expenses and liabilities	
—	
—	
—	
602	
304	
906
	 Other liabilities	
—	
—	
—	
423	
224	
647
Equity contracts:
	 Prepaid expenses and other current assets	
—	
5	
5	
—	
—	
—
	 Other accrued expenses and liabilities	
—	
—	
—	
—	
0	
0
Fair value of derivative assets and liabilities	
$656	
$182	
$838	
$1,027	
$528	
$1,555
Total debt designated as hedging instruments:
	 Short-term debt	
NA	
NA	
NA	
$1,440	
—	
$1,440
	 Long-term debt	
NA	
NA	
NA	
2,618	
—	
2,618
Total		 	
	
	
$838	
	
	
$5,613
95


===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The Effect of Derivative Instruments on the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2009:
	
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings
Derivative instruments in 	
Consolidated Statement of	
Recognized on	
Attributable to risk
fair value hedges	
Earnings line item	
derivatives(2)	
being hedged(3)
Interest rate contracts	
Cost of financing	
$(172)	
$344
	 	 	 	 	
Interest expense	
(97)	
193
Total		 	
	
$(269)	
$537
	
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings and other comprehensive income
	
	
	
Effective portion	
Ineffectiveness and
Derivative instruments in 	
Effective portion	
Consolidated Statement	
reclassified from	
amounts excluded from
cash flow hedges	
recognized in AOCI	
of Earnings line item	
AOCI to earnings	
effectiveness testing(4)
Interest rate contracts	
$    (0)	
Interest income	
$ (13)	
$—
Foreign exchange contracts	
(718)	
Other (income)
	 	 	 	 	
	
and expense	
143	
(3)
	 	 	 	 	
	
Cost of sales	
(49)
	 	 	 	 	
	
SG&A expense	
14
Total		 	
$(718)	
	
$ 94	
$(3)
	
Gain (loss) recognized in earnings and other comprehensive income
	
	
	
Effective portion	
Ineffectiveness and
Derivative instruments in 	
Effective portion	
Consolidated Statement	
reclassified from	
amounts excluded from
net investment hedges	
recognized in AOCI	
of Earnings line item	
AOCI to earnings	
effectiveness testing(5)
Foreign exchange contracts	
$234	
Interest income	
$—	
$  1
	 	 	 	 	
	
Other (income)
	 	 	 	 	
	
and expense	
$—	
$—
Derivative instruments not 	
	
Consolidated Statement	
Gain (loss) recognized
designated as hedging instruments(1)	
	
of Earnings line item	
in earnings
Foreign exchange contracts	
	
Other (income)
	 	 	 	 	
	
and expense	
$(128)
Equity contracts	
	
SG&A expense	
 177
Total		 	
	
	
$   50
Note: AOCI represents Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) in Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
(1)	See pages 76 and 77 for additional information on the purpose for entering into derivatives not designated as hedging instruments.
(2)	Includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under these 
derivative contracts.
(3)	Includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated 
hedging relationships during the period.
(4)	Amount of gain (loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(5)	Amount of gain (loss) recognized in income represents amounts excluded from effectiveness assessment.
At December 31, 2009, in connection with cash flow hedges 
of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, the company 
recorded net losses of $718 million (before taxes), in accumu­
lated other comprehensive income/(loss); $427 million of losses 
are expected to be reclassified to net income within the next 12 
months, providing an offsetting economic impact against the 
underlying anticipated transactions. At December 31, 2009, net 
losses of approximately $18 million (before taxes), were recorded 
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) in connec­
tion with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings; $10 
million of losses are expected to be reclassified to net income 
within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting economic 
impact against the underlying transactions.
	
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2009, there were 
no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings represent­
ing hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of 
hedge effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an 
underlying exposure that did not or was not expected to occur 
(for cash flow hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the nor­
mal course of business.
	
Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies”, on pages 
76 and 77 for additional information.
96


===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Note M. 
Other Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008*
Income tax reserves	
	
$3,627	
$3,557
Executive compensation accruals	
	
1,160	
860
Disability benefits	
	
795	
743
Derivative liabilities	
	
649	
702
Restructuring actions	
	
441	
476
Workforce reductions	
	
409	
415
Deferred taxes	
	
470	
270
Environmental accruals	
	
245	
246
Noncurrent warranty accruals	
	
126	
189
Asset retirement obligations	
	
116	
119
Other*	 	
	
781	
615
Total		 	
	
$8,819	
$8,192
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in 
consolidated 	financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes”, on pages 
79 to 82 for additional information.
In response to changing business needs, the company periodi­
cally takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, 
cost competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent 
contractually obligated future payments associated with these 
activities are reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the 
previous table.
	
In addition, the company executed certain special actions as 
follows: (1) the second quarter of 2005 associated with Global 
Services segments, primarily in Europe, (2) the fourth quarter of 
2002 associated with the acquisition of the Pricewaterhouse-
Coopers consulting business, (3) the second quarter of 2002 
associated with the Microelectronics Division and the rebalancing 
of both the company’s workforce and leased space resources, (4) 
the 2002 actions associated with the HDD business for reductions 
in workforce, manufacturing capacity and space, (5) the actions 
taken in 1999, and (6) the actions that were executed prior to 1994.
	
The table below provides a roll forward of the current and 
noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. The 
current liabilities presented in the table are included in other 
accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. 
($ in millions)
	
	
	
Liability	
	
	
Liability
	
	
	
 as of	
	
Other	
as of
	
	
	
Dec. 31, 2008	
Payments	
Adjustments*	
Dec. 31, 2009
Current:
	 Workforce	
	
	
$  95	
$  (95)	
$ 71	
$  71
	 Space	
	
	
23	
(21)	
13	
16
	 Other		
	
	
7	
—	
(7)	
—
Total Current	
	
	
$125	
$(116)	
$ 77	
$  87
Noncurrent:
	 Workforce	
	
	
$453	
$    —	
$(26)	
$427
	 Space	
	
	
23	
—	
(10)	
14
Total Noncurrent	
	
	
$476	
$    —	
$(36)	
$441
*	 The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, foreign currency translation adjustments and 
interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees 
who are no longer working for the company who were granted 
annual payments to supplement their incomes in certain coun­
tries. Depending on the individual country’s legal requirements, 
these required payments will continue until the former employee 
begins receiving pension benefits or passes away. The space 
accruals are for ongoing obligations to pay rent for vacant space 
that could not be sublet or space that was sublet at rates lower 
than the committed lease arrangement. The length of these obli­
gations varies by lease with the longest extending through 2016.
	
The company employs extensive internal environmental 
protection programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The 
company also participates in environmental assessments and 
cleanups at a number of locations, including operating facilities, 
previously owned facilities and Superfund sites. The company’s 
maximum exposure for all environmental liabilities cannot be 
estimated and no amounts have been recorded for non-ARO 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable. The 
total amounts accrued for non-ARO environmental liabilities, 
including amounts classified as current in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect actual or 
anticipated insurance recoveries, were $258 million and $267 
million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. Estimated 
environmental costs are not expected to materially affect the 
consolidated financial position or consolidated results of the 
company’s operations in future periods. However, estimates of 
future costs are subject to change due to protracted cleanup 
periods and changing environmental remediation regulations.
	
As of December 31, 2009, the company was unable to esti­
mate the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities 
97


===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
repurchase. The initial purchase price was subject to adjustment 
based on the volume weighted-average price of IBM common 
stock over a settlement period of three months for each of the 
banks. The adjustment also reflected certain other amounts 
including the banks’ carrying costs, compensation for ordinary 
dividends declared by the company during the settlement period 
and interest benefits for receiving the $12.5 billion payment in 
advance of the anticipated purchases by each bank of shares in 
the open market during the respective settlement periods. The 
adjustment amount could be settled in cash, registered shares 
or unregistered shares at IIG’s option. Under the ASR agreements, 
IIG had a separate settlement with each of the three banks. The 
first settlement occurred on September 6, 2007, resulting in a 
settlement payment to the bank of $151.8 million. The second 
settlement occurred on December 5, 2007, resulting in a settle­
ment payment to the bank of $253.1 million. The third settlement 
occurred on March 4, 2008, resulting in a settlement payment to 
the company of $54.2 million. The adjusted average price paid per 
share during the ASR was $108.13, resulting in a total purchase 
price of $12,581 million. The $351 million difference was settled 
in cash. The settlement amounts were paid in cash at the election 
of IIG in accordance with the provisions of the ASR agreements 
and were recorded as adjustments to equity in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position on the settlement dates.
	
The company issued 6,408,265 treasury shares in 2009, 
5,882,800 treasury shares in 2008 and 9,282,055 treasury shares 
in 2007, as a result of exercises of stock options by employees of 
certain recently acquired businesses and by non-U.S. employees. 
At December 31, 2009, $6,113 million of Board common stock 
repurchase authorization was still available. The company plans 
to purchase shares on the open market or in private transactions 
from time to time, depending on market conditions. In connection 
with the issuance of stock as part of the company’s stock-based 
compensation plans, 1,550,846 common shares at a cost of 
$161 million, 1,505,107 common shares at a cost of $166 million 
and 1,282,131 common shares at a cost of $134 million in 2009, 
2008 and 2007, respectively, were remitted by employees to the 
company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax withholding 
requirements. These amounts are included in the treasury stock 
balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position and 
the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.
for certain asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs 
are primarily related to the encapsulated structural fireproof­
ing that is not subject to abatement unless the buildings are 
demolished and non-encapsulated asbestos that the company 
would remediate only if it performed major renovations of certain 
existing buildings. Because these conditional obligations have 
indeterminate settlement dates, the company could not develop a 
reasonable estimate of their fair values. The company will continue 
to assess its ability to estimate fair values at each future reporting 
date. The related liability will be recognized once sufficient addi­
tional information becomes available. The total amounts accrued 
for ARO liabilities, including amounts classified as current in the 
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position were $126 million 
and $127 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively.
Note N. 
Equity Activity
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 
shares of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which 
1,305,337,423 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2009 
and 150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share 
par value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2009. 
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM 
common stock. The company repurchased 68,650,727 common 
shares at a cost of $7,534 million, 89,890,347 common shares at a 
cost of $10,563 million and 178,385,436 common shares at a cost 
of $18,783 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. These 
amounts reflect transactions executed through December 31 of 
each year. Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares 
may differ due to varying settlement dates for these transactions.
	
Included in the 2007 repurchases highlighted above, in May 
2007, IBM International Group (IIG), a wholly owned foreign 
sub­sidiary of the company, repurchased 118.8 million shares of 
common stock for $12.5 billion under accelerated share repur­
chase (ASR) agreements with three banks. 
	
Pursuant to the ASR agreements, executed on May 25, 2007, 
IIG paid an initial purchase price of $105.18 per share for the 
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
	
	
Net Unrealized	
	
Net Change 	
Net Unrealized	
Accumulated
	
	
Gains/(Losses)	
Foreign Currency	
Retirement-	
Gains/(Losses)	
Other
	
	
on Cash Flow	
Translation	
related	
on Marketable 	
Comprehensive
	
	
Hedge Derivatives	
Adjustments*	
Benefit Plans	
Securities	
Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2007 	
	
$(227)	
$ 3,655	
$  (7,168)	
$ 325	
$  (3,414)
Change for period	
	
301	
(3,552)	
(14,856)	
(324)	
(18,431)
December 31, 2008	
	
74	
103	
(22,025)	
2	
(21,845)
Change for period	
	
(556)	
1,732	
1,727	
111	
3,015
December 31, 2009	
	
$(481)	
$ 1,836	
$(20,297)	
$ 113	
$(18,830)
*	 Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax. 
98


===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Net Change in Unrealized Gains/(Losses) on Marketable Securities (net of tax)
($ in millions)
For the period ended December 31:	
	
	
	
	
2009	
2008
Net unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period	
	
	
	
	
$  72	
$(224)
Less: Net (losses)/gains included in net income for the period*	
	
	
	
	
(39)	
100
Net change in unrealized gains/(losses) on marketable securities	
	
	
	
	
$111	
$(324)
*	 Includes writedowns of $16.2 million and $3.0 million in 2009 and 2008, respectively. 
Note O. 
Contingencies and Commitments
Contingencies
The company is involved in a variety of claims, demands, suits, 
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time 
to time in the ordinary course of its business, including actions 
with respect to contracts, intellectual property (IP), product lia­
bility, employment, benefits, securities, foreign operations and 
environmental matters. These actions may be commenced by a 
number of different parties, including competitors, partners, cli­
ents, current or former employees, government and regulatory 
agencies, stockholders and representatives of the locations in 
which the company does business. 
	
The following is a summary of the more significant legal mat­
ters involving the company. 
	
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 
2003 in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by The SCO Group 
(SCO v. IBM). The company removed the case to Federal Court 
in Utah. Plaintiff is an alleged successor in interest to some of 
AT&T’s UNIX IP rights, and alleges copyright infringement, unfair 
competition, interference with contract and breach of contract 
with regard to the company’s distribution of AIX and Dynix and 
contribution of code to Linux. The company has asserted coun­
terclaims, including breach of contract, violation of the Lanham 
Act, unfair competition, intentional torts, unfair and deceptive 
trade practices, breach of the General Public License that 
governs open source distributions, promissory estoppel and 
copyright infringement. In October 2005, the company withdrew 
its patent counterclaims in an effort to simplify and focus the 
issues in the case and to expedite their resolution. Motions for 
summary judgment were heard in March 2007, and the court 
has not yet issued its decision. On August 10, 2007, the court 
in another suit, The SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., issued a 
decision and order determining, among other things, that Novell 
is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare copyrights, and obligating 
SCO to recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM 
and Sequent for breach of UNIX license agreements. At the 
request of the court in SCO v. IBM, on August 31, 2007, each 
of the parties filed a status report with the court concerning the 
effect of the August 10th Novell ruling on the SCO v. IBM case, 
including the pending motions. On September 14, 2007, plaintiff 
filed for bankruptcy protection, and all proceedings in this case 
were stayed. In the SCO v. Novell case, on November 25, 2008, 
SCO filed its notice of appeal to the U.S. Court of Appeals for 
the Tenth Circuit, which included an appeal of the August 10, 
2007 ruling; on August 24, 2009, the U.S. Court of Appeals 
reversed the August 10, 2007 ruling and remanded the SCO v. 
Novell case for trial. On August 25, 2009, the U.S. Bankruptcy 
Court for the District of Delaware approved the appointment of 
a Chapter 11 Trustee of SCO. 
	
On November 29, 2006, the company filed a lawsuit against 
Platform Solutions, Inc. (PSI) in the United States District Court 
for the Southern District of New York, alleging that PSI vio­
lated certain intellectual property rights of IBM. PSI asserted 
counterclaims against IBM. On January 11, 2008, the court 
permitted T3 Technologies, a reseller of PSI computer systems, 
to intervene as a counterclaim-plaintiff. T3 claimed that IBM 
violated certain antitrust laws by refusing to license its patents 
and trade secrets to PSI and by tying the sales of its mainframe 
computers to its mainframe operating systems. On June 30, 
2008, IBM acquired PSI. As a result of this transaction, IBM and 
PSI dismissed all claims against each other, and PSI withdrew a 
complaint it had filed with the European Commission in October 
2007 with regard to IBM. On September 30, 2009, the court 
granted IBM’s motion for summary judgment and dismissed 
T3’s claims against IBM. This decision is subject to appeal by 
T3. In January 2009, T3 filed a complaint with the European 
Commission alleging that IBM violated European Commission 
competition law based on the facts alleged in the above-
referenced U.S. litigation. IBM has been notified that the U.S. 
Department of Justice (DOJ) is investigating possible antitrust 
violations by IBM. The DOJ has requested certain information, 
including the production of materials from the litigation between 
T3 and IBM. 
	
The company is a defendant in an action filed on December 
14, 2009 in the United States District Court for the Western 
District of Texas by Neon Enterprise Software, LLC. Neon alleges 
that the company has interfered with Neon’s efforts to license 
its zPrime software. They seek damages and injunctive relief. In 
late January 2010, IBM filed its answer to Neon’s complaint and 
asserted counterclaims against Neon. 
99


===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
In January 2004, the Seoul District Prosecutors Office in 
South Korea announced it had brought criminal bid-rigging 
charges against several companies, including IBM Korea and 
LG IBM (a joint venture between IBM Korea and LG Electronics, 
which has since been dissolved, effective January, 2005) and 
had also charged employees of some of those entities with, 
among other things, bribery of certain officials of government-
controlled entities in Korea and bid rigging. IBM Korea and 
LG IBM cooperated fully with authorities in these matters. A 
number of individuals, including former IBM Korea and LG IBM 
employees, were subsequently found guilty and sentenced. 
IBM Korea and LG IBM were also required to pay fines. 
Debarment orders were imposed at different times, covering a 
period of no more than a year from the date of issuance, which 
barred IBM Korea from doing business directly with certain 
government-controlled entities in Korea. All debarment orders 
have since expired and when they were in force did not pro­
hibit IBM Korea from selling products and services to business 
partners who sold to government-controlled entities in Korea. 
In addition, the U.S. Department of Justice and the SEC have 
both contacted the company in connection with this matter. In 
March 2008, the company received a request from the SEC for 
additional information. 
	
The company was a defendant in a civil lawsuit brought in 
Tokyo District Court by Tokyo Leasing Co., Ltd., which sought 
to recover losses that it allegedly suffered after IXI Co., Ltd. initi­
ated civil rehabilitation (bankruptcy) proceedings in Japan and 
apparently failed to pay Tokyo Leasing amounts for which Tokyo 
Leasing sought to hold IBM and others liable. The claims in this 
suit included tort and breach of contract. The action against IBM 
was resolved in December 2009 and is no longer pending.
	
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after 
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New 
York, county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. 
The complaints allege numerous and different causes of action, 
including for negligence and recklessness, private nuisance and 
trespass. Plaintiffs in these cases seek medical monitoring 
and claim damages in unspecified amounts for a variety of 
personal injuries and property damages allegedly arising out of 
the presence of groundwater contamination and vapor intrusion 
of groundwater contaminants into certain structures in which 
plaintiffs reside or resided, or conducted business, allegedly 
resulting from the release of chemicals into the environment by 
the company at its former manufacturing and development facil­
ity in Endicott. These complaints also seek punitive damages in 
an unspecified amount. 
	
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings 
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under 
the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation 
and Liability Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar 
to CERCLA. Such statutes require potentially responsible parties 
to participate in remediation activities regardless of fault or own­
ership of sites. The company is also conducting environmental 
investigations, assessments or remediations at or in the vicinity 
of several current or former operating sites globally pursuant to 
permits, administrative orders or agreements with country, state 
or local environmental agencies, and is involved in lawsuits and 
claims concerning certain current or former operating sites. 
	
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations 
and governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along 
with many other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the 
company is involved in various challenges with Brazilian authori­
ties regarding non-income tax assessments and non-income 
tax litigation matters. These matters include claims for taxes on 
the importation of computer software. In November 2008, the 
company won a significant case in the Superior Chamber of the 
federal administrative tax court in Brazil, and in late July 2009, the 
company received written confirmation regarding this decision. 
The total potential amount related to the remaining matters for 
all applicable years is approximately $600 million. The company 
believes it will prevail on these matters and that this amount is 
not a meaningful indicator of liability. 
	
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, 
suit, investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a 
liability has been incurred and the amount of the loss can be 
reasonably estimated. Claims and proceedings are reviewed at 
least quarterly and provisions are taken or adjusted to reflect 
the impact and status of settlements, rulings, advice of coun­
sel and other information pertinent to a particular matter. Any 
recorded liabilities, including any changes to such liabilities for 
the year ended December 31, 2009, were not material to the 
Consolidated Financial Statements. Based on its experience, 
the company believes that the damage amounts claimed in the 
matters previously referred to are not a meaningful indicator of 
the potential liability. Claims, suits, investigations and proceed­
ings are inherently uncertain and it is not possible to predict the 
ultimate outcome of the matters previously discussed. While 
the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, it is pos­
sible that the company’s business, financial condition, results 
of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular 
period by the resolution of one or more of these matters. 
	
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined 
in any such claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reason­
ably have a material effect on the company’s business, financial 
condition, results of operations or cash flows will depend on a 
number of variables, including the timing and amount of such 
losses or damages; the structure and type of any such reme­
dies; the significance of the impact any such losses, damages or 
remedies may have on the Consolidated Financial Statements; 
and the unique facts and circumstances of the particular matter 
which may give rise to additional factors. 
100


===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities 
include unused amounts of $3,576 million and $3,857 million at 
December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. A portion of these 
amounts was available to the company’s business partners to 
support their working capital needs. In addition, the company 
has committed to provide future financing to its clients in con­
nection with client purchase agreements for approximately 
$2,788 million and $3,342 million at December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively. The change over the prior year was due to 
decreased signings of long-term IT infrastructure arrangements 
in which financing is committed by the company to fund a cli­
ent’s future purchases from the company.
	
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guaran­
tor to disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood 
of requiring the guarantor’s performance is remote. The follow­
ing is a description of arrangements in which the company is 
the guarantor.
	
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant 
to which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with 
respect to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in 
the context of contracts entered into by the company, under 
which the company customarily agrees to hold the other party 
harmless against losses arising from a breach of representations 
and covenants related to such matters as title to assets sold, 
certain IP rights, specified environmental matters, third-party 
performance of nonfinancial contractual obligations and certain 
income taxes. In each of these circumstances, payment by 
the company is conditioned on the other party making a claim 
pursuant to the procedures specified in the particular contract, 
which procedures typically allow the company to challenge the 
other party’s claims. While typically indemnification provisions 
do not include a contractual maximum on the company’s pay­
ment, the company’s obligations under these agreements may 
be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim, and in some 
instances, the company may have recourse against third parties 
for certain payments made by the company.
	
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the 
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique 
facts and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. 
Historically, payments made by the company under these agree­
ments have not had a material effect on the company’s business, 
financial condition or results of operations.
	
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and finan­
cial commitments. The maximum potential future payment under 
these financial guarantees was $85 million and $50 million at 
December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. The fair value of the 
guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position is not material.
Note P. 
Taxes
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Income from continuing operations
	 before income taxes:
	 	 U.S. operations	
$  9,524	
$  8,424	
$  7,667
	 	 Non-U.S. operations	
8,614	
8,291	
6,822
Total income from continuing 
	 operations before income taxes	
$18,138	
$16,715	
$14,489
The continuing operations provision for income taxes by geo­
graphic operations is as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
U.S. operations	
$2,427	
$2,348	
$2,280
Non-U.S. operations	
2,286	
2,033	
1,791
Total continuing operations 
	 provision for income taxes	
$4,713	
$4,381	
$4,071
The components of the continuing operations provision for 
income taxes by taxing jurisdiction are as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
U.S. federal:
	 Current	
$   473	
$   338	
$1,085
	 Deferred	
1,341	
1,263	
683
	 	 	 	 	
1,814	
1,601	
1,768
U.S. state and local:
	 Current	
120	
216	
141
	 Deferred	
185	
205	
(19)
	 	 	 	 	
305	
421	
122
Non-U.S.:
	 Current	
2,347	
1,927	
2,105
	 Deferred	
247	
432	
76
	 	 	 	 	
2,594	
2,359	
2,181
Total continuing operations 
	 provision for income taxes	
4,713	
4,381	
4,071
Provision for social security, real estate, 
	 personal property and other taxes	
3,986	
4,076	
3,832
Total taxes included in income 
	 from continuing operations	
$8,699	
$8,457	
$7,903
101


===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the 
company’s continuing operations effective tax rate is as follows: 
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Statutory rate	
35%	
35%	
35%
Foreign tax differential	
(9)	
(8)	
(6)
State and local	
1	
1	
1
Other		 	
(1)	
(2)	
(2)
Effective rate	
26%	
26%	
28%
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities 
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate.
	
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabili­
ties that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position were as follows: 
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008*
Retirement benefits	
	
$  3,921	
$  5,215
Share-based and other compensation	
	
1,853	
2,579
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards	
	
859	
862
Deferred income	
	
847	
739
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards	
	
680	
642
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves	
	
605	
561
Capitalized research and development	
	
539	
795
Depreciation	
	
485	
388
Other		 	
	
1,999	
1,863
Gross deferred tax assets	
	
11,788	
13,644
Less: valuation allowance	
	
812	
720
Net deferred tax assets	
	
$10,976	
$12,924
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation. 
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008*
Leases		
	
$2,129	
$1,913
Depreciation	
	
1,138	
941
Goodwill and intangible assets	
	
639	
552
Software development costs	
	
409	
449
Retirement benefits	
	
389	
104
Other		 	
	
874	
697
Gross deferred tax liabilities	
	
$5,578	
$4,656
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation. 
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and 
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $860 mil­
lion as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $679 
million. Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at 
least two years or are available for ten years or more. 
	
The company has certain foreign tax loss carryforwards that 
have not been reflected in the gross deferred tax asset balance 
due to the level of uncertainty associated with the sustainability 
of the losses which are under examination by the local taxing 
authority. The tax benefit of these losses approximated $930 
million at December 31, 2009. In addition, during the second 
quarter of 2009, foreign tax losses were utilized against a prior 
year tax liability resulting in a cash benefit of approximately $360 
million. However, the company has recorded an unrecognized 
tax benefit for the entire amount received given the degree of 
uncertainty in sustaining the associated tax benefit. The com­
pany expects that the local taxing authority will complete its field 
examination in early 2010.
	
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2009, principally 
applies to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards 
that, in the opinion of management, are more likely than not to 
expire unutilized. However, to the extent that tax benefits related 
to these carryforwards are realized in the future, the reduction 
in the valuation allowance will reduce income tax expense. The 
year-to-year change in the allowance balance was an increase 
of $92 million.
	
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 
2009 increased by $892 million in 2009 to $4,790 million. A rec­
onciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized 
tax benefits is as follows:
($ in millions)
	
2009	
2008	
2007
Balance at January 1	
$3,898	
$ 3,094	
$2,414
Additions based on tax positions
	 related to the current year	
554	
1,481	
745
Additions for tax positions of prior years	
634	
747	
195
Reductions for tax positions
	 of prior years (including impacts 
	 due to a lapse in statute)	
(277)	
(1,209)	
(144)
Settlements	
(19)	
(215)	
(116)
Balance at December 31	
$4,790	
$ 3,898	
$3,094
The additions to the unrecognized tax benefits related to the 
current and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. 
issues, certain tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related 
matters and other non-U.S. and state matters.
102


===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
The settlements and reductions to the unrecognized tax 
benefits for tax positions of prior years are primarily attributable to 
the conclusion of the company’s various U.S., state and non-U.S. 
income tax examinations and various non-U.S. matters including 
impacts due to lapses in statutes of limitation.
	
The liability at December 31, 2009 of $4,790 million can be 
reduced by $577 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with 
the correlative effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, 
state income taxes and timing adjustments. The net amount of 
$4,213 million, if recognized, would favorably affect the com­
pany’s effective tax rate. The net amounts at December 31, 
2008 and December 31, 2007 were $3,366 million and $2,598 
million, respectively.
	
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are 
included in income tax expense. During the year ended December 
31, 2009, the company recognized $193 million in interest and 
penalties; in 2008, the company recognized $96 million in inter­
est and penalties and in 2007, the company recognized $85 
million in interest and penalties. The company has $479 million 
for the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 
31, 2009 and had $286 million accrued at December 31, 2008.
	
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reason­
ably possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
associated with certain positions may be significantly reduced. 
The potential decrease in the amount of unrecognized tax ben­
efits is primarily associated with the possible resolution of the 
company’s U.S. income tax audit for 2006 and 2007, as well as 
various non-U.S. audits. Specific positions that may be resolved, 
and that may significantly reduce the related amount of unrecog­
nized tax benefits, include transfer pricing matters, tax incentives 
and credits as well as various other foreign tax matters including 
foreign tax loss utilization. The company estimates that the unrec­
ognized tax benefits at December 31, 2009 could be reduced by 
approximately $1,100 million. 
	
With limited exception, the company is no longer subject to 
U.S. federal, state and local or non-U.S. income tax audits by 
taxing authorities for years through 2003. The years subsequent 
to 2003 contain matters that could be subject to differing inter­
pretations of applicable tax laws and regulations as it relates to 
the amount and/or timing of income, deductions and tax credits. 
Although the outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the 
company believes that adequate amounts of tax and interest 
have been provided for any adjustments that are expected to 
result for these years.
	
During the fourth quarter of 2008, the U.S. Internal Revenue 
Service (IRS) concluded its examination of the company’s income 
tax returns for 2004 and 2005 and issued a final Revenue Agent’s 
Report (RAR). The company has agreed with all of the adjust­
ments contained in the RAR, with the exception of a proposed 
adjustment, with a pre-tax amount in excess of $2 billion, relating 
to valuation matters associated with the intercompany transfer 
of certain intellectual property in 2005 and computational issues 
related to certain tax credits. The company disagrees with the 
IRS position on these specific matters and in March 2009 filed a 
protest with the IRS Appeals Office.
	
The audit of the company’s 2006 and 2007 U.S. income tax 
returns commenced in the first quarter of 2009. The company 
anticipates that this audit will be completed by the end of 2010.
	
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $26.0 
billion of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at 
December 31, 2009, as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely 
reinvest these earnings in non-U.S. operations. However, the 
company periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to 
the extent that it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. 
Quantification of the deferred tax liability, if any, associated with 
indefinitely reinvested earnings is not practicable.
	
For additional information on the company’s effective tax 
rate refer to the “Looking Forward” section of the Management 
Discussion on pages 47 to 49.
Note Q. 
Research, Development 
and Engineering
RD&E expense was $5,820 million in 2009, $6,337 million in 
2008 and $6,153 million in 2007.
	
The company incurred expense of $5,523 million in 2009, 
$6,015 million in 2008 and $5,754 million in 2007 for scien­
tific research and the application of scientific advances to the 
development of new and improved products and their uses, as 
well as services and their application. Within these amounts, 
software-related expense was $2,991 million, $3,359 million and 
$3,037 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. In addition, 
included in the expense was a charge of $24 million in 2008 for 
acquired IPR&D.
	
Expense for product-related engineering was $297 million, 
$322 million and $399 million in 2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively.
103


===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Note R. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock. 
For the year ended December 31:	
	
	
	
2009	
2008	
2007
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based:
Basic:	 	
	
	
	
1,327,157,410	
1,369,367,069*	 1,433,935,221*
	 Add — incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans	
	
	
	
12,258,864	
16,617,801*	
18,145,715*
	 Add — incremental shares associated with Accelerated Share Repurchase agreements		
	
—	
—	
1,891,095
	 Add — incremental shares associated with convertible notes	
	
	
	
—	
—	
1,362,191
	 Add — incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares	
	
	
1,936,480	
1,812,328	
1,546,529
Assuming dilution	
	
	
	
1,341,352,754	
1,387,797,198*	 1,456,880,751*
($ in millions except per share amounts)
Basic:
	 Income from continuing operations 	
	
	
	
$13,425	
$12,334	
$10,418
	 Income/(loss) from discontinued operations	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(00)
Net income from total operations on which basic 
	 earnings per share is calculated	
	
	
	
$13,425	
$12,334	
$10,418
Assuming dilution:
	 Income from continuing operations 	
	
	
	
$13,425	
$12,334	
$10,418
	 Less — net income applicable to contingently issuable shares	
	
	
	
—	
1	
—
	 Income/(loss) from discontinued operations	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(00)
Net income from total operations on which diluted 
	 earnings per share is calculated	
	
	
	
$13,425	
$12,333	
$10,418
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
	
	
$  10.01	
$    8.89*	
$    7.15*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(0.00)
	 Total assuming dilution	
	
	
	
$  10.01	
$    8.89*	
$    7.15*
	 Basic:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
	
	
$  10.12	
$    9.02*	
$    7.27*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
	
	
—	
—	
(0.00)
	 Total basic	
	
	
	
$  10.12	
$    9.02*	
$    7.27*
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. See note B, 
“Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
Stock options to purchase 612,272 common shares in 2009, 
42,981,463 common shares in 2008 and 62,782,516 common 
shares in 2007 were outstanding, but were not included in the 
computation of diluted earnings per share because the exercise 
price of the options was greater than the average market price 
of the common shares for the applicable full year, and therefore, 
the effect would have been antidilutive.
Note S. 
Rental Expense and Lease 
Commitments
Rental expense from continuing operations, including amounts 
charged to inventories and fixed assets, and excluding amounts 
previously reserved, was $1,677 million in 2009, $1,681 million in 
2008 and $1,559 million in 2007. Rental expense in agreements 
104


===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Note T. 
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, 
based on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over 
the employee requisite service period. See note A, “Significant 
Accounting Policies,” on page 76 for additional information.
	
The following table presents total stock-based compensa­
tion cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Cost	 	 	
$   94	
$ 116	
$ 166
Selling, general and administrative	
417	
484	
480
Research, development and engineering	
47	
58	
68
Other (income) and expense*	
—	
  — 	
(1)
Pre-tax stock-based compensation cost	
558	
659	
713
Income tax benefits	
(221)	
(224)	
(248)
Total stock-based 
	 compensation cost	
$ 337	
$ 435	
$ 464
*	 Reflects the one-time effects of the divestiture of the Printing Systems business 
in the second quarter of 2007.
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested 
awards at December 31, 2009 and 2008 was $1,082 million and 
$1,076 million, respectively, and is expected to be recognized 
over a weighted-average period of approximately 2.5 years.
	
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensa­
tion cost at December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under 
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the 
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen­
sation and Management Resources Com­mittee of the Board of 
Directors (the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans 
principally include stock options, restricted stock units, perfor­
mance share units or any combination thereof. The nonmanage­
ment members of the IBM Board of Directors also received stock 
options under a director stock option plan through December 31, 
2006. The director stock option plan was terminated effective 
January 1, 2007.
	
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 
2009 and 2008. In addition, certain incentive awards granted 
under previous Plans, if and when those awards were canceled, 
could be reissued under the company’s existing Plans. As such, 
66.4 million and 47.6 million additional awards were considered 
authorized to be issued under the company’s existing Plans as 
of December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. There were 1.9 
million and 23.8 million option awards outstanding (which were 
included in the total options outstanding at December 31, 2009 
and 2008, respectively) under previous Plans that, if and when 
canceled, would increase the number of authorized shares. 
There were 140.4 million and 130.1 million unused shares avail­
able to be granted under the Plans as of December 31, 2009 
and 2008, respectively.
	
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, 
all awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The 
exercise price of at-the-money stock options is the average of 
the high and low market price on the date of grant. The options 
($ in millions)
	
2010	
2011	
2012	
2013	
2014	
Beyond 2014
Operating lease commitments:
	 Gross minimum rental commitments 
	 	 (including vacant space below)	
$1,504	
$1,281	
$982	
$769	
$626	
$776
	 Vacant space	
$     69	
$     37	
$  18	
$    9	
$    8	
$    9
	 Sublease income commitments	
$     52	
$     27	
$  15	
$    8	
$    4	
$    2
Capital lease commitments	
$     64	
$     25	
$  32	
$  31	
$  13	
$   —
with rent holidays and scheduled rent increases is recorded on 
a straight-line basis over the lease term. Contingent rentals are 
included in the determination of rental expense as accruable. 
The table below depicts gross minimum rental commitments 
from continuing operations under noncancelable leases, amounts 
related to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions 
and restructuring actions taken through 1994, and in 1999, 2002 
and 2005 (previously reserved), sublease income commitments 
and capital lease commitments. These amounts reflect activities 
primarily related to office space, as well as manufacturing facilities. 
105


===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
of ten years. The plan element permitting executives to defer 
annual incentive compensation into IBM equity and receive at-
the-money stock options was terminated at December 31, 2006.
	
The company estimates the fair value of stock options using 
the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and assumptions 
used to estimate the fair value of stock options include the grant 
price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of the 
company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend 
yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual 
future events or the value ultimately realized by employees who 
receive equity awards, and subsequent events are not indicative 
of the reasonableness of the original estimates of fair value made 
by the company.
	
The fair value of each stock option grant was estimated at 
the date of grant using a Black-Scholes option pricing model. 
The following table presents the weighted-average assumptions 
used in the valuation and the resulting weighted-average fair 
value per option granted.
For the year ended December 31:	
2009*	
2008*	
2007
Option term (years)**	
—	
—	
5
Volatility +	
—	
—	
23.1%
Risk-free interest rate (zero
	 coupon U.S. treasury note)	
—	
—	
4.5%
Dividend yield	
—	
—	
1.4%
Weighted-average fair value 
	 per option granted	
—	
—	
$26
*	 During the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, the company did not 
grant stock options.
**	The option term is the number of years that the company estimates, based upon 
history, that options will be outstanding prior to exercise or forfeiture. 
+	The company’s estimates of expected volatility are principally based on daily 
price changes of the company’s stock over the expected option term, as 
well as the additional requirements included in accounting guidance on share-
based payments.
approval process specifies the individual receiving the grant, 
the number of options or the value of the award, the exercise 
price or formula for determining the exercise price and the date 
of grant. All awards for senior management are approved by 
the Committee. All awards for employees other than senior 
management are approved by senior management pursuant to 
a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee, 
and the grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed 
periodically with the Committee. Awards that are given as part 
of annual total compensation for senior management and other 
employees are made on specific cycle dates scheduled in 
advance. With respect to awards given in connection with pro­
motions or new hires, the company’s policy requires approval of 
such awards prior to the grant date, which is typically the date 
of the promotion or the date of hire. The exercise price of these 
options is the average of the high and low market price on the 
date of grant.
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase 
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are 
granted at an exercise price equal to the company stock price on 
the date of grant. These awards, which generally vest 25 percent 
per year, are fully vested four years from the date of grant and 
have a contractual term of ten years. The company also had a 
stock-based program under the Plans for its senior executives, 
designed to drive improved performance and increase the own­
ership executives have in the company. These executives had the 
opportunity to receive at-the-money stock options by agreeing to 
defer a certain percentage of their annual incentive compensation 
into IBM equity, where it is held for three years or until retirement. 
In 2005, this program was expanded to cover all executives of 
the company. Options under this program become fully vested 
three years from the date of grant and have a contractual term 
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007.
	
2009	
2008	
2007
	
Wtd. Avg.	
No. of Shares	
Wtd. Avg.	
No. of Shares	
Wtd. Avg.	
No. of Shares
	
Exercise Price	
Under Option	
 Exercise Price	
Under Option	
Exercise Price	
Under Option
Balance at January 1	
$102	
119,307,170	
$100	
157,661,257	
$  95	
207,663,223
Options granted	
—	
—	
—	
—	
103	
1,087,381
Options exercised	
120	
(28,100,192)	
91	
(36,282,000)	
77	
(46,961,380)
Options canceled/expired	
127	
(17,996,521)	
109	
(2,072,087)	
106	
(4,127,967)
Balance at December 31	
$  98	
73,210,457	
$102	
119,307,170	
$100	
157,661,257
Exercisable at December 31	
$  98	
72,217,126	
$102	
114,445,381	
$100	
144,092,169
106


===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The shares under option at December 31, 2009 were in the following exercise price ranges:
	
Options Outstanding
	
	
	
	
	
	
Wtd. Avg.
	
	
	
Wtg. Avg.	
Number	
Aggregate	
Remaining
	
	
	
Exercise	
of Shares	
Intrinsic	
Contractual
Exercise Price Range	
	
	
Price	
Under Option	
Value	 Life (in years)
$61– $85	
	
	
$  77	
17,468,272	
$   940,917,103	
3.2
$86 – $105	
	
	
98	
32,894,001	
1,067,822,966	
3.4
$106 and over	
	
	
112	
22,848,184	
432,260,579	
1.5
	 	 	 	 	
	
	
$  98	
73,210,457	
$2,441,000,648	
2.8
	
Options Exercisable
	
	
	
	
	
	
Wtd. Avg.
	
	
	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number	
Aggregate	
Remaining
	
	
	
Exercise	
of Shares	
Intrinsic	
Contractual
Exercise Price Range	
	
	
Price	
Under Option	
Value	 Life (in years)
$61– $85	
	
	
$  77	
17,439,702	
$   939,529,901	
3.2
$86 – $105	
	
	
98	
31,929,240	
1,039,848,239	
3.3
$106 and over	
	
	
112	
22,848,184	
432,260,579	
1.5
	 	 	 	 	
	
	
$  98	
72,217,126	
$2,411,638,719	
2.7
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there were 
an additional 1.1 million options outstanding at December 31, 
2009, as a result of the company’s assumption of options 
granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-average exercise 
price of these options was $76 per share.
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years 
ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $639 million, 
$1,073 million and $1,414 million, respectively. The total cash 
received from employees as a result of employee stock option 
exercises for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 
2007 was approximately $2,744 million, $3,320 million and 
$3,619 million, respectively. In connection with these exercises, 
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended 
December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 were $243 million, $356 
million and $481 million, respectively.
	
The company settles employee stock option exercises 
primarily with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, 
with treasury shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 
2009 and 2008 were approximately 822 million and 758 million 
shares, respectively.
Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, currently the company grants its 
employees stock awards. These awards are made in the form 
of Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted 
Stock Units (RRSUs), or Performance Share Units (PSUs). 
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the 
holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically 
over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards is 
determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s 
stock price. For RSUs awarded after December 31, 2007, divi­
dend equivalents will not be paid. The fair value of such RSUs is 
determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s 
stock price adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents.
	
The tables on page 108 summarize RSU and PSU activity 
under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2009, 
2008 and 2007.
107


===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
RSUs
	
2009	
2008	
2007
	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number
	
Grant Price	
of Units	
Grant Price	
of Units	
Grant Price	
of Units
Balance at January 1	
$100	
12,397,515	
$  94	
11,887,746	
$  84	
10,217,258
RSUs granted	
105	
4,432,449	
107	
4,587,011	
104	
4,929,141
RSUs released	
99	
(2,748,613)	
88	
(3,526,580)	
77	
(2,747,110)
RSUs canceled/forfeited	
101	
(675,697)	
98	
(550,662)	
88	
(511,543)
Balance at December 31	
$102	
13,405,654	
$100	
12,397,515	
$  94	
11,887,746
PSUs
	
2009	
2008	
2007
	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number	
Wtd. Avg.	
Number
	
Grant Price	
of Units	
Grant Price	
of Units	
Grant Price	
of Units
Balance at January 1	
$102	
3,078,694	
$  93	
2,783,823	
$  89	
2,417,378
PSUs granted at target	
101	
1,568,129	
119	
1,058,381	
103	
1,156,708
Additional shares earned above target*	
83	
396,794	
91	
275,190	
95	
216,826
PSUs released	
83	
(1,440,099)	
91	
(860,705)	
96	
(926,386)
PSUs canceled/forfeited	
111	
(126,781)	
102	
(177,995)	
90	
(80,703)
Balance at December 31**	
$107	
3,476,737	
$102	
3,078,694	
$  93	
2,783,823
*	 Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
**	Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the 
company’s performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at 
December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 is the same as the period 
over which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, 
which is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs 
granted during the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 
2007 was $467 million, $490 million and $513 million, respec­
tively. The total fair value of RSUs vested and released during the 
years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $272 mil­
lion, $311 million and $213 million, respectively. As of December 
31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, there was $892 million, $863 million 
and $740 million, respectively, of unrecognized compensation 
cost related to non-vested RSUs. The company received no cash 
from employees as a result of employee vesting and release of 
RSUs for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. 
	
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ulti­
mately received by the employee depends on the company’s 
performance against specified targets and typically vest over 
a three-year period. The fair value of each PSU is determined 
on the grant date, based on the company’s stock price, and 
assumes that performance targets will be achieved. Over the 
performance period, the number of shares of stock that will 
be issued is adjusted upward or downward based upon the 
probability of achievement of performance targets. The ultimate 
number of shares issued and the related compensation cost 
recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the 
final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value 
of PSUs granted during the years ended December 31, 2009, 
2008 and 2007 was $159 million, $126 million and $116 million, 
respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during 
the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 was $120 
million, $78 million and $88 million, respectively.
	
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, 
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended 
December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007 were $156 million, $165 
million and $133 million, respectively. 
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock 
Pur­chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants 
to purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 
five-percent discount off the average market price on the day 
of purchase through payroll deductions of up to 10 percent 
of eligible compensation. Eligible compensation includes any 
compensation received by the employee during the year. The 
ESPP provides for offering periods during which shares may 
be purchased and continues as long as shares remain available 
under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion of the 
Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted 
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one 
calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period. 
108


===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
Employees purchased 3.2 million, 3.5 million and 4.0 million 
shares under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. Cash dividends declared 
and paid by the company on its common stock also include 
cash dividends on the company stock purchased through the 
ESPP. Dividends are paid on full and fractional shares and can 
be reinvested in the ESPP. The company stock purchased 
through the ESPP is considered outstanding and is included in 
the weighted-average outstanding shares for purposes of com­
puting basic and diluted earnings per share.
	
Approximately 9.6 million, 12.8 million and 16.3 million shares 
were available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 
2009, 2008 and 2007, respectively. 
Note U. 
Retirement-Related Benefits
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined con­
tribution plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a 
supplemental retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans primarily consist­
ing of retiree medical and dental benefits for eligible retirees 
and dependents. 
U.S. Plans
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS
IBM Personal Pension Plan 
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees 
hired prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined 
benefit pension benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior 
to 2008, the IBM Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax quali­
fied (qualified) plan and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. 
Effective January 1, 2008, the nonqualified plan was renamed 
the Excess Personal Pension Plan (Excess PPP) and the quali­
fied plan is now referred to as the Qualified PPP. The combined 
plan is now referred to as the PPP. The Qualified PPP is funded 
by company contributions to an irrevocable trust fund, which is 
held for the sole benefit of participants and beneficiaries. The 
Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides benefits in excess of 
IRS limitations for qualified plans.
	
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using 
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. Pension 
benefits are calculated using one of two methods based upon 
specified criteria used to determine each participant’s eligibility. 
The first method uses a five-year, final pay formula that deter­
mines benefits based on salary, years of service, mortality and 
other participant-specific factors. The second method is a cash 
balance formula that calculates benefits using a percentage of 
employees’ annual salary, as well as an interest crediting rate.
	
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan 
ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants. 
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental 
Exec­utive Reten­tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, 
which is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives 
based on average earnings, years of service and age at termina­
tion of employment. Effective July 1, 1999, the company replaced 
the then effective Retention Plan with the current Retention 
Plan. Some participants in the previous Retention Plan will still 
be eligible for benefits under that prior plan if those benefits are 
greater than the benefits provided under the current plan.
	
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 
31, 2007 for all participants. 
DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLANS
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to 
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified 
defined contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal 
Revenue Code. Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) 
Plus Plan, eligible employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of 
their contributions up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for 
those hired prior to January 1, 2005, and up to 5 percent of eli­
gible compensation for those hired on or after January 1, 2005. 
In addition, eligible employees receive automatic contributions 
from the company equal to 1, 2 or 4 percent of eligible com­
pensation based on their eligibility to participate in the PPP as of 
December 31, 2007. Employees receive automatic contributions 
and matching contributions after the completion of one year of 
service. Further, through June 30, 2009, IBM contributed transi­
tion credits to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus Plan accounts. 
The amount of the transition credits was based on a partici­
pant’s age and service as of June 30, 1999.
	
Prior to January 1, 2008, the company match equaled 50 
percent of the first 6 percent of eligible compensation that par­
ticipants contributed to the plan for those hired before January 
1, 2005, and 100 percent of the first 6 percent contributed for 
those hired after December 31, 2004. 
	
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and 
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All 
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash 
and invested in accordance with participants’ investment elec­
tions. There are no minimum amounts that must be invested 
in company stock, and there are no restrictions on transferring 
amounts out of company stock to another investment choice, 
other than excessive trading rules applicable to such investments.
109


===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Exec­
utive Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, 
defined contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan 
(Excess 401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution 
plan. All employees whose eligible compensation is expected to 
exceed the IRS compensation limit for qualified plans are eligible to 
participate in the Excess 401(k). The purpose of the Excess 401(k) 
is to provide benefits that would be provided under the qualified 
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation limits did not apply.
	
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are recordkeeping 
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional 
accounts in the primary investment options available to all 
employees through the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the 
Excess 401(k) are also eligible to receive company match and 
automatic contributions on eligible compensation deferred into 
the Excess 401(k) and on compensation earned in excess of the 
Internal Revenue Code pay limit once they have completed one 
year of service. Through June 30, 2009, eligible participants also 
received transition credits. Amounts deferred into the Excess 
401(k), including company contributions are recorded as liabilities. 
NONPENSION POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan 
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretire­
ment benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to 
eligible U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insur­
ance for eligible U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company 
established a Future Health Account (FHA) for employees who 
were more than five years from retirement eligibility. Employees 
who were within five years of retirement eligibility are covered 
under the company’s prior retiree health benefits arrangements. 
Under either the FHA or the prior retiree health benefit arrange­
ments, there is a maximum cost to the company for retiree 
health benefits. 
	
Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are 
not eligible for company subsidized postretirement benefits.
Non-U.S. Plans
Most subsidiaries and branches outside the United States spon­
sor defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover 
substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds 
under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities 
under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. 
Benefits under the defined benefit plans are typically based 
either on years of service and the employee’s compensation 
(generally during a fixed number of years immediately before 
retirement) or on annual credits. The range of assumptions that 
are used for the non-U.S. defined benefit plans reflect the differ­
ent economic environments within the various countries.
	
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiar­
ies sponsor defined benefit nonpension postretirement benefit 
plans that provide medical and dental benefits to eligible non-
U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for 
certain eligible non-U.S. retirees. However, most of the non-U.S. 
retirees are covered by local government sponsored and admin­
istered programs.
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. 
($ in millions)
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans	
Total
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009	
2008*	
2007*	
2009	
2008*	
2007*
Defined benefit pension plans	
$(919)	
$  (948)	
$   473	
$   521	
$402	
$   835	
$  (398)	
$  (546)	
$1,308
Retention Plan	
13	
13	
23	
—	
—	
—	
13	
13	
23
Total defined benefit pension plans 
	 (income)/cost	
$(906)	
$  (936)	
$   496	
$   521	
$402	
$   835	
$  (384)	
$  (534)	
$1,331
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan and Non-U.S. plans	
$ 946	
$1,034	
$   390	
$   478	
$540	
$   478	
$1,424	
$1,574	
$   868
Excess 401(k)	
26	
36	
12	
—	
—	
—	
26	
36	
12
Total defined contribution plans cost	
$ 972	
$1,069	
$   402	
$   478	
$540	
$   478	
$1,450	
$1,609	
$   880
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans cost	
$ 292	
$   310	
$   342	
$     58	
$  53	
$      57	
$   350	
$   363	
$   399
Total retirement-related 
	 benefits net periodic cost	
$ 358	
$   443	
$1,240	
$1,057	
$996	
$1,370	
$1,415	
$1,439	
$2,610
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
110


===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The following table presents a summary of the total projected benefit obligation (PBO) for defined benefit plans, accumulated postre­
tirement benefit obligation (APBO) for nonpension postretirement benefit plans (benefit obligations), fair value of plan assets and the 
associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
	
Benefit Obligations	
 Fair Value of Plan Assets	
Funded Status*
At December 31: 	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008
U.S. Plans:
	 Overfunded plans: 
	 	 Qualified PPP	
$46,910	
$        —	
$47,269	
$        —	
$      359	
$         —
	 Underfunded plans:
	 	 Qualified PPP	
$        —	
$47,297	
$        —	
$45,918	
$         —	
$  (1,379)
	 	 Excess PPP	
1,195	
1,224	
—	
—	
(1,195)	
(1,224)
	 	 Retention Plan	
249	
235	
—	
—	
(249)	
(235)
	  	 Nonpension postretirement benefit plan	
5,100	
5,224	
33	
113	
(5,067)	
(5,111)
	 Total underfunded U.S. plans	
$  6,545	
$53,980	
$        33	
$46,031	
$  (6,512)	
$  (7,949)
Non-U.S. Plans:
	 Overfunded plans: 
	 	 Qualified defined benefit pension plans	
$14,032	
$12,586	
$16,673	
$14,183	
$   2,641	
$   1,598
	 	 Nonpension postretirement benefit plans	
7	
12	
8	
14	
1	
3
	 Total overfunded non-U.S. plans	
$14,039	
$12,598	
$16,681	
$14,197	
$   2,642	
$   1,601
	 Underfunded plans:
	 	 Qualified defined benefit pension plans	
$21,521	
$21,179	
$17,633	
$14,980	
$  (3,888)	
$  (6,199)
	 	 Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans	
5,755	
5,406	
—	
—	
(5,755)	
(5,406)
	 	 Nonpension postretirement benefit plans	
760	
596	
96	
65	
(664)	
(532)
	 Total underfunded non-U.S. plans	
$28,036	
$27,182	
$17,729	
$15,045	
$(10,307)	
$(12,137)
Total overfunded plans	
$60,949	
$12,598	
$63,950	
$14,197	
$   3,001	
$   1,601
Total underfunded plans	
$34,581	
$81,162	
$17,762	
$61,076	
$(16,819)	
$(20,086)
*	 Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensa­
tion and benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2009, the company’s qualified defined benefit 
pension plans worldwide were 99 percent funded compared to the 
benefit obligations, with the U.S. qualified PPP 101 percent funded. 
Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined ben­
efit pension plans were 91 percent funded, an improvement of 6 
points from the year-end 2008 position.
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension 
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The tables on pages 112 to 114 represent financial information 
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans. Defined ben­
efit pension plans in the U.S. Plans consist of the Qualified PPP, 
the Excess PPP and the Retention Plan. Defined benefit pen­
sion plans in the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored 
by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan in the U.S. Plan represents the U.S. Non­pension 
Postretirement Benefit Plan. Nonpension postretirement benefit 
plans in the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the 
company’s subsidiaries.
	
The tables on page 112 present the components of net peri­
odic (income)/cost of the company’s retirement-related benefit 
plans recognized in Consoli­dated Statement of Earnings.
111


===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
	
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009	
2008*	
2007*
Service cost	
$      —	
$      —	
$    773	
$    585	
$    660	
$    688
Interest cost	
2,682	
2,756	
2,660	
1,898	
2,042	
1,825
Expected return on plan assets	
(4,009)	
(3,978)	
(3,703)	
(2,534)	
(2,725)	
(2,528)
Amortization of transition assets	
—	
—	
—	
(0)	
(0)	
(3)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)	
10	
(7)	
57	
(126)	
(129)	
(125)
Recognized actuarial losses	
411	
291	
703	
624	
612	
934
Curtailments and settlements	
—	
2	
5	
(126)	
(139)	
2
Multi-employer plan/other costs	
—	
—	
—	
200	
82	
40
Total net periodic (income)/cost	
$   (906)	
$   (936)	
$    496	
$    521	
$    402	
$    835
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2009 presentation.
($ in millions)
	
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
	
U.S. Plan 	
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009	
2008	
2007
Service cost	
$  41	
$  55	
$  69	
$10	
$ 10	
$ 12
Interest cost	
289	
312	
311	
51	
53	
46
Expected return on plan assets	
—	
(8)	
—	
(8)	
(10)	
(11)
Amortization of transition assets	
—	
—	
—	
0	
0	
1
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)	
(39)	
(62)	
(62)	
(6)	
(7)	
(8)
Recognized actuarial losses	
—	
9	
24	
11	
14	
17
Curtailments and settlements	
—	
3	
—	
—	
(6)	
—
Total net periodic cost	
$292	
$310	
$342	
$58	
$ 53	
$ 57
112


===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans.
($ in millions)
	
Defined Benefit Pension Plans	
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans*	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans
 	
	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008	
2009	
 2008	
2009	
 2008
Change in benefit obligation: 
Benefit obligation at January 1	
	
$48,756	
$47,673	
$39,171	
$ 42,291	
$ 5,224	
$ 5,472	
$ 608	
$ 769
Service cost	
	
—	
—	
585	
660	
41	
55	
10	
10
Interest cost	
	
2,682	
2,756	
1,898	
2,042	
289	
312	
51	
53
Plan participants’ contributions	
	
—	
—	
58	
63	
228	
216	
—	
—
Acquisitions/divestitures, net	
	
—	
—	
(58)	
(6)	
—	
—	
(2)	
(1)
Actuarial losses/(gains)	
	
155	
1,183	
506	
(64)	
(65)	
(191)	
14	
(12)
Benefits paid from trust	
	
(3,144)	
(2,999)	
(1,855)	
(1,814)	
(646)	
(656)	
(6)	
(31)
Direct benefit payments	
	
(94)	
(81)	
(464)	
(486)	
(25)	
(24)	
(23)	
(21)
Foreign exchange impact	
	
—	
—	
1,920	
(3,357)	
—	
—	
111	
(146)
Medicare subsidy	
	
—	
—	
—	
—	
52	
37	
—	
—
Plan amendments/curtailments/settlements	
	
—	
224	
(454)	
(157)	
—	
3	
4	
(13)
Benefit obligation at December 31	
	
$48,354	
$48,756	
$41,308	
$ 39,171	
$ 5,100	
$ 5,224	
$ 767	
$ 608
Change in plan assets:
Fair value of plan assets at January 1	
	
$45,918	
$57,191	
$29,164	
$ 41,696	
$    113	
$    504	
$   79	
$ 121
Actual return on plan assets	
	
4,496	
(8,274)	
4,030	
(7,678)	
(1)	
4	
8	
10
Employer contributions	
	
—	
—	
1,195	
858	
338	
45	
1	
10
Acquisitions/divestitures, net	
	
—	
—	
(29)	
16	
—	
—	
—	
—
Plan participants’ contributions	
	
—	
—	
58	
63	
228	
216	
—	
—
Benefits paid from trust	
	
(3,144)	
(2,999)	
(1,855)	
(1,814)	
(646)	
(656)	
(6)	
(31)
Foreign exchange impact	
	
—	
—	
1,710	
(3,978)	
—	
—	
23	
(30)
Plan amendments/curtailments/settlements	
	
—	
—	
33	
2	
—	
—	
(1)	
—
Fair value of plan assets at December 31	
	
$47,269	
$45,918	
$34,305	
$ 29,164	
$      33	
$    113	
$ 104	
$   79
Funded status at December 31	
	
$ (1,085)	
$ (2,838)	
$ (7,003)	 $(10,007)	
$(5,067)	
$(5,111)	
$(663)	
$(529)
Accumulated benefit obligation**	
	
$48,354	
$48,756	
$40,339	
$ 37,759	
N/A	
N/A	
N/A	
N/A
*	 Excludes a defined benefit pension plan in Brazil due to restrictions on the use of plan assets imposed by governmental regulations.
**	Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
	
Defined Benefit Pension Plans	
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans*	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans
At December 31: 	
	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008	
2009	
 2008	
2009	
 2008
Prepaid pension assets	
	
$    359	
$       —	
$ 2,641	
$   1,598	
$       —	
$       —	
$     1	
$      3
Current liabilities—Compensation and benefits	
	
(91)	
(86)	
(326)	
(283)	
 (425)	
(255)	
 (24)	
(9)
Noncurrent liabilities—Retirement and 
	 nonpension postretirement benefit obligations	
	
(1,353)	
(2,752)	
(9,318)	
(11,322)	
(4,642)	
(4,856)	
(640)	
(523)
Funded status — net	
	
$(1,085)	
$(2,838)	
$(7,003)	 $(10,007)	
$(5,067)	
$(5,111)	
$(663)	
$(529)
The table on page 114 presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in 
other comprehensive income/(loss) and the changes in pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities 
recognized in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.
113


===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions)
	
Defined Benefit Pension Plans	
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:	
	
2009	
2008	
2009	
2008	
2009	
 2008	
2009	
 2008
Net loss at January 1	
	
$15,623	
$  2,479	
$18,898	
$  9,228	
$454	
$ 657	
$155	
$186
Current period loss/(gain)	
	
(332)	
13,435	
(1,107)	
10,339	
(57)	
(194)	
24	
(11)
Curtailments and settlements	
	
—	
—	
6	
(56)	
—	
—	
—	
(7)
Amortization of net loss included in net 
	 periodic (income)/cost	
	
(411)	
(291)	
(624)	
(612)	
—	
(9)	
(11)	
(14)
Net loss at December 31	
	
$14,880	
$15,623	
$17,172	
$18,898	
$397	
$ 454	
$167	
$155
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1	
	
$     168	
$      (60)	
$    (980)	
$ (1,147)	
$ (53)	
$(115)	
$ (21)	
$ (28)
Current period prior service costs/(credits)	
	
—	
222	
(370)	
—	
—	
—	
(5)	
—
Curtailments and settlements	
	
—	
—	
120	
38	
—	
—	
—	
—
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits 
	 included in net periodic (income)/cost	
	
(10)	
7	
126	
129	
39	
62	
6	
7
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31	
	
$     159	
$     168	
$ (1,104)	
$    (980)	
$ (14)	
$  (53)	
$ (19)	
$ (21)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1	
	
$       —	
$        —	
$        (1)	
$        (1)	
$   —	
$    —	
$    1	
$    1
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities) 
	 included in net periodic (income)/cost	
	
—	
—	
0	
0	
—	
—	
0	
0
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31	
	
$       —	
$        —	
$        (1)	
$        (1)	
$   —	
$    —	
$    1	
$    1
Total loss recognized in Accumulated 
	 other comprehensive income/(loss)*	
	
$15,038	
$15,791	
$16,067	
$17,917	
$382	
$ 401	
$148	
$135
*	 See note N, “Equity Activity,” on page 98 for the total change in the accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity 
for components of net periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) into net 
periodic (income)/cost and recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings in 2010.
	
Defined 	
Nonpension Post-
	
Benefit Pension Plans	
retirement Benefit Plans
($ in millions)	
	
	
U.S. Plans	
Non-U.S. Plans	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans 
Net loss	
	
	
$476	
$ 722	
$  —	
$9
Prior service costs/(credits)	
	
	
10	
(165)	
(14)	
(5)
Transition (assets)/liabilities	
	
	
—	
0	
—	
—
for future years of service. This amendment resulted in a 
decrease in the PBO of $359 million and had no impact on 2009 
net periodic (income)/cost.
	
During the year ended December 31, 2008, the IBM Board 
of Directors approved a pension adjustment for certain U.S. 
retirees and beneficiaries in the PPP. This adjustment provided 
a pension increase to approximately 42,000 IBM retirees who 
retired before January 1, 1997. This adjustment resulted in an 
increase in the PBO of $222 million and had no impact on 2008 
net periodic (income)/cost.
	
During the year ended December 31, 2008, the company 
terminated one of its defined benefit pension plans in Japan that 
resulted in a settlement gain of $140 million recorded as part of 
2008 net periodic (income)/cost and resulted in a decrease in 
the PBO of $157 million. 
During the year ended December 31, 2009, the company paid 
$140 million for mandatory pension insolvency insurance cover­
age premiums in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada, 
Luxembourg and the U.K.), an increase of $117 million from the 
year ended December 31, 2008, driven primarily by premiums 
paid in Germany. These premiums relate to the rising level of 
plan insolvencies experienced by other companies.
	
During the year ended December 31, 2009, the company 
approved changes to the United Kingdom Pension Plan which 
included the elimination of accrued benefits under this plan effec­
tive April 2011. As a result of this action, the company recorded 
a curtailment gain of $124 million included in 2009 net periodic 
(income)/cost and reduced the PBO by $85 million. The com­
pany also amended its cash balance and defined contribution 
plans in Japan to reduce overall benefits for active participants 
114


===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
No significant amendments of retirement-related benefit plans 
occurred during the year ended December 31, 2007 that had a 
material effect on the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan 
Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net 
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations 
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years 
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant 
of which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on 
plan assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting 
rates and mortality rates. The company evaluates these assump­
tions, at a minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.
	
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure 
the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obliga­
tions for retirement-related benefit plans.
	
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009	
2008	
2007
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
	 periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31:
	 Discount rate	
5.75%	
6.00%	
5.75%	
4.89%	
5.06%	
4.40%
	 Expected long-term returns on plan assets	
8.00%	
8.00%	
8.00%	
6.73%	
6.86%	
6.95%
	 Rate of compensation increase*	
N/A	
N/A	
4.00%	
3.09%	
3.23%	
3.05%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure
	 benefit obligations at December 31:
	 Discount rate	
5.60%	
5.75%	
6.00%	
4.84%	
4.89%	
5.06%
	 Rate of compensation increase*	
N/A	
N/A	
N/A	
2.92%	
3.09%	
3.23%
*	 Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
	
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
	
U.S. Plans 	
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2009	
2008	
2007
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure 
	 net periodic cost for the year ended December 31:
	 Discount rate	
5.75%	
6.00%	
5.75%	
7.36%	
7.13%	
6.93%
	 Expected long-term returns on plan assets	
N/A	
3.02%	
N/A	
9.19%	
9.04%	
9.95%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure 
	 benefit obligations at December 31:
	 Discount rate	
5.40%	
5.75%	
6.00%	
7.92%	
7.36%	
7.13%
N/A—Not applicable
DISCOUNT RATE
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related ben­
efit plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, 
fixed income debt instruments at the measurement date. For 
the U.S. discount rate assumptions, a portfolio of high-quality 
corporate bonds is used to construct a yield curve. The cash 
flows from the company’s expected benefit obligation payments 
are then matched to the yield curve to derive the discount rates. 
In the non-U.S., where markets for high-quality long-term bonds 
are not generally as well developed, a portfolio of long-term 
government bonds is used as a base, to which a credit spread 
is added to simulate corporate bond yields at these maturities 
in the jurisdiction of each plan, as the benchmark for developing 
the respective discount rates.
115


===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in 
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. The changes in discount rate assumptions 
resulted in a decrease in 2009 net periodic income of $70 mil­
lion, an increase in 2008 net periodic income of $67 million and 
a decrease in 2007 net periodic cost of $92 million. The changes 
in discount rate assumptions resulted in an increase in the PBO 
of $703 million and $1,190 million at December 31, 2009 and 
2008, respectively. 
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes 
in discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net peri­
odic cost for the years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 
2007 and on the APBO at December 31, 2009 and 2008.
EXPECTED LONG-TERM RETURNS ON PLAN ASSETS
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan 
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan 
assets. Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into 
account long-term expectations for future returns and invest­
ment policies and strategies as described on page 117. These 
rates of return are developed by the company, calculated using 
an arithmetic average and are tested for reasonableness against 
historical returns. The use of expected long-term returns on plan 
assets may result in recognized pension income that is greater 
or less than the actual returns of those plan assets in any given 
year. Over time, however, the expected long-term returns are 
designed to approximate the actual long-term returns, and 
therefore result in a pattern of income and cost recognition that 
more closely matches the pattern of the services provided by the 
employees. Differences between actual and expected returns 
are recognized as a component of net loss or gain in accumu­
lated other comprehensive income/(loss), which is amortized 
as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the service 
lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending on 
the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds 
provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of 
plan assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets 
systematically over a five-year period in the expected return on 
plan assets line in net periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, Qualified PPP, the 
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent 
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2009, 
2008 and 2007 and, consequently, had no incremental impact 
on net periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the com­
pany maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to 
ensure payments are made timely. As a result, for the years 
ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007, the expected long-
term return on plan assets and the actual return on those assets 
were not material.
RATE OF COMPENSATION INCREASES AND MORTALITY RATE
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com­
pany, based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The 
rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. 
defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased 
December 31, 2007 for all participants. Mortality rate assump­
tions are based on life expectancy and death rates for different 
types of participants. Mortality rates are periodically updated 
based on actual experience.
INTEREST CREDITING RATE
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using 
a cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula 
is an interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic 
(income)/cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis 
for projecting the expected interest rate that participants will 
earn on the benefits that they are expected to receive in the 
following year and is based on the average from August to 
October of the one-year U.S. Treasury Constant Maturity yield 
plus one percent.
	
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 
2.8 percent for the year ended December 31, 2009 from 5.2 
percent for the year ended December 31, 2008 resulted in 
an increase in 2009 net periodic income of $151 million. The 
change in the interest crediting rate to 5.2 percent for the year 
ended December 31, 2008 from 6.0 percent for the year ended 
December 31, 2007 resulted in an increase in 2008 net periodic 
income of $65 million. The change in the interest crediting rate 
to 6.0 percent for the year ended December 31, 2007 from 5.0 
percent for the year ended December 31, 2006 resulted in an 
increase in 2007 net periodic cost of $125 million.
116


===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
HEALTHCARE COST TREND RATE
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the 
company reviews external data and its own historical trends for 
healthcare costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. 
However, the healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant 
effect on plan costs and obligations as a result of the terms of 
the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants. 
The company assumes that the healthcare cost trend rate for 
2010 will be 7 percent. In addition, the company assumes that 
the same trend rate will decrease to 5 percent over the next 
three years. A one percentage point increase or decrease in the 
assumed healthcare cost trend rate would not have a material 
effect on 2009, 2008 and 2007 net periodic cost or the benefit 
obligations as of December 31, 2009 and 2008.
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and mea­
sured at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting 
Policies,” on page 77. Because of the inherent uncertainty of 
valuations, these fair value measurements may not necessarily 
reflect the amounts the company could realize in current market 
transactions.
INVESTMENT POLICIES AND STRATEGIES
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are 
designed to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet 
its future obligations. The precise amount for which these obli­
gations will be settled depends on future events, including the 
retirement dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. 
The obligations are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based 
on the current economic environment and other pertinent factors 
described on page 115. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment 
strategy balances the requirement to generate returns, using 
potentially higher yielding assets such as equity securities, with 
the need to control risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, 
such as fixed-income securities. Risks include, among others, 
inflation, volatility in equity values and changes in interest rates 
that could cause the plan to become underfunded, thereby 
increasing its dependence on contributions from the company. 
To mitigate any potential concentration risk, careful consider­
ation is given to balancing the portfolio among industry sectors, 
companies and geographies, taking into account interest rate 
sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, currency and other 
factors that affect investment returns. As a result, the Qualified 
PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 44 percent equity securities, 
46 percent fixed income securities, 5 percent real estate and 5 
percent other investments, which is consistent with the alloca­
tion decisions made by the company’s management and is 
similar to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 118 
details the actual allocation of equity, fixed income, real estate 
and all other types of investments for the Qualified PPP portfolio. 
	
The assets are managed by professional investment firms 
and investment professionals who are employees of the com­
pany. They are bound by investment mandates determined by 
the company’s management and are measured against specific 
benchmarks. Among these managers, consideration is given, 
but not limited to, balancing security concentration, issuer con­
centration, investment style and reliance on particular active and 
passive investment strategies. 
	
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with only a mod­
est percentage of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private 
market assets consisting of private equities and private real 
estate investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded 
securities. As of December 31, 2009, the Qualified PPP port­
folio had $3,618 million in commitments for future investments 
in private markets to be made over a number of years. These 
commitments are expected to be funded from plan assets.
	
Derivatives are used on a limited basis as an effective means 
to achieve investment objectives and/or as a component of 
the plan’s risk management strategy. The primary reasons for 
the use of derivatives are fixed income management, including 
duration, interest rate management and credit exposure, cash 
equitization and as a means to gain exposure to the currency 
and commodities markets.
	
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to 
those described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted- 
average target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 47 percent 
equity securities, 46 percent fixed income securities, 2 percent 
real estate and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent 
with the allocation decisions made by the company’s manage­
ment and is similar to the prior year weighted-average target 
allocation. The table on page 118 details the actual allocations 
of equity, fixed income, real estate and all other types of invest­
ments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher percent­
age allocation to fixed income securities is required. In others, 
the responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with 
a board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected 
by employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences 
compared with the strategies previously described. Generally, 
these non-U.S. plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their 
use of derivatives is usually limited to currency hedging, adjust­
ing portfolio durations and reducing specific market risks. There 
was no significant change in the investment strategies of these 
plans during either 2009 or 2008.
	
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are 
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company main­
tains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely 
benefit payments. 
117


===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN ASSETS
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ major asset categories and their associated fair value at 
December 31, 2009. The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the com­
pany’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans
	
	
 Level 1	
 Level 2	
Level 3	
 Total	
Level 1	
Level 2	
Level 3	
 Total
Equity:
	 Equity securities(a)	
	
$15,205	
$       56	
$      —	
$15,261	
$7,012	
$        —	
$   —	
$  7,012
	 Equity commingled/mutual funds(b)(c)	
	
303	
1,085	
26	
1,413	
386	
8,923	
—	
9,309
Fixed income:
	 Government and related(d)	
	
—	
10,880	
—	
10,880	
—	
6,231	
—	
6,231
	 Corporate bonds	
	
—	
7,264	
—	
7,264	
—	
1,467	
—	
1,467
	 Mortgage and asset-backed securities	
	
—	
1,403	
37	
1,440	
—	
21	
—	
21
	 Fixed income commingled/mutual funds(b)(e)	
	
369	
1,064	
192	
1,625	
45	
6,835	
—	
6,880
	 Insurance contracts	
	
—	
1	
—	
1	
—	
1,143	
—	
1,143
Cash and short-term investments(f)	
	
243	
2,460	
—	
2,703	
98	
236	
—	
333
Hedge funds	
	
—	
214	
587	
800	
—	
—	
—	
—
Private equity(g)	
	
—	
—	
3,877	
3,877	
—	
—	
93	
93
Private real estate(g)	
	
—	
—	
2,247	
2,247	
—	
—	
492	
492
Derivatives(h)	
	
18	
(221)	
—	
(203)	
62	
(7)	
—	
55
Other commingled/mutual funds(b)(i)	
	
—	
(0)	
—	
—	
—	
1,190	
—	
1,190
	 Subtotal	
	
16,138	
24,205	
6,964	
47,308	
7,602	
26,038	
585	
34,226
Other(j)	 	
	
—	
—	
—	
(39)	
—	
—	
—	
80
Fair value of plan assets	
	
$16,138	
$24,205	
$6,964	
$47,269	
$7,602	
$26,038	
$585	
$34,305
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $122 million, representing 0.3 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans 
include IBM common stock of $45 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(f)	 Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(g)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(h)	Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(i)	 Invests in both equity and fixed income securities. 
(j)	 Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $33 
million were invested in fixed income commingled/mutual funds, 
categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. The non-U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $104 million, pri­
marily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South Africa, 
were invested primarily in government and related fixed income 
securities, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.
	
The company’s asset allocations at December 31, 2008 were 
as follows: 
	
U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans
Asset Category:
	 Equity securities(a)(b)	
37.1%	
	
46.0%
	 Debt securities	
54.0	
	
48.5
	 Real estate(a)	
5.9	
	
1.6
	 Other		
3.0	
	
4.0
Total	 	 	
100.0%	
	
100.0%
(a)	The Qualified PPP portfolio (U.S. Plan) included private market assets comprising 
approximately 12.9 percent of total assets.
(b)	Equity securities included IBM common stock of $83 million, representing 0.2 
percent of the Qualified PPP portfolio plan assets.
118


===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
The following table presents the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the year ended December 
31, 2009 for the U.S. Plan:
($ in millions)
	
Equity	
Mortgage	
Fixed
	
Commingled/	
And	
Income	
	
	
Private
	
Mutual	
Asset-Backed	
Commingled/	
 Hedge	
Private	
Real
	
Funds	
Securities	
Mutual Funds	
Funds	
Equity	
Estate	
Total
Balance at January 1	
$ —	
$47	
$180	
$513	
$3,169	
$2,698	
$6,607
Return on assets held at end of year	
1	
11	
11	
80	
575	
(634)	
44
Return on assets sold during the year	
—	
1	
—	
2	
14	
(98)	
(81)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net	
25	
(7)	
—	
(8)	
118	
281	
408
Transfers, net	
—	
(14)	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(14)
Balance at December 31	
$26	
$37	
$192	
$587	
$3,877	
$2,247	
$6,964
The following table presents the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the year ended December 
31, 2009 for the non-U.S. Plans:
($ in millions)
	
	
	
	
Private	
Private
	
	
	
	
Equity	
Real Estate	
Total
Balance at January 1	
	
	
	
$ 64	
$429	
$494
Return on assets held at end of year	
	
	
	
(10)	
(10)	
(19)
Return on assets sold during the year	
	
	
	
—	
—	
1
Purchases, sales and settlements, net	
	
	
	
32	
27	
59
Transfers, net	
	
	
	
—	
—	
—
Foreign exchange impact	
	
	
	
6	
46	
51
Balance at December 31	
	
	
	
$ 93	
$492	
$585
VALUATION TECHNIQUES
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used 
to measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in 
valuation techniques during 2009 and 2008.
	
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on 
the stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. 
IBM common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the 
New York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds 
are typically valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by 
the administrator of the fund and reviewed by the company. The 
NAV is based on the value of the underlying assets owned by 
the fund, minus liabilities and divided by the number of shares or 
units outstanding. These assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 
or Level 3 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
	
The fair value of fixed income securities is typically estimated 
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar 
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally clas­
sified as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing 
price reported on the major market on which the individual 
securities are traded.
	
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at 
their cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair 
value. Short-term investments represent securities with original 
maturities of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 
1 or Level 2. 
	
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations 
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted mar­
ket prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature 
of such assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are 
reviewed periodically utilizing available and relevant market data 
to determine if the carrying value of these assets should be 
adjusted. These investments are classified as Level 3. The valu­
ation methodology is applied consistently from period to period.
119


===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
	
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price 
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close 
price. Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using 
pricing models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, 
for example, yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility 
and foreign exchange rates. These assets are classified as Level 
1 or Level 2 depending on availability of quoted market prices.
Expected Contributions
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLANS
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pen­
sions sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in 
applicable employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From 
time to time, the company contributes additional amounts as it 
deems appropriate.
	
The company contributed $1,252 million and $917 million 
in cash to non-U.S. plans, including non-U.S. multi-employer 
plans, during the years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, 
respectively.
	
In 2010, the company is not legally required to make any 
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, 
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company 
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified 
PPP during the year. 
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into 
law in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among 
other provisions, increases pension funding requirements for cer­
tain U.S. defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring 
pension plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes 
and raises tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-
related benefit plans. The additional funding requirements by the 
Act apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 2007. The 
Act was updated by the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery 
Act of 2008, which revised the funding requirements in the Act 
by clarifying that the company may smooth the change in value 
of pension plan assets over 24 months. At December 31, 2009, 
no mandatory contribution is required for 2010.
	
In 2010, the company estimates contributions to its non-
U.S. plans to be approximately $800 million, which will be 
mainly contributed to defined benefit pension plans in Japan, 
the Nether­lands, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. This 
amount represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. 
Financial market performance in 2010 could increase the legally 
mandated minimum contribution in certain countries which 
require monthly or daily remeasurement of the funded status. 
The company could also elect to contribute more than the legally 
mandated amount based on market conditions or other factors. 
NONPENSION POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLANS
The company contributed $293 million and $10 million to the 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended 
December 31, 2009 and 2008. These contribution amounts 
exclude the Medicare-related subsidy discussed below.
Expected Benefit Payments
DEFINED BENEFIT PENSION PLAN EXPECTED PAYMENTS
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments 
to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments 
have been estimated based on the same assumptions used to 
measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2009 and include 
benefits attributable to estimated future compensation increases, 
where applicable.
($ in millions)
	
	
Qualified	
Nonqualified	
Qualified	
Nonqualified	
Total Expected
	
	
U.S. Plan	
U.S. Plans	
Non-U.S. Plans	
Non-U.S. Plans	
Benefit 
	
	
Payments	
Payments	
Payments	
Payments	
Payments
2010		 	
	
$  3,375	
$  91	
$  2,079	
$   314	
$  5,860
2011		 	
	
3,262	
91	
1,951	
315	
5,620
2012		 	
	
3,276	
92	
1,971	
324	
5,664
2013		 	
	
3,291	
95	
1,989	
333	
5,709
2014		 	
	
3,316	
97	
2,022	
337	
5,772
2015 – 2019	
	
16,692	
518	
10,536	
1,843	
29,590
The 2010 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (under­
funded plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position.
120


===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
NONPENSION POSTRETIREMENT BENEFIT PLAN 
EXPECTED PAYMENTS
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants, as well as the 
expected receipt of the company’s share of the Medicare subsidy described below. These payments have been estimated based on 
the same assumptions used to measure the plan’s APBO at December 31, 2009.
($ in millions)
	
	
Less: IBM Share	
 Net Expected	
Qualified	
Nonqualified	
Total Expected
	
U.S. Plan	
of Expected	
 U.S. Plan	
Non-U.S. Plans	
Non-U.S. Plans	
Benefit
	
Payments	 Medicare Subsidy	
Payments	
Payments	
Payments	
Payments
2010		 	
$   499	
$(27)	
$   472	
$  11	
$  24	
$   507
2011		 	
492	
(28)	
464	
15	
25	
503
2012		 	
458	
(28)	
430	
16	
 26	
472
2013		 	
440	
(28)	
412	
18	
 27	
457
2014		 	
431	
—	
431	
20	
 28	
479
2015 – 2019	
$2,113	
—	
$2,113	
135	
154	
2,402
The 2010 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretire­
ment benefit plan participants not covered by the respective 
plan assets represent a component of compensation and ben­
efits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position.
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement 
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company is expected to 
continue to receive a federal subsidy of approximately $229 
million to subsidize the prescription drug coverage provided 
by the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan, which is 
expected to extend until 2013. Approx­imately $111 million of 
the subsidy will be used by the company to reduce its obligation 
and cost related to the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit 
plan. The company will contribute the remaining subsidy of $118 
million to the plan in order to reduce contributions required by 
the participants. The company received a total subsidy of $45 
million for prescription drug-related coverage during each of the 
years ended December 31, 2009 and 2008, which was utilized 
to reduce the company contributions to the U.S. nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan. 
	
The company has included the impact of its portion of the 
subsidy in the determination of net periodic cost and APBO for 
the U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at and for the 
years ended December 31, 2009, 2008 and 2007. The impact 
of the subsidy resulted in a reduction in APBO of $100 million 
and $127 million at December 31, 2009 and 2008, respectively. 
The impact of the subsidy resulted in a reduction in 2009, 2008 
and 2007 net periodic cost of $28 million, $40 million and $36 
million, respectively.
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pen­
sion plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess 
of plan assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded 
status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the 
table on page 113.
($ in millions)
	
2009	
2008
	
	
	
Benefit	
	
Benefit
At December 31:	
	
	
Obligation	
Plan Assets	
Obligation	
Plan Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets	
	
	
$28,720	
$17,633	
$75,341	
$60,898
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets	
	
	
27,996	
17,561	
73,939	
60,630
Plans with assets in excess of PBO	
	
	
60,942	
63,942	
12,586	
14,183
121


===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Note V. 
Segment Information
The company creates business value for clients and solves 
business problems through integrated solutions that leverage 
information technology and deep knowledge of business pro­
cesses. IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s 
operational costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate 
revenue. These solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio 
of consulting, delivery and implementation services, enterprise 
software, systems and financing.
	
The company’s major operations comprise: a Global Tech­
nol­ogy Services segment; a Global Business Services segment; 
a Software segment; a Systems and Technology segment; and a 
Global Financing segment. The segments repre­sent components 
of the company for which separate financial information is available 
that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief executive officer in 
determining how to allocate the company’s resources and evalu­
ate performance. The segments are determined based on several 
factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, technol­
ogy, delivery channels and similar economic characteristics.
	
Information about each segment’s business and the products 
and services that generate each segment’s revenue is located 
in the “Description of Business” section of the Management 
Dis­cus­sion on pages 20 to 25, and “Segment Details,” on pages 
25 to 31.
	
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions 
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length 
transfer price. Systems and software that is used by the Global 
Technology Services segment in outsourcing engagements is pri­
marily sourced internally from the Systems and Technology and 
Software segments. For the internal use of IT services, Global 
Technology Services and Global Business Services recover cost, 
as well as a reasonable fee, reflecting the arm’s-length value of 
providing the services. The Global Services segments enter into 
arm’s-length leases and loans at prices equivalent to market rates 
with the Global Financing segment to facilitate the acquisition of 
equipment used in services engagements. All internal transaction 
prices are reviewed annually, and reset if appropriate.
	
The company utilizes globally integrated support orga­
nizations to realize economies of scale and efficient use of 
resources. As a result, a considerable amount of expense is 
shared by all of the segments. This shared expense includes 
sales coverage, marketing and support functions such as 
Accounting, Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re­sources 
and Billing and Collections. Where practical, shared expenses 
are allocated based on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., 
headcount. When a clear and measurable driver cannot be 
identified, shared expenses are allocated on a financial basis 
that is consistent with the company’s management system; e.g., 
advertising expense is allocated based on the gross profits of 
the segments. The unallocated corporate amounts arising from 
certain divestitures, indirect infrastructure reductions, miscella­
neous tax items and the unallocated corporate expense pool are 
recorded in net income but are not allocated to the segments.
	
The following tables reflect the results of continuing operations 
of the segments consistent with the company’s management and 
measurement system. These results are not necessarily a depic­
tion that is in conformity with GAAP. Performance measurement 
is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by 
senior management, both in evaluating the performance of, and 
in allocating resources to, each of the segments. 
122


===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
	
Global Services Segments
	
Global	
Global
	
Technology	
Business	
	
Systems and	
Global	
Total
For the year ended December 31:	
Services	
Services	
Software	
Technology	
Financing	
Segments
2009:
External revenue	
$37,347	
$17,653	
$21,396	
$ 16,190	
$2,302	
$  94,889
Internal revenue	
1,386	
887	
2,677	
911	
1,774	
7,635
Total revenue	
$38,734	
$18,540	
$24,073	
$17,102	
$4,076	
$102,524
Pre-tax income 	
$  5,537	
$  2,555	
$  8,095	
$  1,419	
$1,730	
$  19,335
Revenue year-to-year change	
(5.1)%	
(10.3)%	
(3.1)%	
(15.2)%	
(8.4)%	
(7.6)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change	
20.2%	
(4.7)%	
14.4%	
(8.5)%	
7.0%	
10.3%
Pre-tax income margin	
14.3%	
13.8%	
33.6%	
8.3%	
42.4%	
18.9%
2008:
External revenue	
$39,264	
$19,628	
$22,089	
$ 19,287	
$2,559	
$102,827
Internal revenue	
1,546	
1,044	
2,761	
882	
1,892	
8,125
Total revenue	
$40,810	
$20,671	
$24,850	
$20,169	
$4,451	
$110,951
Pre-tax income 	
$  4,607	
$  2,681	
$  7,075	
$  1,550	
$1,617	
$  17,531
Revenue year-to-year change	
8.1%	
7.5%	
10.9%	
(9.6)%	
11.7%	
5.0%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change	
29.5%	
29.9%	
17.9%	
(28.0)%	
16.7%	
15.6%
Pre-tax income margin	
11.3%	
13.0%	
28.5%	
7.7%	
36.3%	
15.8%
2007:
External revenue	
$36,103	
$18,041	
$19,982	
$21,317	
$2,502	
$  97,944
Internal revenue	
1,636	
1,193	
2,416	
998	
1,482	
7,726
Total revenue	
$37,739	
$19,234	
$22,398	
$22,315	
$3,984	
$105,670
Pre-tax income 	
$  3,557	
$  2,064	
$  6,002	
$  2,153	
$1,386	
$  15,163
Revenue year-to-year change	
10.7%	
10.9%	
9.7%	
(3.6)%	
2.4%	
6.9%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change	
8.2%	
21.0%	
9.3%	
23.8%	
(4.7)%	
10.8%
Pre-tax income margin	
9.4%	
10.7%	
26.8%	
9.6%	
34.8%	
14.3%
123


===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
 2008	
 2007
Revenue:
Total reportable segments	
$102,524	 $110,951	 $105,670
Other revenue and adjustments	
869	
803	
842
Elimination of internal revenue	
(7,635)	
(8,125)	
(7,726)
Total IBM consolidated revenue	
$  95,758	 $103,630	 $  98,786
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Pre-Tax Income:
Total reportable segments	
$19,335	
$17,531	
$15,163
Elimination of internal transactions	
(744)	
(433)	
(194)
Unallocated corporate amounts*	
(453)	
(382)	
(480)
Total IBM consolidated pre-tax 
	 income from continuing 
	 operations	
$18,138	
$16,715	
$14,489
*	 Includes a provision related to a joint venture investment (2009 only); gains 
related to the divestiture of the printing business (2007–2009), interest expense 
associated with debt related to the 2007 accelerated share repurchase (2007–
2009); and gains related to the sale of Lenovo stock (2008 and 2007).
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances and Equity Alliances 
Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and 
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the seg­
ments did not have a material effect on the financial position or 
the financial results of the segments. 
Segment Assets and Other Items
Global Technology Services assets are primarily accounts receiv­
able, plant, property and equipment including those associated 
with the segment’s outsourcing business, goodwill, acquired 
intangible assets, deferred services arrangement transition costs 
and maintenance parts inventory. Global Business Services 
assets are primarily goodwill and accounts receivable. Software 
segment assets are mainly goodwill, acquired intangible assets 
and accounts receivable. Systems and Technology assets are 
primarily plant, property and equipment, manufacturing inven­
tory and accounts receivable. The assets of the Global Financing 
segment are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets 
under operating leases.
	
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and 
equipment, it usually is necessary for several segments to share 
plant, property and equipment assets. Where assets are shared, 
landlord ownership of the assets is assigned to one segment and 
is not allocated to each user segment. This is consistent with the 
company’s management system and is reflected accordingly in 
the following table. In those cases, there will not be a precise cor­
relation between segment pre-tax income and segment assets.
	
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each seg­
ment are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may 
not be consistent with the amounts that are included in the 
segments’ pre-tax income. The amounts that are included in 
pre-tax income reflect occupancy charges from the landlord 
segment and are not specifically identified by the management 
reporting system. Capital expenditures that are reported by 
each segment also are consistent with the landlord ownership 
basis of asset assignment.
	
The Global Financing segment amounts for interest income 
and interest expense reflect the interest income and interest 
expense associated with the Global Financing business, includ­
ing the intercompany financing activities discussed on page 24, 
as well as the income from investment in cash and marketable 
securities. The explanation of the difference between cost of 
financing and interest expense for segment presentation ver­
sus presentation in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings is 
included on page 60 of the Management Discussion.
124


===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
	
Global Services Segments
	
Global	
Global
	
Technology	
Business	
	
Systems and	
Global	
Total
For the year ended December 31:	
Services	
Services	
Software	
Technology	
Financing	
Segments
2009:
Assets	 	
$16,422	
$6,885	
$16,894	
$6,907	
$34,605	
$81,714
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles	
1,680	
87	
906	
814	
1,694	
5,181
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles	
1,512	
45	
471	
658	
1,460	
4,145
Interest income	
—	
—	
—	
—	
2,265	
2,265
Interest expense	
—	
—	
—	
—	
674	
674
2008:
Assets	 	
$15,456	
$6,874	
$15,336	
$7,313	
$36,119	
$81,098
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles	
1,797	
99	
905	
851	
2,065	
5,718
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles	
1,607	
54	
504	
754	
2,143	
5,062
Interest income	
—	
—	
—	
—	
2,604	
2,604
Interest expense	
—	
—	
—	
—	
988	
988
2007:
Assets	 	
$16,157	
$7,226	
$10,042	
$7,338	
$37,586	
$78,348
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles	
1,714	
122	
684	
894	
2,034	
5,448
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles	
1,803	
61	
559	
840	
2,432	
5,694
Interest income	
—	
—	
—	
—	
2,421	
2,421
Interest expense	
—	
—	
—	
—	
966	
966
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Assets:
Total reportable segments	
$  81,714	 $  81,098	 $  78,348
Elimination of internal transactions	
(5,481)	
(5,594)	
(5,964)
Unallocated amounts:
	 Cash and marketable securities	
12,688	
11,631	
16,007
	 Notes and accounts receivable	
3,928	
3,632	
3,639
	 Deferred tax assets	
5,545	
8,341	
2,664
	 Plant, other property and equipment	
2,971	
3,172	
3,098
	 Pension assets	
2,994	
1,594	
17,397
	 Other		
4,665	
5,647	
5,242
Total IBM consolidated	
$109,022	 $109,524	 $120,431
Major Clients
No single client represents 10 percent or more of the company’s 
total revenue.
Geographic Information 
The following provides information for those countries that are 
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
United States	
$34,150	 $  36,686	
$36,511
Japan	 	
10,222	
10,403	
9,632
Other countries	
51,386	
56,541	
52,643
Total		 	
$95,758	 $103,630	
$98,786
*	 Revenues are attributed to countries based on location of client. 
Net Plant, Property and Equipment
($ in millions)
At December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
United States	
$  6,313	
$  6,469	
$  6,592
Japan	 	
1,050	
1,055	
890
Other countries	
5,092	
4,797	
5,365
Total		 	
$12,455	
$12,321	
$12,847
125


===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Revenue by Classes of 
Similar Products or Services
The table presents external revenue for similar classes of products 
or services within the company’s reportable segments. Within 
Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, 
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and 
other suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within 
Software, product license charges and ongoing subscription 
and support are reported as Software and consulting, educa­
tion, training and other product-related services are reported 
as Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from 
the sale of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue 
includes circuit and component design services and technology 
and manufacturing consulting services. See “Description of the 
Business” beginning on page 20 for additional information. The 
data is presented on a continuing operations basis. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:	
2009	
2008	
2007
Global Technology Services:
	 Services	
$28,762	
$29,928	
$27,482
	 Maintenance	
6,956	
7,250	
6,670
	 Systems	
1,279	
1,648	
1,496
	 Software	
351	
438	
454
Global Business Services:
	 Services	
$17,213	
$19,176	
$17,579
	 Software	
231	
237	
289
	 Systems	
208	
215	
173
Software:
	 Software	
$20,094	
$20,695	
$18,992
	 Services	
1,302	
1,394	
990
Systems and Technology:
	 Servers	
$10,627	
$12,717	
$13,348
	 Storage	
3,177	
3,612	
3,738
	 Microelectronics OEM	
1,550	
1,862	
2,589
	 Retail Store Solutions	
551	
741	
872
	 Microelectronics Services	
285	
355	
383
	 Printing Systems	
—	
—	
386
Global Financing:
	 Financing	
$  1,715	
$  1,946	
$  1,803
	 Remarketing	
588	
613	
699
Note W. 
Subsequent Events
On January 20, 2010, the company announced that it signed 
a definitive agreement to acquire National Interest Security 
Company, LLC (NISC). NISC, a privately held company, will 
strengthen the company’s ability to deliver advanced analytics 
and IT solutions to the public sector. The transaction is subject 
to customary closing conditions, including regulatory reviews, 
and is expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2010.
	
On January 26, 2010, the company announced that the 
Board of Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.55 per 
common share. The dividend is payable March 10, 2010 to 
shareholders of record on February 10, 2010.
	
On January 26, 2010, the company announced that it com­
pleted the acquisition of Lombardi, a privately held software 
company based in Austin, Texas. Lombardi is a leading pro­
vider of business process management software and services. 
Lombardi will become a part of the company’s application inte­
gration software portfolio. At the date of issuance of the financial 
statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete.
	
On February 3, 2010, the company announced that it 
signed a definitive agreement to acquire Initiate Systems. Initiate 
Systems, a privately held company based in Chicago, Illinois 
is a leading provider of data integrity software for information 
sharing among healthcare and government organizations. The 
transaction is subject to customary closing conditions, including 
regulatory reviews, and is expected to be completed in the first 
quarter of 2010.
	
On February 16, 2010, the company announced that it had 
completed the acquisition of Intelliden Inc., a privately held soft­
ware company based in Menlo Park, California. Intelliden will 
extend the company’s network management offerings. At the 
date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase 
accounting was not complete.
126


===== PAGE 129 =====
Five-year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:	
	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2006	
2005
Revenue	
	
$  95,758	
$103,630	
$98,786	
$91,424	
$91,134
Income from continuing operations	
	
$  13,425	
$  12,334	
$10,418	
$  9,416	
$  7,994
Income/(loss) from discontinued operations	
	
—	
—	
(00)	
76	
(24)
Income before cumulative effect of change
	 in accounting principle	
	
13,425	
12,334	
10,418	
9,492	
7,970
Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle**	
	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(36)
Net income	
	
$  13,425	
$  12,334	
$10,418	
$  9,492	
$  7,934
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
$    10.01	
$      8.89*	
$    7.15*	
$    6.05*	
$    4.90*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
—	
—	
(0.00)	
0.05	
(0.01)
	 	 Before cumulative effect of change 
	 	 	 in accounting principle	
	
10.01	
8.89*	
7.15*	
6.10*	
4.89*
	 	 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle**	
	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(0.02)
	 Total	 	
	
$    10.01	
$      8.89*	
$    7.15*	
$    6.10*	
$    4.86*
	 Basic:
	 	 Continuing operations	
	
$    10.12	
$      9.02*	
$    7.27*	
$    6.13*	
$    4.97*
	 	 Discontinued operations	
	
—	
—	
(0.00)	
0.05	
(0.02)
	 	 Before cumulative effect of change in 
	 	 	 accounting principle	
	
10.12	
9.02*	
7.27*	
6.18*	
4.96*
	 	 Cumulative effect of change in accounting principle**	
	
—	
—	
—	
—	
(0.02)
	 Total	 	
	
$    10.12	
$      9.02*	
$    7.27*	
$    6.18*	
$    4.94*
Cash dividends paid on common stock	
	
$    2,860	
$    2,585	
$  2,147	
$  1,683	
$  1,250
	 Per share of common stock	
	
2.15	
1.90	
1.50	
1.10	
0.78
Investment in plant, rental machines and other property	
	
$    3,447	
$    4,171	
$  4,630	
$  4,362	
$  3,842
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity	
	
80.4%	
48.7%+	
42.6%+	
29.3%+	
25.8%+
At December 31:	
	
2009	
2008	
2007	
2006	
2005
Total assets	
	
$109,022	
$109,524	
$120,431	
$103,234	
$105,748
Net investment in plant, rental machines and other property	
	
14,165	
14,305	
15,081	
14,440	
13,756
Working capital	
	
12,933	
6,568	
8,867	
4,569	
10,509
Total debt	
	
26,099	
33,926	
35,274	
22,682	
22,641
Total equity	
	
22,755	
13,584+	
28,615+	
28,635+	
33,209+
*	 Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. See note B, 
“Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information. 
**	Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in accounting for conditional asset retirement obligations. 
+	Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance on noncontrolling interests in consolidated financial statements. See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for 
additional information. 
127


===== PAGE 130 =====
Selected Quarterly Data
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
	
	
First	
Second 	
Third 	
Fourth 	
Full
2009:	
	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Year
Revenue	
	
$21,711	
$23,250	
$23,566	
$27,230	
$  95,758
Gross profit	
	
$  9,431	
$10,581	
$10,627	
$13,145	
$  43,785
Net income	
	
$  2,295	
$  3,103	
$  3,214	
$  4,813	
$  13,425
Earnings per share of common stock:
	 Assuming dilution	
	
$    1.70	
$    2.32	
$    2.40	
$    3.59	
$    10.01*
	 Basic		
	
$    1.71	
$    2.34	
$    2.44	
$    3.65	
$    10.12*
Dividends per share of common stock	
	
$    0.50	
$    0.55	
$    0.55	
$    0.55	
$      2.15
Stock prices:**
	 High	 	
	
$  99.86	
$110.62	
$122.88	
$132.85
	 Low	 	
	
81.76	
95.70	
99.50	
117.31
	
	
First	
Second 	
Third 	
Fourth 	
Full
2008:	
	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Quarter	
Year
Revenue	
	
$24,502	
$26,820	
$25,302	
$27,006	
$103,630
Gross profit	
	
$10,166	
$11,599	
$10,959	
$12,936	
$  45,661
Net income	
	
$  2,319	
$  2,765	
$  2,824	
$  4,427	
$  12,334
Earnings per share of common stock:	
	
	
	
	 Assuming dilution	
	
$    1.64+	
$    1.97+	
$    2.04+	
$    3.27+	
$      8.89+
	 Basic		
	
$    1.67+	
$    2.01+	
$    2.08+	
$    3.29+	
$      9.02+
Dividends per share of common stock	
	
$    0.40	
$    0.50	
$    0.50	
$    0.50	
$      1.90
Stock prices:**
	 High	 	
	
$119.78	
$129.99	
$130.92	
$116.80
	 Low	 	
	
97.04	
113.86	
109.95	
69.50
*	 Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is 
computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarter’s EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
**	The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the last two years.
+	Reflects the adoption of the FASB guidance in determining whether instruments granted in share-based payment transactions are participating securities. See note B, 
“Accounting Changes,” on pages 79 to 82 for additional information.
128


===== PAGE 131 =====
Performance Graphs
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Comparison of One-, Five- and Ten-year Cumulative Total Return for IBM, 
S&P 500 Stock Index and S&P Information Technology Index
The following graphs compare the one-, five- and ten-year cumu­
lative total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable 
cumulative return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. 
Due to the fact that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 
Stock Index, the SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the 
required five-year graph. Under those rules, the second index 
used for comparison may be a published industry or line-of-
business index. The S&P Information Technology Index is such 
an index. IBM is also included in this index.
	
Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the 
initial year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 
invested on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The com­
parisons assume that all dividends are reinvested.
One-year	
Five-year
($ usd)	
($ usd)
08
180
160
140
120
100
09
04
05
06
07
08
160
140
120
100
80
60
09
Five-year
	
2004	
2005	
2006	
2007	
 2008	
2009
•	IBM Common Stock	
$100.00	
$  84.17	
$100.81	
$113.75	
$90.13	
$142.96
•	S & P 500 Index 	
100.00	
104.91	
121.48	
128.16	
80.74	
 102.11
•	S & P Information Technology Index	
100.00	
100.99	
109.49	
127.35	
72.41	
 117.11
One-year
	
	
	
	
	
 2008	
2009
•	IBM Common Stock	
	
	
	
	
$100.00	
$158.61
•	S & P 500 Index	
	
	
	
	
100.00	
126.46
•	S & P Information Technology Index	
	
	
	
	
100.00	
 161.72
129


===== PAGE 132 =====
Performance Graphs
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Ten-year
($ usd)
Ten-year
	
1999	
2000	
2001	
2002	
2003	
2004	
2005	
 2006	
2007	
 2008	
2009
•	IBM Common Stock	 $100.00	
$79.16	
$113.20	
$73.04	
$88.02	
$94.34	
$79.41	
$  95.11	
$107.32	
$85.03	
$134.87
•	S & P 500 Index 	
100.00	
90.89	
80.09	
62.39	
80.29	
89.02	
93.40	
108.15	
114.09	
71.88	
90.90
•	S & P Information 
	 	 Technology Index	
100.00	
59.10	
43.81	
27.42	
40.37	
41.40	
41.81	
45.33	
52.72	
29.98	
48.48
99
00
01
02
03
150
120
90
60
30
0
04
05
06
07
08
09
130


===== PAGE 133 =====
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
Alain J.P. Belda
Chairman 
Alcoa Inc. 
and
Managing Director
Warburg Pincus LLC
Cathleen Black
President 
Hearst Magazines
William R. Brody
President
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Kenneth I. Chenault
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
American Express Company
Michael L. Eskew
Retired Chairman and 
Chief Executive Officer
United Parcel Service, Inc.
Shirley Ann Jackson
President
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Andrew N. Liveris
Chairman, President and
Chief Executive Officer
The Dow Chemical Company
W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer
The Boeing Company
Taizo Nishimuro
Chairman 
Tokyo Stock Exchange Group, Inc.
James W. Owens
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer
Caterpillar Inc.
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer
IBM
Joan E. Spero
Visiting Fellow
Foundation Center
Sidney Taurel
Chairman Emeritus
Eli Lilly and Company
Lorenzo H. Zambrano
Chairman and 
Chief Executive Officer
CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.
Rodney C. Adkins
Senior Vice President 
Systems and Technology Group
Colleen F. Arnold
Senior Vice President
Application Management Services
Andrew Bonzani
Vice President, Assistant 
General Counsel and Secretary
Michael E. Daniels
Senior Vice President 
Global Technology Services
Jesse J. Greene, Jr.
Vice President 
Financial Management and 
Chief Financial Risk Officer
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President 
Marketing and Communications
James J. Kavanaugh
Vice President and Controller
John E. Kelly III
Senior Vice President
Research and Intellectual Property
R. Franklin Kern III
Senior Vice President 
Global Business Services
Robert J. LeBlanc
Senior Vice President
Software Middleware Group
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and 
Chief Financial Officer
J. Randall MacDonald
Senior Vice President 
Human Resources
Steven A. Mills
Senior Vice President
Software Group
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer
Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President
Software Solutions Group
Virginia M. Rometty
Senior Vice President 
Global Sales and Distribution
Linda S. Sanford
Senior Vice President 
Enterprise Transformation
Martin J. Schroeter
Treasurer
Timothy S. Shaughnessy
Senior Vice President
Services Delivery
Robert C. Weber
Senior Vice President 
Legal and Regulatory Affairs, and
General Counsel
Board of Directors
Senior Leadership
131


===== PAGE 134 =====
Stockholder Information
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS MACHINES CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARY COMPANIES
IBM STOCKHOLDER SERVICES
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43072, Providence, 
Rhode Island 02940-3072 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico 
should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A. 
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications 
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare Trust 
Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders residing outside 
the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2694.
IBM ON THE INTERNET
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found via the IBM 
home page on the Internet (http://www.ibm.com). Financial results, 
news on IBM products, services and other activities can also 
be found via that address.
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and 
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts 
via the Internet (http://www.ibm.com/investor).
Stockholders of record can also consent to receive future IBM 
Annual Reports and Proxy Statements online through the Internet 
at this site.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on 
Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required 
by the SEC.
IBM’s website (http://www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount 
of information about IBM, including the company’s annual report 
on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on 
Form 8-K, and all amendments to those reports as soon as 
reasonably practicable after such material is electronically filed with 
or furnished to the SEC (http://www.ibm.com/investor). These 
materials are available free of charge on or through our website.
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the 
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, 
Washington, DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the 
operation of the Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 
(800) SEC-0330. The SEC maintains an Internet site (http://www.sec.gov) 
that contains reports, proxy and information statements, and other 
information regarding issuers that file electronically with the SEC.
IBM INVESTOR SERVICES PROGRAM
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services 
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including the 
reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM 
stock certificates for safe­keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of the 
brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, 
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM STOCK
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, 
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
ANNUAL MEETING
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday, 
April 27, 2010, at 10 a.m. at the Midwest Airlines Center, 400 West 
Wisconsin Avenue, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
STOCKHOLDER COMMUNICATIONS
Stockholders in the United States and Canada can get quarterly 
financial results, listen to a summary of the Annual Meeting remarks 
and hear voting results from the meeting by calling (800) IBM-7800. 
Callers can also request printed copies of the information via mail or 
fax. Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (402) 573-9861.
LITERATURE FOR IBM STOCKHOLDERS
The following literature on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43072, Providence, 
Rhode Island 02940-3072 (888) IBM-6700.
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico 
should call (781) 575-2727.
The Form 10-K Annual Report and Form 10-Q Quarterly Reports 
to the SEC provide additional information on IBM’s business. 
The 10-K report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are 
released by early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2009 Annual Report will be available for 
sight-impaired stockholders in June.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report details the company’s 
distinct strategy, results and key performance metrics in the areas of 
employees, communities, environment, supply chain, public policy 
and governance. The report highlights IBM’s values-based leadership 
of IBMers, leadership that drives not just our corporate social 
responsibility efforts, but also our hiring decisions, our partnering 
strategy, and our client engagements. The report is available in printed 
form, online and downloadable at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility.
GENERAL INFORMATION
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental 
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States, 
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
132


===== PAGE 135 =====
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
CloudBurst, Cognos, DataMirror, DataPower, Diligent Technologies, DS8000, IBM, ILOG, InfoSphere, Jazz, Lotus, 
POWER, POWER6, POWER7, Rational, Smarter Planet, SPSS, System i, System p, System x, System z, Tivoli, 
Watchfire, WebDialogs, WebSphere, XIV and z10 are trademarks or registered trademarks of International Business
Machines Corporation or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Java is a trademark of Sun Microsystems, Inc. Linux is
a trademark of Linus Torvalds. UNIX is a registered trademark of The Open Group in the United States and other
countries. Other company, product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
Printed in the U.S.A.     COL03002-USEN-00
Design: VSA Partners, Inc.     Printing: RR Donnelley
133


===== PAGE 136 =====
Welcome to the Decade of Smart
