

===== PAGE 1 =====
2011 Annual Report


===== PAGE 2 =====


===== PAGE 3 =====
1
I am pleased to report that IBM had 
another strong year in 2011. Your 
company continued to outperform  
our industry and the market at large.  
We capped IBM’s first century by 
achieving record revenue, profit,  
free cash flow and earnings per share.  
At the same time, we continued to  
deliver superior returns to you, and we 
are well positioned for future growth  
in a globally integrating economy.
Revenue and income: Our revenue in 2011 was  
$107 billion, up 7 percent. We grew operating pre-tax 
income by 9 percent, to $21.6 billion, our highest ever.
Margins: IBM’s operating pre-tax income margin rose for 
the ninth consecutive year — to 20.2 percent, up 10 points 
since 2000. We achieved this by continuing to shift our 
business mix to more profitable segments and by driving 
productivity. More than 90 percent of our segment profit 
in 2011 was from software, services and financing.
Earnings per share: We have continued to achieve  
strong EPS growth. Last year was another record, with 
diluted operating earnings per share of $13.44, up  
15 percent. This marked nine straight years of double- 
digit EPS growth.
Cash flow: IBM has consistently generated strong  
cash flow, a key indicator of real business performance.  
In 2011 our free cash flow was $16.6 billion. We have 
improved our free cash flow by nearly $10 billion over  
the past decade. We ended 2011 with $11.9 billion of  
cash and marketable securities.
Investment and return to shareholders: Our cash flow 
has enabled us to invest in the business and to generate 
substantial returns to investors, while spending  
$6.3 billion on R&D. In 2011 we invested $1.8 billion for 
five acquisitions in key areas of software and $4.1 billion  
in net capital expenditures. We were able to return  
$18.5 billion to you — $15 billion through share 
repurchases and $3.5 billion through dividends. Last year’s 
dividend increase was 15 percent, marking the 16th  
year in a row in which we have raised our dividend, and 
the 96th consecutive year in which we have paid one.
A road map to the future
This performance was the result of disciplined execution 
by more than 400,000 IBMers and the strategic 
repositioning of the company over the past decade.  
We have steadily realigned our business to lead in a  
new era of computing and to enable our clients to  
benefit from the new capabilities that era is creating.  
As a consequence, our investors benefit from a business 
model that is both sustainable over the long term  
and fueled by some of the world’s most attractive high- 
growth markets and technologies. 
A Letter from 
the President and CEO


===== PAGE 4 =====
2
Virginia M. Rometty, President and CEO 
Samuel J. Palmisano, Chairman of the Board


===== PAGE 5 =====
3
A Letter from the President and CEO
You see this expressed in financial terms in our EPS road 
maps. We introduced our first in 2007, and surpassed  
our 2010 objectives. Now, we are well on track toward our 
2015 Road Map goal of at least $20 in operating earnings  
per share. 
As before, the road map is not simply a list of targets,  
but a management model built on exploiting multiple 
ways to create value. Operating leverage will come  
from our continuing shift to higher-margin businesses  
and improving enterprise productivity — expected to  
be $8 billion over this five-year period. We will create  
value for shareholders through an anticipated $50 billion  
in share repurchases and $20 billion in dividends. 
When it comes to growth strategies, we are focused  
on four high-growth spaces that should drive 
approximately $20 billion in revenue growth by 2015:
1. Growth Markets. Revenue for our Growth Markets 
Unit was up 11 percent at constant currency for the second 
year in a row. Growth markets contributed 22 percent  
of IBM’s geographic revenue in 2011, up from 11 percent in 
2000, and we expect them to approach 30 percent by 2015.
2. Business Analytics. Our analytics business grew  
16 percent for the year. Having spotted early the 
emergence of “big data,” IBM built the world’s leading 
analytics software and consulting practice, and we are 
translating it into powerful new capabilities, which 
enable our clients to identify, manage and even predict 
outcomes that matter to their success.
3. Cloud. IBM has helped thousands of clients adopt 
aspects of cloud computing, where IT resources are 
virtualized, highly automated and accessed by self-service. 
Our cloud revenue in 2011 was more than three times  
the prior year.
Our strong strategic positioning, 
solid balance sheet, recurring 
revenue, robust profit streams 
and unmatched global  
reach give us confidence that  
we will achieve success in  
the next five years, as we have 
during the past decade. 
4. Smarter Planet. All of this comes together in our 
solutions to build Smarter Planet systems, transforming 
systems such as supply chains, retail, energy, transportation, 
telecommunications, food and water. It includes the 
successful establishment of large new market categories, 
such as Smarter Cities and Smarter Commerce. Smarter 
Planet revenue grew by almost 50 percent in 2011.


===== PAGE 6 =====
4
In sum, our strong strategic positioning, solid balance sheet, 
recurring revenue, robust profit streams and unmatched 
global reach give us confidence that we will achieve success 
in the next five years, as we have during the past decade. 
The information on pages 9 to 15 — “Generating Higher 
Value at IBM”— explains how. 
The decade ahead
The next decade holds enormous promise for IBM,  
most importantly because of what it holds for business  
and society at large. We are uniquely positioned to deliver 
the benefits of a vast new natural resource — a gusher  
of data from both man-made and natural systems that  
can now be tapped to help businesses and institutions 
succeed in an increasingly complex and dynamic global 
economy. Together, we can create economic and societal 
value of incalculable potential, across the developed  
and developing worlds, as well as in new global markets  
such as those in Africa. 
Without question, the world is undergoing disruption.  
But IBM now stands out among our industry peers  
and in business at large as distinctively able to keep moving 
to the future, and to keep generating differentiating  
value for our clients, our employees and the citizens of the 
world. And that, in turn, promises to continue generating 
high value for our owners.
The fact that we enter IBM’s second century with such 
strength and confidence is a testament to the extraordinary 
leadership of Sam Palmisano as IBM’s CEO. I will leave  
to Sam the description of our historic transformation.  
But there is no doubt that IBM today is far stronger than  
it was a decade ago, in both its performance and its impact 
on the world. 
Let me close by expressing my pride in the worldwide  
IBM team for bringing us to this point, and my gratitude  
to you, our shareholders, for your unwavering support.  
I trust you share our excitement about your company’s 
performance and the way in which IBMers are building  
on our storied past to build an even brighter future.
Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer
This letter includes selected references to certain non-GAAP financial measures that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the company’s ongoing operational performance. 
For information about the company’s financial results related to (i) operating pre-tax income, operating pre-tax income margin and operating earnings per share and (ii) free cash 
flow, which are in each case non-GAAP measures, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the SEC on January 19, 2012 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP Supplementary Materials).


===== PAGE 7 =====
5
As we look back on our strong 
performance in 2011 — the culmination  
of an impressive decade — Ginni  
and I thought it would be appropriate  
for me to share a perspective on this  
most recent phase of IBM’s 100-year 
journey, and to offer some thoughts  
on what it has taught us. 
I recently took a look at my notes from my first meeting 
with IBM’s senior leadership after becoming chairman  
in January 2003. I was surprised to see how little I had 
written down. At the top were just four questions:
+	 Why would someone invest in us? 
+	 Why would customers buy from us? 
+	 Why would society allow us to operate? 
+	 Why would someone work here? 
Our history teaches us that IBM became one of the world’s 
great companies by continually creating value for all  
of these stakeholders. Certainly, that was the IBM I joined  
38 years ago. And as IBM’s incoming chairman nine years 
ago, I couldn’t imagine an agenda that wasn’t built on that 
multidimensional goal. 
Let’s consider how we have done against each of these 
fundamental questions. 
First, how have we done in answering: Why would 
someone invest in us? Some technology companies, 
particularly start-ups, are attractive to investors because 
they grow meteorically — but often without profit or 
positive cash flow. Others provide a broad portfolio  
of products and services — but their very breadth makes 
them mystifying to the investor. 
A decade ago we committed to providing our owners  
with clarity about our business model, strategies, finances 
and governance principles. We would manage and grow  
IBM through the basics — revenue, profit, earnings, cash 
and margins. And we pledged to deliver consistent investor 
returns through dividends and repurchased shares.  
At the same time, we believed we could provide a unique 
investment opportunity — participation in attractive  
new growth areas in technology and in emerging markets, 
with confidence that IBM would safeguard shareholders’ 
investments. 
It all came together in our 2010 Road Map, and we  
are continuing to demonstrate progress against our  
2015 Road Map. The results for investors speak for 
themselves. Over the past five years, we have increased 
our market capitalization by $70 billion, and returned  
$50 billion to shareholders in net share repurchases  
and $14 billion in dividends — creating approximately 
$135 billion in value for our owners.
A Letter from 
the Chairman of the Board


===== PAGE 8 =====
6
Second, why would customers buy from us?  
IBM’s business model has always been to provide value  
to our clients that they cannot get from anyone else —  
value that gives them a competitive advantage. This  
model is not universal in our industry — where some  
choose to compete on the basis of greater efficiency  
and lower cost. But it was ours.
A decade ago, however, we straddled two worlds — of 
enterprise and consumer technology — at a time when 
computing was starting to move beyond the PC. This 
emerging model of technology, in which intelligence  
was being infused into all the ways our world works,  
could be of enormous value to our clients. But delivering 
this potential meant we had to transform our portfolio  
of technologies and skills. 
We did so. We got out of PCs and disk drives, and 
increased our presence in key areas of software, industry 
expertise and process know-how, increasing software  
and services from 65 percent of IBM’s segment profit in 
2000 to 84 percent today. We invested nearly $70 billion  
in R&D since the beginning of 2000, shifting research  
into new areas and generating more than 47,000 patents —  
extending IBM’s streak of leadership in U.S. patents to  
19 years.  And we acquired 130 companies, in strategic areas 
of software and services.
The result? Client after client — from Bharti, which is 
accelerating the modernization of Africa through mobile 
telecom; to Macy’s, which is redefining the online 
shopping experience; to the city of Rio de Janeiro, which  
is inventing the Smarter City of the 21st century — is 
saying, “We couldn’t have done it without IBM.”  This  
is music to our ears.
At this institution, an individual 
can actually change the  
world, can learn something new 
every day, can collaborate  
with some of the smartest people 
on the planet, can work in a 
progressive environment and 
can truly be a global citizen.
Third, why would society allow us to operate?  
Over the past decade, we have increasingly sought to 
address the world’s biggest problems, driven by the idea  
of building a smarter planet. Without question, we do  
this in pursuit of large new profit opportunities. But it  
is more than that. It represents the fusion of IBM’s business 
and citizenship goals. And that shows up not only in our 
broad strategies, but in how we work as individuals around 
the world. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
A Letter from the Chairman
7
We hear again and again from schools, governments, 
nongovernmental organizations and communities that 
the thing they value most is the expertise of IBMers — 
 more even than donations of cash or technology (although 
those are also welcome, and plentiful). IBMers bring 
expertise in engineering, finance, marketing, management 
and more to help cities actually become smarter; to 
reimagine existing school models, as with P-TECH in 
New York City; and to develop global citizens and leaders, 
as we’re doing through Corporate Service Corps.
One consequence of this business-citizenship fusion is  
that we can deliver its benefits at increasing scale. Our  
On Demand Community, for example, has grown ninefold 
in volunteers since it began. In one example alone — 
 our Centennial Celebration of Service — more than 
300,000 IBMers performed more than 4 million hours  
of service across 120 countries. 
Fourth, why would someone work here? In an earlier  
era, this had a lot to do with job security and stability.  
We learned the hard way that that was unsustainable.  
And yet, IBM today remains an employer of choice. 
Why? I believe it is because, at this institution, an individual 
can actually change the world, can learn something new 
every day, can collaborate with some of the smartest people 
on the planet, can work in a progressive environment and 
can truly be a global citizen. 
Since 2002 we have invested about $100 billion in 
non-salary employee compensation — bonuses, 
commissions, benefits and employee equity — including 
more than $5 billion in employee learning and 
development. In 2005, we became the first corporation  
to guarantee our employees’ genetic privacy. The  
way we develop leaders was ranked number one in the 
world by Fortune. And we have received widespread 
recognition for our diversity, work/life, environmental 
and collaboration policies and programs. 
In the end, it comes back to our values as IBMers. It was  
no accident that the first major work effort I launched  
at that senior leadership meeting nine years ago was a 
collective “jam” on who we are and why we exist. What 
resulted — the values IBMers themselves shaped — has 
held up remarkably well as a distillation of what it means 
to be “an IBMer.” 
We still have a long way to go to fully realize these values 
in our work, our management systems and our behavior.  
But I think it’s safe to say, after nearly a decade, that we 
laid the right foundation. I am also convinced that the 
transformation we have carried out since then was only 
possible because we first undertook this deeper dive  
of self-discovery. 
The road ahead
None of these shifts was easy — but that comes with the 
territory, when you choose to live at the intersection  
of all of your company’s key constituencies. You must 
accept — indeed, embrace — the inherent tensions.  
And you must balance continual forward motion with  
a clear understanding of what must never change.  


===== PAGE 10 =====
8
The result is a fundamentally different IBM than existed  
a decade ago — one that is delivering historic results  
despite a global economic downturn, even as it more fully 
exemplifies the company’s century-old character. We  
have outperformed our industry and the market as a whole, 
and we did it the hard way — through technology 
breakthroughs, the creation of client value, and driving 
change in how the company operates. That record is 
something of which we can all be proud. 
The fact that we enter our second century on such a high 
note is a testament to a unique institution and a remarkable 
group of people. For nine years, it has been my privilege  
to be the temporary steward of that institution. For 38 years, 
it has been my even deeper privilege to have worked with 
those women and men. 
Clearly, 38 years with one company is rare these days. 
However, there is benefit to developing deep under-
standing of an industry and the culture of a company,  
even if this sort of longevity is not valued as highly in 
today’s world. I believe such knowledge is what made it 
possible to transform IBM and position it for the future. 
Both my own experience and the promise of our new  
CEO give me enormous hope for the decade ahead. Ginni 
Rometty is a brilliant leader who has also spent her entire 
career with IBM. I could not be prouder or happier for her, 
or more optimistic about IBM’s future in her hands.
This is a fundamentally 
different IBM than existed  
a decade ago — one that is 
delivering historic results despite 
a global economic downturn, 
even as it more fully exemplifies 
the company’s century-old 
character.
To IBM’s steadfast investors, to our clients, and to the 
citizens of all the communities where IBMers work to 
build a smarter planet, please know that you have my  
deepest thanks. I am confident that our second century 
together will be even more remarkable than our first.
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman of the Board


===== PAGE 11 =====
$16.3 billion
operating net income*
up 9 percent from 2010
*non-GAAP
$18.5 billion
returned
in share repurchases  
and dividends
$107billion
revenue
up 7 percent from 2010
$16.6 billion
free cash flow
up for the ninth  
consecutive year
$13.44 
operating  
earnings  
per share*
up 15 percent, the ninth  
consecutive year of  
double-digit growth
*non-GAAP
2015 IBM Road Map
2011 Performance
Looking ahead to 2015, we will continue our 
transformation for growth…
In 2011 IBM delivered record performance in revenue, 
profit, earnings per share and free cash flow.
Each year IBM describes how the company manages its business and serves its shareholders 
in a detailed financial road map. 
A long-term perspective ensures IBM is well positioned to take advantage of major shifts 
occurring in technology, business and the global economy. It also galvanizes the company  
to deliver superior performance.
15%
2011
2010
11.67
13.44
 Generating
Higher Value
at IBM
Generating Higher Value at IBM
9


===== PAGE 12 =====
16.6
20.2%
6.7
10.1%
00
11
3
6
$18
12
15
9
0
IBM has built a record of leadership by pursuing the most 
transformational opportunities, inventing the breakthrough 
technologies to capture them and building an organization 
able to deliver superior results over the long term.
We continually change  
our business mix toward 
higher-value, more profitable 
technologies and market 
opportunities.
About
50%
of IBM segment  
profit expected  
to come from  
Software by 2015
We have become a globally 
integrated enterprise, to 
capture new growth and 
improve productivity.
Approaching
30%
of geographic revenue  
from growth markets  
by 2015
By aligning our business 
model with our clients’ 
needs we generated 
superior financial results …
  Hardware/Financing   
  Services   
  Software
Segment Pre-Tax Income*
($ in billions)
IBM operations in more than 170 countries 
leverage the company’s global scale and 
expertise.
Global integration of all our major enterprise 
functions—from service delivery to 
marketing—has enabled IBM to gain more 
than $6 billion in enterprise productivity 
savings over the past five years while 
improving quality.
A globally integrated model allows us to 
focus resources on client-oriented work and 
enable rapid deployment of IBM capabilities 
to growth markets.
1.
2.
3.
0
$24
16
20
12
8
4
3.6
9.3
10.0
3.3
3.7
2.6
2000**
2011
35%
38%
27%
16%
41%
44%
Operating Pre-tax Income Margin and Free Cash Flow 
($ in billions)
  *	Sum of external segment pre-tax income not equal to IBM pre-tax income. 
**	Excludes Enterprise Investments and not restated for stock-based compensation. 2000 Segment PTI is reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Growth Markets Share of Geographic Revenue
* Excluding divested businesses of PCs and printers.
  Operating Pre-tax Income Margin   
  Free Cash Flow
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
2006
2000
22%
21%
19%
18%
17%
16%
11%*
Our operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income 
margin in 2011 was 20.2 percent, 10 points 
higher than in 2000. The primary driver  
of this performance was gross profit margin 
expansion, as a result of the shift in  
our business mix to more profitable, higher-  
value segments and improved productivity 
across the enterprise.
At the same time, we’ve increased R&D 
investment. Since the beginning of  
2000, we’ve spent nearly $70 billion in R&D, 
enabling us to deliver key innovations  
and maintain U.S. patent leadership for  
our 19th consecutive year in 2011.
Our strong business model performance 
has resulted in consistently strong free cash 
flow generation. In 2011 our free cash flow 
was $16.6 billion—an increase of nearly  
$10 billion since 2000.
10


===== PAGE 13 =====
2011
2010
2000
2002
$13.44
$11.67
$3.32
$1.81
2015
This delivers long-term value 
and high performance for  
all key IBM stakeholders—
investors, clients, employees 
and society …
Our 2015 Road Map continues the 
drive to higher value—with the 
expectation of at least $20 operating  
(non-GAAP) EPS* in 2015. 
Key objectives for 2015: 
+  Software becomes about half  
of segment profit 
+  Growth markets approach  
30 percent of geographic revenue
+  Generate $8 billion in productivity 
through enterprise transformation
+  $70 billion of capital returned  
to shareholders 
+  $20 billion in spending on 
acquisitions
Capital Expenditures—We have invested more  
than $50 billion over the past 12 years to advance  
our capabilities, including a global delivery center  
in Columbia, Missouri, advanced semiconductor 
manufacturing in Fishkill, New York, and a research 
facility in Ontario, Canada. 
Acquisitions—Since the beginning of 2000, we have 
acquired 130 companies in strategic areas including 
analytics, cloud, security and Smarter Commerce.  
We expect to spend $20 billion in acquisitions over the 
2015 Road Map period to support growth initiatives.
Share Repurchase and Dividends—We have 
returned $133 billion to our shareholders since the 
beginning of 2000. At the end of 2011 our quarterly 
dividend per share was six times higher than 2000. 
During this period we reduced shares outstanding  
by one third. We expect to return $70 billion to share-
holders in our 2015 Road Map period—$50 billion 
through share repurchases and $20 billion in dividends.
Key Drivers for 2015 EPS Road Map
4.
… allowing us to invest in 
future sources of growth 
and provide record returns 
to our shareholders.
 $70 billion
in capital expected  
to be returned  
through 2015
  *	Excludes acquisition-related and nonoperating 
retirement-related charges. 
**	2000 and 2001 exclude Enterprise Investments 
and not restated for stock-based compensation. 
Sum of external segment pre-tax income not 
equal to IBM pre-tax income.
At Least $20
Operating EPS*
Revenue Growth 
A combination of base  
revenue growth, a shift to 
faster growing businesses  
and strategic acquisitions.
Operating Leverage 
A shift to higher-margin 
businesses and enterprise 
productivity derived from 
global integration and process 
efficiencies.
Share Repurchase 
Leveraging our strong cash 
generation to return value  
to shareholders by reducing 
shares outstanding.
  Operating (non-GAAP) EPS*
Segment Pre-tax Income*, **
  Software
  Services
  Hardware/Financing
Primary Uses of Cash  
Since the Beginning of 2000 
($ in billions)
 
$214
$111
$22
$30
$51
  Capital Expenditures
  Acquisitions
  Share Repurchases
  Dividends
Generating Higher Value at IBM
11


===== PAGE 14 =====
5. … while driving a new era  
of growth and leadership  
for IBM…
2015 Road Map Objective:
Growth initiatives  
will contribute about
 
$20 billion
in incremental  
revenue growth
Growth Markets
The world’s emerging markets will drive more than 60 percent of global GDP growth in  
the next four years. IBM is investing in more than 100 of these countries, which are building 
out critical infrastructure, developing strategic industries and responding to massive 
demographic shifts, such as rapid urbanization.
Our four complementary growth initiatives—business analytics, cloud, growth markets  
and Smarter Planet—target opportunities that are changing the global IT landscape. With 
strong contribution from these initiatives, IBM delivered 7 percent revenue growth in 2011.
In 2011 we opened nearly 100 new branch 
offices to expand our presence beyond  
large cities and beyond the BRICs (Brazil, 
Russia, India and China), and to participate  
in high-growth industries.
We are creating hubs of expertise around the 
world. These include the Institute for Electronic 
Government and the Energy and Utilities 
Solution Lab in China; Natural Resource 
Solution Centers in Perth and Rio de Janeiro; 
Banking Centers in Singapore and São Paulo; 
and a Latin American micro-financing center 
in Lima. 
In Africa, IBM is investing to bring expertise  
in areas like financial services. For example, 
we are working with five leading Kenyan 
banks on infrastructure projects and helping 
Safaricom, through a partnership with 
Vodafone, provide its M-PESA mobile money 
service to more than 15 million customers.
$1.9 billion
	
Growth Markets
$2.2 billion
	
Major Markets
Geographic Gross Profit Growth
In 2011, growth markets 
generated nearly half  
of IBM’s geographic gross 
profit growth.
2011 Performance
Growth Markets
22% of IBM’s  
geographic revenue
Business Analytics
16% revenue increase  
from 2010
Smarter Planet
Nearly 50% revenue 
increase from 2010
Cloud
3.8 times 2010 revenue
2011 Results:
22%
of IBM’s geographic  
revenue
11%
revenue increase  
at constant currency  
from 2010
Nearly
40
countries grew 
double digits at  
constant currency
Nearly
60%
of growth markets  
revenue is now outside  
the BRICs
12


===== PAGE 15 =====
Business Analytics
Organizations are reaching far beyond the structured tables of databases. They are 
analyzing the streaming, unstructured data generated by events as they occur in the  
world, and acting upon those insights—from customer preferences or patient outcomes, 
to process inefficiencies or safety—in real time. They are integrating analytics into the 
way they work.
Cloud
Cloud, which delivers business and IT services over the network, is transforming the way 
data centers are designed and software is developed, providing far more efficiency and 
flexibility. That has the potential to change the way many industries work. But it requires 
addressing important issues of security and privacy. So, enterprises seek not just clouds,  
but smarter clouds. IBM is helping them build private clouds in areas central to their 
business, while also enabling them, like consumers, to tap into cloud services provided  
by IBM and others.
IBM has the world’s deepest portfolio of 
analytics solutions and software; a leading 
position in powerful optimized systems; and 
the business and industry expertise of almost 
9,000 business analytics and optimization 
consultants, 400 researchers and eight 
analytics solution centers. IBM has acquired 
28 companies to build targeted analytics and 
information expertise since 2005. We have 
generated hundreds of patents a year  
in analytics, and invented breakthrough 
technologies like IBM Watson, a learning 
system that answers questions in natural 
language, and InfoSphere Streams, software 
that can correlate and analyze thousands  
of real-time data sources.
Mazda Motor Corporation collaborated  
with IBM analytics, data modeling and traffic 
simulation experts to reduce human error  
in driving. The result was an early warning 
system using IBM analytics software that 
identifies accident-prone areas, warns drivers 
of danger and learns as conditions change.
Guangdong Hospital of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine worked with IBM 
Research to understand the effectiveness  
of traditional Chinese and Western treatments 
of chronic kidney disease. IBM information 
management and analytics software helps 
the hospital correlate patient information  
with demographics, such as age and  
gender, and relevant anonymized cases  
to improve outcomes, boost quality of care 
and reduce costs.
IBM is focused on the enterprise cloud.  
We have more than 1 million enterprise 
application users working in the IBM cloud 
and analyze more than $100 billion in 
commerce transactions a year in the cloud. 
We monitor 13 billion security events every 
day and have more than 1,000 researchers 
and developers working on security and 
privacy breakthroughs. 
The IBM SmartCloud portfolio addresses the 
full scope of enterprise client requirements:  
+  IBM SmartCloud Foundation enables 
clients to build private clouds. 
+  IBM SmartCloud Services offers cloud 
infrastructure services managed and run  
by IBM. 
+  IBM SmartCloud Solutions offers software 
and business processes as a service. 
Dutch Cloud, a service provider in the 
Netherlands, uses IBM SmartCloud 
technologies to build low-touch infrastructure-
as-a-service for its small and medium-sized 
business clients.
Lockheed Martin uses IBM SmartCloud 
technology to develop mission critical 
applications and technologies and to support 
a broader evolution to cloud computing for 
the U.S. Government.
Lucky Brand, a designer clothing retailer,  
is using IBM cloud-based analytics to 
personalize customers’ online shopping 
experience, resulting in improved customer 
loyalty and increased sales.
2011 Results:
16%
revenue increase  
from 2010
Almost
9,000
analytics and  
optimization  
consultants
2011 Results:
3.8x
2010 revenue
IBM analyzes  
more than 
 
$100 billion
in commerce  
transactions a  
year in the cloud
Generating Higher Value at IBM
13


===== PAGE 16 =====
Smarter Planet
The infusion of digital intelligence into the world’s systems is changing the way people, 
organizations and entire industries approach what they do—how they interact, organize  
and create value. Nowhere is the potential for transformation greater than in our cities.   
Around the world, city leaders are struggling with economic challenges, overtaxed  
infrastructures and dramatic demographic shifts. In more than 2,000 Smarter Cities 
engagements, we see forward-thinking leaders emerging with new approaches to make  
their communities smarter and to make them work better.
Smarter Water and Sewer Systems
San Francisco Public Utilities  
Commission 
70%
increase in ability  
to track critical assets
11%
improvement in the ratio  
of preventative to corrective 
maintenance
Drawing on usage data and many  
other variables, San Francisco is 
predicting and preventing break- 
downs and reducing pollution from  
its sewer system’s 1,000 miles of pipes 
and three treatment facilities, which 
together process 500 million gallons  
of wastewater and storm runoff  
per day during the rainy season.
Smarter Law Enforcement
Memphis Police Department
30%
decrease in  
serious crime
15%
decrease in  
violent crime 
Memphis Police Department precinct 
commanders start their day with  
data. A predictive analytics system 
looks for patterns in criminal  
activity that help the department  
see emergent trends in their 
communities in time to make  
a difference. 
Inside the solution:
The system integrates IBM asset  
management and geographic information  
software to locate and monitor assets  
such as pumps, fittings and other parts  
of the water infrastructure.
 “Not only can we solve most  
problems within 24 hours, but  
we’re able to use insights from  
the data to reduce water pollution.”
—Tommy Moala, Assistant General Manager,  
SFPUC Wastewater Enterprise
Inside the solution:
The system relies on IBM predictive 
analytics software that correlates historic 
data with the latest incident reports  
to create multilayer maps of “hot spots.”
 “Memphis Police Department  
now has the invaluable insight 
all of our staff can use — from  
the commanders to the patrolling 
officers — to specifically focus 
investigative and patrol resources 
with the goal of preventing  
crime and making our neighbor- 
hoods safer.”
—Colonel James Harvey,  
Commander, Ridgeway Station,  
Memphis Police Department
… and for the economies,  
cities and people of  
the world.
2011 Results:
Nearly
50%
revenue growth  
from 2010 
More than
2,000
Smarter Cities  
engagements
14


===== PAGE 17 =====
Smarter Government Services
Bolzano, Italy  
Remote Patient Monitoring
80%
of participants  
felt more secure
70%
improved their  
mobility through  
exercises
As part of a pilot to extend healthcare 
services without increasing costs, 
elderly citizens in Bolzano, Italy, were 
given access to advice and medical 
attention from their homes, via  
mobile devices. In addition, wireless 
sensors monitored the environment 
within the homes, generating alerts  
delivered via sms text message,  
email and Twitter to family members 
and social services professionals.
Smarter Operations Center
Rio de Janeiro’s Integrated  
Operations Center
30%
decrease in emergency  
response times
Rio de Janeiro’s operations center 
provides a single dashboard of the 
city’s critical systems. Information on 
weather, traffic and medical services 
helps city agencies anticipate looming 
problems, engage citizens as part of 
the solution and plan for major events, 
like the upcoming World Cup and 
Olympic Games. A predictive weather 
forecasting system designed by  
IBM researchers helps model flooding  
patterns, identifying where events  
such as mud slides are likely to occur.
Inside the solution:
The solution was created by IBM with 
the support of TIS Innovation Park, 
developed on an IBM application 
server, with data management and 
messaging software integrated with 
Android mobile devices.
 “The monitoring network 
allows us to provide services 
with a human touch — but  
it’s now the right touch,  
at the right time.”
—Michela Trentini,  
Director of Social Planning, Bolzano
Inside the solution:
The Intelligent Operations Center combines  
patented analytics technologies, created  
by IBM Research in collaboration with the  
city, and IBM collaboration, analytics and  
asset management software and systems  
integration expertise.
 “Communicating with citizens about  
Rio’s day-to-day life is key. When  
people are well-informed, they act in 
ways that help the city work better.”
—Eduardo Paes, Mayor, Rio de Janeiro
Smarter Transportation
Singapore’s Land Transport Authority
80%
reduction in lost  
transactions due  
to system issues
100%
increase in performance  
capacity to 20 million fare 
transactions per day
Singapore commuters move easily 
among all forms of public transportation, 
thanks to a smart system that charges 
by distance, not by mode of transport.  
A highly intelligent algorithm constructs 
the ideal journey for each commuter 
across rail and bus lines. In the process, 
the Land Transport Authority gets real- 
time insight to anticipate capacity needs. 
Inside the solution:
The Authority’s fare processing clearing-
house uses IBM data management, 
analytics and transaction processing 
software running on IBM Power systems.
 “By unifying our payment 
systems, we can build 
composite models of typical 
journeys, such as a person 
driving a car into the city, 
being charged for congestion, 
parking his car, catching  
the bus and then the rail.”
—Silvester Prakasam, Director of Fare Systems, 
Singapore Land Transport Authority
“Generating Higher Value at IBM” includes selected 
references to certain non-GAAP financial measures  
that are made to facilitate a comparative view of the 
company’s ongoing operational performance. For 
information about the company’s financial results related 
to (i) operating (non-GAAP) EPS and (ii) free cash flow  
for 2011, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to the 
SEC on January 19, 2012 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP 
Supplementary Materials). For information about the 
company’s financial results related to (i) growth markets 
share of geographic revenue excluding divested PCs  
and printers and (ii) free cash flow, in each case for  
2000, see the company’s Form 8-K submitted to  
the SEC on May 12, 2010 (Attachment II—Non-GAAP 
Supplementary Materials).
Generating Higher Value at IBM
15


===== PAGE 18 =====
16
Financial Highlights
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Revenue
$106,916
$  99,870
Net income
$  15,855
$  14,833
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  16,318
$  15,023
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    13.06
$    11.52
Basic
$    13.25
$    11.69
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)* 
$    13.44
$    11.67
Net cash provided by operating activities
$  19,846
$  19,549
Capital expenditures, net
4,059
3,984
Share repurchases
15,046
15,375
Cash dividends paid on common stock
3,473
3,177
Per share of common stock
2.90
2.50
At December 31:
2011
2010
Cash, cash equivalents and marketable securities
$  11,922
$  11,651
Total assets
116,433
113,452
Working capital
8,805
7,554
Total debt
31,320
28,624
Total equity
20,236
23,172
Common shares outstanding (in millions)
1,163
1,228
Market capitalization 
$213,886
$180,220 
Stock price per common share
$  183.88
$  146.76
Number of employees in IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
433,362
426,751
* See page 38 for a reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.


===== PAGE 19 =====
17
Report of Financials
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Discussion
Overview	
18
Forward-Looking and Cautionary Statements	
18
Management Discussion Snapshot	
 19
Description of Business	
20
Year in Review	
26
Prior Year in Review	
44
Other Information 	
55
	
Looking Forward	
55
	
Liquidity and Capital Resources	
56
	
Critical Accounting Estimates	
58
	
Currency Rate Fluctuations	
61
	
Market Risk	
61
	
Financing Risks	
62
	
Employees and Related Workforce	
63
Global Financing	
63
Report of Management	
68
Report of Independent Registered  
	
Public Accounting Firm	
69
Consolidated Financial Statements
Earnings	
70
Comprehensive Income	
71
Financial Position	
72
Cash Flows	
73
Changes in Equity	
 74
Notes to Consolidated  
Financial Statements
A	 Significant Accounting Policies	
 76
B	 Accounting Changes	
86
C 	 Acquisitions/Divestitures	
89
D 	 Financial Instruments	
93
E	 Inventories	
 100
F	 Financing Receivables	
 101
G	 Property, Plant and Equipment 	
 104
H	 Investments and Sundry Assets	
104
I	
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill	
105
J	 Borrowings	
106
K	 Other Liabilities	
108
L	 Equity Activity	
110
M	 Contingencies and Commitments	
112
N	 Taxes	
115
O	 Research, Development and Engineering	
117
P	 Earnings Per Share of Common Stock	
117
Q	 Rental Expense and Lease Commitments	
118
R	 Stock-Based Compensation	
118
S	 Retirement-Related Benefits	
121
T	 Segment Information	
135
U	 Subsequent Events	
139
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data	
140
Selected Quarterly Data	
141
Performance Graphs	
142
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership	
144
Stockholder Information	
145


===== PAGE 20 =====
18
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Overview
The financial section of the International Business Machines 
Cor­por­ation (IBM or the company) 2011 Annual Report includes the 
Management Discussion, the Consolidated Financial State­ments and 
the Notes to the Consolidated Financial State­ments. This Over­view 
is designed to provide the reader with some perspective regarding 
the information contained in the financial section.
Organization of Information
•	
The Management Discussion is designed to provide readers 
with an overview of the business and a narrative on the 
company’s financial results and certain factors that may affect 
its future prospects from the perspective of the company’s 
management. The “Management Discussion Snap­shot” on pages 
19 and 20, presents an overview of the key performance drivers 
in 2011.
•	
Beginning with the “Year in Review” on page 26, the Manage­ment 
Discussion contains the results of operations for each reportable 
segment of the business and a discussion of the company’s 
financial position and cash flows. Other key sections within the 
Management Discussion include: “Looking Forward” on page 
55, and “Liquidity and Capital Resources” on pages 56 to 58. It 
is useful to read the Management Dis­cussion in conjunction with 
note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 135 to 139.
•	
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a 
stand-alone entity. A separate “Global Financing” section is 
included beginning on page 63.
•	
The Consolidated Financial Statements are presented on pages 
70 through 75. These statements provide an overview of the 
company’s income and cash flow performance and its financial 
position. 
•	
The Notes follow the Consolidated Financial Statements. Among 
other items, the Notes contain the company’s accounting policies 
(pages 76 to 86), acquisitions and divestitures (pages 89 to 93), 
detailed information on specific items within the financial statements, 
certain contingencies and commitments (pages 112 to 115) and 
retirement-related benefits information (pages 121 to 135).
•	
The Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes have been 
prepared in accordance with accounting principles generally 
accepted in the United States (GAAP).
•	
The references to “adjusted for currency” or “at constant currency” 
in the Management Discussion do not include operational 
impacts that could result from fluctuations in foreign currency 
rates. Certain financial results are adjusted based on a simple 
mathematical model that translates current period results in local 
currency using the comparable prior year period’s currency 
conversion rate. This approach is used for countries where the 
functional currency is the local country currency. This information 
is provided so that certain financial results can be viewed without 
the impact of fluctuations in foreign currency rates, thereby 
facilitating period-to-period comparisons of business performance. 
See “Currency Rate Fluctuations” on page 61 for additional 
information.
•	
Within the financial statements and tables in this Annual Report, 
certain columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded 
numbers for disclosure purposes. Percentages reported are 
calculated from the underlying whole-dollar numbers.
Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings
In an effort to provide better transparency into the operational results 
of the business, the company separated business results into 
operating and non-operating categories beginning January 1, 2011. 
Operating earnings is a non-GAAP measure that excludes the effects 
of certain acquisition-related charges and retirement-related costs, 
and their related tax impacts. For acquisitions, operating earnings 
exclude the amortization of purchased intangible assets and 
acquisition-related charges such as in-process research and 
development, transaction costs, applicable restructuring and related 
expenses and tax charges related to acquisition integration. For 
retirement-related costs, the company has characterized certain 
items as operating and others as non-operating. The company 
includes defined benefit plan and nonpension postretirement benefit 
plan service cost, amortization of prior service cost and the cost of 
defined contribution plans in operating earnings. Non-operating 
retirement-related cost includes defined benefit plan and nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan interest cost, expected return on plan 
assets, amortized actuarial gains/losses, the impacts of any plan 
curtailments/settlements and multi-employer plan costs, pension 
insolvency costs and other costs. Non-operating costs are primarily 
related to changes in pension plan assets and liabilities which are 
tied to financial market performance and the company considers 
these costs to be outside the operational performance of the business. 
	
Overall, the company believes that providing investors with a view 
of operating earnings as described above provides increased 
transparency and clarity into both the operational results of the 
business and the performance of the company’s pension plans; 
improves visibility to management decisions and their impacts 
on operational performance; enables better comparison to peer 
companies; and allows the company to provide a long-term strategic 
view of the business going forward. For its 2015 earnings per share 
Road Map, the company is utilizing an operating view to establish 
its objectives and track its progress. Effective January 1, 2011, the 
company’s segment financial results and performance reflect 
operating earnings, consistent with the company’s management 
and measurement system. The 2010 and 2009 financial results 
in this Annual Report have been reclassified to conform with the 
2011 presentation of business results into operating and non-
operating categories. 
Forward-Looking  
and Cautionary Statements
Certain statements contained in this Annual Report may constitute 
forward-looking statements within the meaning of the Private 
Secur­ities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Any forward-looking statement 
in this Annual Report speaks only as of the date on which it is made; 
the company assumes no obligation to update or revise any such 


===== PAGE 21 =====
19
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
statements. Forward-looking statements are based on the company’s 
current assumptions regarding future business and financial 
performance; these statements by their nature address matters that 
are uncertain to different degrees. Forward-looking statements 
involve a number of risks, uncertainties and other factors that could 
cause actual results to be materially different, as discussed more 
fully elsewhere in this Annual Report and in the company’s filings 
with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), including the 
company’s 2011 Form 10-K filed on February 28, 2012.
Management Discussion Snapshot
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$106,916
$  99,870
7.1%*
Gross profit margin
46.9%
46.1%
0.8 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  29,135
$  26,291
10.8%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
27.3%
26.3%
0.9 pts.
Income before income taxes
$  21,003
$  19,723
6.5%
Provision for income taxes
  5,148
  4,890
5.3%
Net income
$  15,855
$  14,833
6.9%
Net income margin
  14.8%
14.9%
0.0 pts.
Earnings per share  
of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    13.06
$    11.52
13.4%
Weighted-average shares 
outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,213.8
1,287.4
(5.7)%
Assets**
$116,433
$113,452
2.6%
Liabilities**
$  96,197
$  90,279
6.6%
Equity**
$  20,236
$  23,172
(12.7)%
*	 3.4 percent adjusted for currency.
**	At December 31.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2011 and 2010.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$15,855
$14,833 
6.9%
Non-operating adjustments            
(net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
495
443
12.0
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
(32)
(253)
(87.3)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$16,318
$15,023
8.6%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)    
earnings per share
$  13.44
$  11.67
15.2%
*	 See page 38 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
In 2011, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted by 
solid revenue performance, continued margin expansion, strong profit 
and cash generation and effective use of cash. In its centennial year, 
the company achieved record levels of revenue, profit, free cash flow 
and earnings per share (EPS). The financial performance is the result 
of the transformation of the company which began years ago. This 
transformation has been focused on shifting the business to higher 
value areas of the market, improving productivity and investing in 
opportunities to drive future growth. These changes have contributed 
to nine consecutive years of double-digit earnings per share growth. 
More importantly, this transformation has strengthened the business 
and put the company on track to achieve its 2015 Road Map objective 
of at least $20 of operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share. 
	
The focus on key growth initiatives and investments in innovation 
are enabling the company to expand into new markets and capitalize 
on trends like business analytics and cloud computing. The growth 
markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT infrastructures 
and lead in specific industries is driving strong performance and 
market share gains. Growth markets revenue increased 16.0 percent 
(11 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 contributing approximately 
two-thirds of the total constant currency revenue growth for the year 
and represented 22 percent of total geographic revenue. The 
company’s business analytics solutions helps clients leverage 
massive amounts of data and content to gain business insight and 
optimize results. Business analytics revenue increased 16 percent 
compared to 2010. The Smarter Planet offerings generated close to 
50 percent growth year to year, with Smarter Commerce demonstrating 
strong market momentum. In cloud computing, the company is 
helping its clients improve the economics of information technology. 
In 2011, the company continued to expand its offerings and cloud 
revenue for the year was more than three times the prior year results. 
With strong contribution from these growth initiatives, the company 
delivered revenue growth of 7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) compared to 2010.
	
Segment performance was led by Software which increased 
revenue 10.9 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency) driven by key 
branded middleware which increased 15.6 percent (13 percent adjusted 
for currency) and continued to extend its lead in the middleware 
market. In the Global Services business, Global Technology Services 
increased 7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and Global 
Business Services grew revenue 5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for 
currency) driven by strong performance in the growth markets where 
both segments grew revenue 11 percent at constant currency. Systems 
and Technology delivered revenue growth of 5.6 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) driven by strong performance in Power Systems 
which increased 12.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) and 
the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent (12 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
The consolidated gross profit margin increased 0.8 points versus 
2010 to 46.9 percent. This was the eighth consecutive year of 
improvement in the gross profit margin. The operating (non-GAAP) 
gross margin of 47.2 percent increased 1.1 points compared to the 
prior year. The increase in gross margin in 2011 was driven by margin 
improvements in Software, Systems and Technology and Global 
Services, and an improved revenue mix driven by Software. 


===== PAGE 22 =====
20
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Total expense and other income increased 10.8 percent in 2011 
versus the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other 
income increased 10.2 percent compared to the prior year. The 
year-to-year drivers for both categories were approximately:
•	
Currency* 	
4 points
•	
Acquisitions** 	
3 points
•	
Base expense	
3 points
*	 Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
**	Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
Pre-tax income grew 6.5 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
19.6 percent, a decrease of 0.1 points versus 2010. Net income 
increased 6.9 percent and the net income margin was 14.8 percent, 
flat versus 2010. The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent, 
compared with 24.8 percent in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) 
pre-tax margin was 20.2 percent, an increase of 0.3 points versus 
the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) earnings increased 8.6 percent 
and the operating (non-GAAP) earnings margin of 15.3 percent 
increased 0.2 points versus the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) 
effective tax rate was 24.5 percent versus 24.4 percent in 2010. 
	
Diluted earnings per share improved 13.4 percent reflecting the 
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase 
program. In 2011, the company repurchased approximately 89 million 
shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of $13.06 
increased $1.54 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted 
earnings per share of $13.44 increased $1.77 versus 2010 driven 
by the following factors:
•	
Revenue increase at actual rates	
$0.82
•	
Margin expansion	
$0.18
•	
Common stock repurchases	
$0.77
At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
positions remain strong and are well positioned to support the 
company’s objectives. Cash and cash equivalents at year end was 
$11,922 million. Key drivers in the balance sheet and total cash flows 
are highlighted below.
	
Total assets increased $2,981 million ($4,636 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by: 
•	
Increases in total receivables ($1,564 million), cash and cash 
equivalents ($1,262 million), goodwill ($1,077 million) and 
prepaid expenses and other assets ($1,022 million), partially 
offset by
•	
Decreases in marketable securities ($990 million) and 
investments and sundry assets ($883 million).
Total liabilities increased $5,918 million ($6,324 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2010 driven by:
•	
Increases in total debt ($2,695 million), retirement and 
nonpension postretirement benefit obligations ($2,396 million), 
accounts payable ($713 million) and deferred income  
($798 million), partially offset by
•	
Decreases in taxes ($903 million).
Total equity of $20,236 million decreased $2,937 million from 
December 31, 2010 as a result of:
•	
Increased treasury stock ($14,803 million) driven by  
share repurchases, pension adjustments ($2,448 million)  
and currency translation adjustments ($711 million),  
partially offset by
•	
Higher retained earnings ($12,326 million) and common  
stock ($2,711 million).
The company generated $19,846 million in cash flow from 
operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010, primarily 
driven by the increase in net income. Net cash used in investing 
activities of $4,396 million was $4,111 million lower than 2010, driven 
by less cash used for acquisitions ($4,111 million). Net cash used in 
financing activities of $13,696 million was $1,267 million higher, 
compared to 2010, primarily due to lower cash from common stock 
transactions ($991 million) and increased dividend payments ($296 
million).
	
As a result of the strong cash performance, the company continued 
to invest in capital and acquisitions and delivered significant returns 
to its shareholders with over $18 billion in share repurchase and 
dividends in 2011. 
	
The estimated Global Services backlog was $141 billion at 
December 31, 2011, down $2 billion (flat adjusted for currency) versus 
the prior year-end balance, and up $4 billion ($5 billion adjusted for 
currency), from September 30, 2011.
	
In January 2012, the company disclosed that it is expecting GAAP 
earnings of at least $14.16 and operating (non-GAAP) earnings of at 
least $14.85 per diluted share for the full year 2012.
	
For additional information and details, see the “Year in Review” 
section on pages 26 through 43.
Description of Business
Please refer to IBM’s Annual Report on Form 10-K filed with 
the SEC on February 28, 2012 for a more detailed version of this 
Des­cription of Business, especially Item 1A. entitled “Risk Factors.”
	
The company creates business value for clients and solves 
business problems through integrated solutions that leverage 
information technology and deep knowledge of business processes. 
IBM solutions typically create value by reducing a client’s operational 
costs or by enabling new capabilities that generate revenue. These 
solutions draw from an industry-leading portfolio of consulting, 
delivery and implementation services, enterprise software, systems 
and financing. 


===== PAGE 23 =====
21
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Strategy
Despite the volatility of the information technology (IT) industry 
over the past decade, IBM has consistently delivered excellent 
performance, with a steady track record of sustained earnings per 
share growth. The company has shifted its business mix, exiting 
certain segments while increasing its presence in higher-value areas 
such as services, software and integrated solutions. As part of this 
shift, the company has acquired over 120 companies since 2000, 
complementing and scaling its portfolio of products and offerings. 
	
IBM’s clear strategy has enabled steady results in core business 
areas, while expanding its offerings and addressable markets. The 
key tenets of this strategy are:
•	
Deliver value to enterprise clients through integrated  
business and IT innovation;
•	
Shift the business mix to higher-value areas; and
•	
Become the premier globally integrated enterprise
These priorities reflect a broad shift in client spending toward 
integrated solutions, as companies seek higher levels of business 
value from their IT investments. IBM has been able to deliver this 
enhanced client value thanks to its industry expertise, understanding 
of clients’ businesses and the breadth and depth of the company’s 
capabilities. 
	
Consistent with this strategy IBM is leveraging its capabilities to 
build and expand strong positions in targeted growth areas. IBM’s 
growth initiatives include Smarter Planet, Growth Markets, Business 
Analytics and Optimization and Cloud Computing. Each initiative 
represents a significant growth opportunity with attractive profit 
margins for IBM.
Smarter Planet
Smarter Planet is IBM’s vision of a technology-enabled world that 
is more instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent than ever before, 
enabling people and organizations to tackle significant business 
and societal challenges. At the heart of this vision is the opportunity 
for meaningful innovation—exploring and extending the boundaries 
of businesses, industries and communities. It’s about helping the 
company’s clients become better at what they do for their clients. 
IBM’s strategy is to accelerate progress towards a “smarter planet” 
by equipping its clients with the advanced, integrated capabilities 
that they will need to thrive in this exciting new world that is unfolding 
before us—capabilities such as business analytics, business process 
management, social business and cloud computing.
	
Over the past year, IBM has steadily deepened its commitment 
to understanding and delivering on the promise of a smarter planet 
for its line of business and IT clients across a broad range of 
industries. An industry-based approach is central to the strategy, 
since every industry confronts a distinct set of challenges and 
opportunities in today’s constantly transforming world. Whether 
“smarter” means helping a hospital group to deliver improved health- 
care, a local government to ease traffic congestion, or a retail chain 
to execute a successful cross-channel campaign, IBM is aggressively 
developing and investing in a portfolio of industry solutions that will 
help these clients achieve their goals. 
	
Two recently announced initiatives that are already driving 
significant value illustrate IBM’s deep commitment to building a smarter 
planet: Smarter Commerce and Smarter Cities. IBM’s Smarter 
Commerce model integrates and transforms how companies manage 
and adapt their buy, market, sell and service processes, placing the 
customer squarely at the center of their business. IBM’s Smarter Cities 
initiative enables local governments to make smarter decisions, 
anticipate issues and coordinate resources more effectively, and deliver 
citizen-centric services that underpin sustainable economic growth.
Growth Markets
The company has benefited from its investments over the past 
several years in growth markets. The focus now is on geographic 
expansion of IBM’s presence; on selected industries of the highest 
impact and opportunity; on countries’ build-out of infrastructure 
aligned with their national agendas; and on creating markets and 
new business models to serve the different requirements that exist 
in these emerging countries. The company’s efforts in developing 
new growth markets within the African continent is a good example 
of this focus. Many of these initiatives are leading edge, both in 
technologies and business models and are delivering both increased 
revenue and margin expansion.
	
In order to support this growth, IBM is continuing to invest 
significantly in these markets to expand capacity, to develop talent 
and to deepen its research and development (R&D) capabilities on 
the ground. At the same time, IBM continues to leverage talent across 
growth markets under its globally integrated enterprise model to the 
benefit of both its clients and the company globally.
Business Analytics and Optimization
Business Analytics and Optimization is core to achieving a Smarter 
Planet, helping leaders of this new information-centric and insight-
driven world make better and faster business decisions. As the 
proliferation of “big data” continues from both structured and 
unstructured sources, IBM is helping organizations leverage analytics 
in new ways to address market uncertainty, complexity and volatility. 
These capabilities allow decision makers to identify patterns and 
gain deeper insights in a way that is unimaginable by other means. 
These insights give organizations the ability to anticipate and shape 
better outcomes so they can grow, retain and satisfy customers. 
They can now dynamically plan, forecast and align resources and 
manage risk, reduce fraud and ensure compliance. They can also 
leverage analytics to increase operational efficiency and agility.
	
IBM’s approach is to ensure customers have complete end-to-
end solutions across industries and functional focus areas like sales, 
finance and risk. These solutions are designed to help organizations: 
develop an information and analytics strategy that flows from the 
business strategy; establish a strong information foundation; make 
analytics skills and capabilities pervasive; and create a culture that 
takes action on analytics. IBM continues to invest in its analytics 
capabilities to deliver real world solutions that its clients can put to 
work today. These ongoing investments in both organic development 
and new acquisitions are complemented by IBM’s focus on game-
changing innovations like Watson, which is ushering in a new 
generation of probabilistic analytics that can dramatically improve 


===== PAGE 24 =====
22
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
decision making through natural language processing, hypotheses 
generation and evidence-based learning. It Is another unique example 
of just how far organizations can go with IBM analytics.
Cloud Computing
Cloud is a new model for consuming and delivering business and 
IT services. It can deliver significant economies of scale, enable 
higher qualities of service and even serve as a transformative platform 
for business innovation. From a business perspective, the promise 
of cloud computing lies in the ability to shape influential communities, 
launch product innovations and explore new business models with 
minimal time, cost and effort. From an IT perspective, the power of 
the model comes from harnessing vast stores of underutilized 
technology with highly efficient virtualization and management, 
consumer-style user interfaces and ubiquitous broadband.
	
IBM has already helped thousands of its clients adopt and leverage 
cloud computing through its broad portfolio of IBM SmartCloud 
products, solutions and services. Today, IBM delivers many line-of-
business solutions via cloud-based hosting models, enabling rapid 
adoption and exploration of new capabilities that can drive significant 
business value for its clients and their customers. For developers and 
IT organizations seeking to leverage cloud computing, IBM can help 
build out private, on-premise cloud-based environments, provide 
security and integration services across private and hybrid cloud 
models, and/or offer its own cloud-based infrastructure and services, 
including advanced analytics, collaboration, and IT infrastructure such 
as virtual servers, storage and tools for testing software. Across IBM’s 
entire SmartCloud portfolio, the company offers expert consulting, 
breakthrough technologies and a portfolio of cloud-based services 
squarely focused on the requirements of the enterprise. 
Business Model
The company’s business model is built to support two principal 
goals: helping clients to become more innovative, efficient and 
competitive through the application of business insight and IT 
solutions; and providing long-term value to shareholders. The business 
model has been developed over time through strategic investments 
in capabilities and technologies that have superior long-term growth 
and profitability prospects based on the value they deliver to clients. 
	
The company’s global capabilities include services, software, 
systems, fundamental research and related financing. The broad 
mix of businesses and capabilities are combined to provide integrated 
solutions to the company’s clients. 
	
The business model is resilient, adapting to the continuously 
changing market and economic environment. The company continues 
to divest certain businesses and strengthen its position through 
strategic organic investments and acquisitions in higher-value segments 
like business analytics, smarter planet and cloud computing. In addition, 
the company has transformed itself into a globally integrated enterprise 
which has improved overall productivity and is driving investment and 
expanding participation in the world’s fastest growing markets. 
	
This business model, supported by the company’s financial 
model, has enabled the company to deliver strong earnings, cash 
flows and returns to shareholders over the long term.
Business Segments and Capabilities
The company’s major operations consists of five business segments: 
Global Tech­nology Services, Global Business Services, Soft­ware, 
Systems and Technology and Global Finan­cing.
Global Services is a critical component of the company’s strategy 
of providing IT infrastructure and business insight and solutions to 
clients. While solutions often include industry-leading IBM software 
and systems, other suppliers’ products are also used if a client solution 
requires it. Approximately 60 percent of external Global Services 
segment revenue is annuity based, coming primarily from outsourcing 
and maintenance arrangements. The Global Services backlog 
provides a solid revenue base entering each year. Within Global 
Services, there are two reportable segments: Global Tech­nology 
Services and Global Business Services.
Global Technology Services (GTS) primarily provides IT 
infra­structure services and business process services, delivering 
business value through global scale, standardization and automation.
GTS Capabilities
Strategic Outsourcing Services: comprehensive IT outsourcing 
services dedicated to transforming clients’ existing infrastructures 
to consistently deliver improved quality, flexibility, risk management 
and financial value. The company integrates long-standing expertise 
in service management and technology with the ability to exploit 
the power of new technologies from IBM systems and software, 
such as cloud computing, analytics and virtualization, to deliver 
high performance, innovation and improved ability to achieve 
business objectives.
Global Process Services: a range of standardized through 
transformational offerings including processing platforms and 
business process outsourcing. These services deliver improved 
business results to clients through the strategic change and/or 
operation of the client’s business processes, applications and 
infrastructure.
Integrated Technology Services: project-based portfolio of services 
that enable clients to optimize their IT environments by driving 
efficiency, flexibility and productivity, while reducing costs. The 
standardized portfolio is built around key assets and patented 
software, and incorporates best practices and proven methodologies 
that ensure predictive quality of delivery, security and compliance.


===== PAGE 25 =====
23
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Maintenance: a complete line of support services from product 
maintenance through solution support to maintain and improve the 
availability of clients’ IT infrastructures.
GTS Services Delivery: responsible for the worldwide delivery 
of IBM’s technology- and process-based services. Operating within 
a globally integrated delivery model enables regional client-facing 
teams to utilize a global network of competencies and centers, 
providing industry-leading, standardized, integrated tools and 
processes. By leveraging insights and experience drawn from IBM’s 
global scale, skills and technology, with applied innovation from IBM 
Research, clients gain access to leading-edge, high-quality services 
with improved productivity, flexibility, cost and outcomes.
Global Business Services (GBS) primarily provides professional 
services and application management services, delivering business 
value and innovation to clients through solutions which leverage 
industry and business-process expertise while integrating the 
industry-leading portfolio of IBM and strategic partners, to define 
the upper end of client-valued services.
GBS Capabilities
Consulting and Systems Integration: delivery of value to clients 
through consulting services for Strategy and Transformation; Application 
Innovation Services; Enterprise Applications and Business Analytics 
and Optimization.
Application Management Services: application development, 
management, maintenance and support services for packaged 
software, as well as custom and legacy applications. Value is delivered 
through advanced capabilities in areas such as applications testing 
and modernization, cloud application security, the company’s highly 
differentiated globally integrated capability model, industry knowledge 
and the standardization and automation of application development.
Software consists primarily of middleware and operating systems 
software. Middleware software enables clients to integrate systems, 
processes and applications across a standard software platform to 
improve their business results, solve critical problems and gain 
competitive advantage within their industries. IBM middleware is 
designed on open standards, making it easier to integrate disparate 
business applications, developed by different methods and 
implemented at different times. Operating systems are the software 
engines that run computers. Approximately two-thirds of external 
software segment revenue is annuity based, coming from recurring 
license charges and ongoing subscription and support. The remaining 
one-third relates to one-time charge (OTC) arrangements in which 
clients pay one, up-front payment for a perpetual license. Typically, 
the sale of OTC software includes one year of subscription and 
support. Clients can also purchase ongoing subscription and support 
after the first year, which includes unspecified product upgrades 
and technical support.
Software Capabilities
WebSphere Software: delivers capabilities that enable clients to 
integrate and manage business processes across their organizations 
with the flexibility and agility they need to respond to changing 
conditions quickly. With a services-oriented architecture (SOA), 
businesses can more easily link together their fragmented data and 
business processes to extract value from their existing technology. 
Smarter Commerce software enables seamless interaction between 
companies, their customers and suppliers throughout the business 
cycle, resulting in better customer experience, higher sales, lower 
inventories, better service levels and improved response times.
Information Management Software: enables clients to integrate, 
manage and use their information to gain business value and improve 
their outcomes. Solutions include advanced database management, 
enterprise content management, information integration, data 
warehousing, performance management business analytics and 
intelligence, as well as the emerging area of big data analytics.
Tivoli Software: helps clients manage their technology and business 
assets by providing visibility, control and automation across their 
organizations. With solutions for identity management, data security, 
storage management, cloud computing, enterprise mobility and the 
ability to provide automation and provisioning of the datacenter, Tivoli 
helps build the infrastructure needed to make the world’s systems—
from transportation to water, energy and telecommunications— 
run smarter.
Lotus Software: enables businesses to connect people and processes 
for more effective communication and increased productivity through 
collaboration, messaging and social networking software. By remaining 
at the forefront of collaboration tools, Lotus helps organizations reap 
the benefits of social networking and social business.
Rational Software: supports software development for both IT as 
well as complex and embedded system solutions with a suite of 
Collaborative Lifecycle Management products. Jazz, Rational’s 
technology platform, transforms the way people work together to 
build software, making software delivery more integrated and 
collaborative, while optimizing for successful business outcomes.
Security Systems Software: provides clients with a single security 
intelligence platform that aligns with their business objectives and 
enables them to more intelligently secure their enterprises by 
applying deep analytics to better identify and prevent vulnerabilities 
within traditional, cyber, cloud and mobile security.
Operating Systems: software that manages the fundamental 
processes that make computers run.


===== PAGE 26 =====
24
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology provides clients with business solutions 
requiring advanced computing power and storage capabilities. 
Approximately half of Systems and Technology’s server and storage 
sales transactions are through the company’s business partners; 
with the balance direct to end-user clients. In addition, Systems and 
Technology provides leading semiconductor technology, products 
and pack­aging solutions for IBM’s own advanced technology needs 
and for external clients.
Systems and Technology Capabilities
Systems: a range of general purpose and integrated systems 
designed and optimized for specific business, public and scientific 
computing needs. These systems—System z, Power Systems and 
System x—are typically the core technology in data centers that 
provide required infrastructure for business and institutions. Also, 
these systems form the foundation for IBM’s integrated offerings, 
such as IBM Smart Analytics, IBM Netezza, IBM SmartCloud Entry 
and IBM BladeCenter for Cloud. IBM servers use both IBM and non-
IBM microprocessor technology and operating systems. All IBM 
servers run Linux, a key open-source operating system. 
Storage: data storage products and solutions that allow clients to retain 
and manage rapidly growing, complex volumes of digital information. 
These solutions address critical client requirements for information 
retention and archiving, security, compliance and storage optimization 
including data deduplication, availability and virtualization. The 
portfolio consists of a broad range of disk and tape storage systems 
and software, including the ultra-scalable disk storage system XIV.
Retail Store Solutions: provider of market leadership solutions that 
include hardware, software and services for the retail industry, 
including point-of-sale and self-service systems and peripherals. 
Solutions leverage industry standards and interfaces enabling 
efficient rollouts and superior integration.
Microelectronics: semiconductor design and manufacturing primarily 
for use in IBM systems and storage products as well as delivering 
semiconductors and related services to external clients.
Global Financing facilitates clients’ acquisition of IBM systems, 
software and services. Global Financing invests in financing assets, 
leverages with debt and manages the associated risks with the 
objective of generating consistently strong returns on equity. The 
primary focus on the company’s offerings and clients mitigates many 
of the risks normally associated with a financing company. Global 
Financing has the benefit of both a deep knowledge of its client base 
and a clear insight into the products and services that are being 
financed. This combination allows Global Financing to effectively 
manage two of the major risks (credit and residual value) that are 
normally associated with financing. 
Global Financing Capabilities
Client Financing: lease and loan financing to end users and internal 
clients for terms generally between one and seven years. Internal 
financing is predominantly in support of Global Services’ long-term 
client service contracts. Global Financing also factors a selected 
portion of the company’s accounts receivable, primarily for cash 
management purposes. All internal financing arrangements are at 
arm’s-length rates and are based upon market conditions.
Commercial Financing: short-term inventory and accounts receivable 
financing to dealers and remarketers of IT products. 
Remanufacturing and Remarketing: as equipment is returned at 
the conclusion of a lease transaction, these assets are refurbished 
and sold or leased to new or existing clients both externally and 
internally. Exter­nally remarketed equipment revenue represents sales 
or leases to clients and resellers. Internally remarketed equipment 
revenue primarily represents used equipment that is sold or leased 
internally to Systems and Technology and Global Services. Systems 
and Technology may also sell the equipment that it purchases from 
Global Financing to external clients.
.


===== PAGE 27 =====
25
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Worldwide Organizations
The following worldwide organizations play key roles in IBM’s delivery 
of value to its clients:
•	
Sales and Distribution
•	
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
•	
Enterprise Transformation
•	
Integrated Supply Chain
Sales and Distribution
IBM has a significant global presence, operating in more than 
170 countries, with an increasingly broad-based geographic distribution 
of revenue. The company’s Sales and Distribution organization 
manages a strong global footprint, with dedicated country-based 
operating units focused on delivering client value. Within these units, 
client relationship professionals work with integrated teams of 
consultants, product specialists and delivery fulfillment teams to 
improve clients’ business performance. These teams deliver value 
by understanding the clients’ businesses and needs, and then bring 
together capabilities from across IBM and an extensive network of 
Business Partners to develop and implement solutions.
	
By combining global expertise with local experience, IBM’s 
geographic structure enables dedicated management focus for local 
clients, speed in addressing new market opportunities and timely 
investments in emerging opportunities. The geographic units align 
industry-skilled resources to serve clients’ agendas. IBM extends 
capabilities to mid-market client segments by leveraging industry 
skills with marketing, ibm.com and local Business Partner resources.
	
Through its growth markets organization, the company continues 
to increase its focus on the emerging markets around the world that 
have market growth rates greater than the global average—countries 
within Southeast Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East and Latin 
America. The company’s major markets include the G7 countries of 
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United States (U.S.) and 
the United Kingdom (U.K.) plus Austria, the Bahamas, Belgium, the 
Caribbean region, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, 
Israel, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and 
Switzerland.
	
The majority of IBM’s revenue, excluding the company’s original 
equipment manufacturer (OEM) technology business, occurs in 
industries that are broadly grouped into six sectors:
•	
Financial Services: Banking, Financial Markets, Insurance
•	
Public: Education, Government, Healthcare, Life Sciences
•	
Industrial: Aerospace and Defense, Automotive,  
Chemical and Petroleum, Electronics
•	
Distribution: Consumer Products, Retail,  
Travel and Trans­portation
•	
Communications: Telecommunications,  
Media and Entertain­ment, Energy and Utilities
•	
General Business: Mainly companies with fewer than  
1,000 employees
Research, Development and Intellectual Property
IBM’s R&D operations differentiate the company from its competitors. 
IBM annually invests approximately $6 billion for R&D, focusing on 
high-growth, high-value opportunities. 
	
IBM Research works with clients and IBM business units 
on near-term and mid-term innovations and solutions and, in 
many cases, qualifies new technologies to be transferred to IBM 
development organizations. It also explores the boundaries of science 
and technology—from nanotechnology, to systems, to analytics, to 
cloud, to IBM Watson, a computer system that applied advanced 
analytics to defeat the all-time champions on the television quiz 
show, Jeopardy!
	
In addition to producing world-class systems, software and 
technology products, IBM innovations also are a major differentiator 
in providing solutions for the company’s clients through its services 
businesses. IBM Research has the world’s largest mathematics 
department of any public company. This unit is actively involved with 
many of the company’s business analytics client engagements.
	
In 2011, the company once again was awarded more U.S. patents 
than any other company, the 19th consecutive year IBM has been 
the patent leader. IBM’s 6,180 patents in 2011 were the most U.S. 
patents ever awarded to one company in a single year; more than 
70 percent of the patents IBM was issued in 2011 were for software 
and services. 
	
The company continues to actively seek intellectual property 
protection for its innovations, while increasing emphasis on other 
initiatives designed to leverage its intellectual property leadership. 
The company’s investments in R&D also result in intellectual property 
(IP) income of approximately $1 billion annually. Some of IBM’s 
technological breakthroughs are used exclusively in IBM products, 
while others are licensed and may be used in either/both IBM 
products and/or the products of the licensee. While the company’s 
various proprietary intellectual property rights are important to its 
success, IBM believes its business as a whole is not materially 
dependent on any particular patent or license, or any particular 
group of patents or licenses. IBM owns or is licensed under a number 
of patents, which vary in duration, relating to its products. Licenses 
under many of the patents owned by IBM have been and are being 
granted to others under reasonable terms and conditions.
Enterprise Transformation
A key element of the company’s strategy has been focused on 
becoming the premier globally integrated enterprise. The company 
has implemented a consistent set of processes and standards 
worldwide to reduce inefficiencies and improve collaboration. 
With its processes fully integrated, the company implemented 
a new operating model with work shared in global resource 
centers of excellence located where it made the most business 
sense. Since 2005, global integration has enabled the company to 
deliver over $6 billion in productivity and improve service quality, 
speed and risk management. The company has shifted resources 
toward building client relationships and employees skills, while 
positioning the company for new market opportunities. During this 
transformation, IBM pioneered this new operating model, changing 
from a classic “multinational,” with smaller versions of the parent 


===== PAGE 28 =====
26
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Year in Review
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2011 versus 2010 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external 
revenue and gross margin results.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$  40,879
$38,201 
7.0%
2.7%
Gross margin
35.0%
34.5%
0.5 pts.
Global Business Services
19,284
18,223
5.8%
1.5%
Gross margin
28.8%
28.0%
0.7 pts.
Software
24,944
22,485
10.9%
8.0%
Gross margin
88.5%
87.9%
0.5 pts.
Systems and Technology
18,985
17,973
5.6%
3.2%
Gross margin
39.8%
38.1%
1.6 pts.
Global Financing
2,102
2,238
(6.1)%
(9.1)%
Gross margin
49.8%
51.3%
(1.5 ) pts.
Other
722
750
(3.8)%
(6.3)%
Gross margin
(54.5)%
(8.6)%
(45.9) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$106,916
$99,870 
7.1%
3.4%
Total consolidated gross profit
$  50,138
$46,014
9.0%
Total consolidated gross margin
46.9%
46.1%
0.8 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangibles assets
340
260
30.8%
Acquisition-related charges
1
0
NM
Retirement-related costs/(income)
2
(204)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$  50,481
$46,070
9.6%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
47.2%
46.1%
1.1 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful
company replicated in countries around the world, to a global model 
with one set of processes, shared services and broadly distributed 
decision making. 
	
The company has now embarked on the next generation of its 
transformation in which new capabilities and technologies like 
business analytics and cloud computing will drive performance. The 
proven principles of the globally integrated enterprise will be applied 
to all of the company’s spending to continue to drive additional 
productivity benefits in shared services, integrated operations and 
end-to-end process transformation.
Integrated Supply Chain
IBM spends approximately $35 billion annually through its supply 
chain, procuring materials and services globally. In addition, in 
2011, the company managed approximately $20 billion in 
procurement spending for its clients through the Global Process 
Services organization. The supply, manufacturing and logistics 
and customer fulfillment operations are integrated in one operating 
unit that has optimized inventories over time. Simplifying and 
streamlining internal processes has improved sales force productivity 
and operational effectiveness and efficiency. Continuous 
improvements to supply chain resiliency against market-place 
changes and risks have been particularly valuable in maintaining 
continuity during  natural disasters and other disruptive events that 
are occurring with increased frequency. 
	
The company’s continuing efforts to derive business value from 
its own globally integrated supply chain provides a strategic 
advantage for the company to create value for clients. IBM leverages 
its supply chain expertise for clients through its supply chain 
business transformation outsourcing service to optimize and help 
operate clients’ end-to-end supply chain processes, from procurement 
to logistics.


===== PAGE 29 =====
27
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The following table presents each reportable segment’s external revenue as a percentage of total segment external revenue and each 
reportable segment’s pre-tax income as a percentage of total segment pre-tax income.
Revenue
Pre-tax Income*+
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2011
2010
Global Technology Services
38.5%
38.5%
27.4%
26.3%
Global Business Services
18.2
18.4
13.1
12.2
Total Global Services
56.7
56.9
40.6
38.4
Software
23.5
22.7
43.5
45.2
Systems and Technology
17.9
18.1
7.1
7.0
Global Financing
2.0
2.3
8.8
9.4
Total
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
100.0%
*	 Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items; 
see note T, “Segment Information,” on pages 135 to 139 for additional information.
+	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
revenue in 2011, an increase of 6.6 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) compared to 2010. Services revenue performance, adjusted 
for currency, was consistent over the course of the year driven 
by stability in the backlog. Performance in 2011 was led by strength 
in the growth markets with total services revenue up 16.9 percent 
(11 percent adjusted for currency) and gross margin 2 points higher 
than in the major markets. The services segments also had good 
performance in the other key growth initiatives: cloud, business analytics 
and Smarter Planet. Total outsourcing revenue of $28,301 million, 
which includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Application Management 
Services Outsourcing, increased 7.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) and total transactional revenue of $24,348 million, which 
includes Consulting and Systems Integration within GBS and Integrated 
Technology Services within GTS, increased 6.2 percent (2 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$60,163
$56,424 
6.6%
2.3%
Global Technology Services
$40,879
$38,201 
7.0%
2.7%
Outsourcing
23,911
22,241
7.5
3.0
Integrated Technology Services
9,453
8,714
8.5
4.1
Maintenance
7,515
7,250
3.6
(0.2)
Global Business Services
$19,284
$18,223
5.8%
1.5%
Outsourcing
4,390
4,007
9.5
4.8
Consulting and Systems Integration
14,895
14,216
4.8
0.5
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation of Outsourcing and Consulting and Systems Integration revenue within GBS.
The Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) transaction gain recorded 
in the first quarter of 2010 impacted the year-to-year results of the 
company’s reportable segments for 2011 compared to 2010. In 
addition, workforce rebalancing charges were incurred in every 
segment in the first quarter of both years. The PLM transaction gain 
($591 million) was recorded in Software in the first quarter of 2010. 
In the segment analysis below and in the Global Financing analysis 
on pages 63 and 64, each segment’s pre-tax income and pre-tax 
margin for 2011 and 2010 is presented on an as-reported basis and 
on a basis normalized for these actions in both years to provide a better 
perspective of the underlying operational performance of the segments.
Global Services
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services (GTS) 
and Global Business Services (GBS), delivered $60,163 million of 


===== PAGE 30 =====
28
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Global Technology Services revenue of $40,879 million increased 
7.0 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. 
Revenue performance was led by the growth markets which were 
up 16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency). GTS Outsourcing 
revenue increased 7.5 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 
2011 and gained share. Outsourcing performance in 2011 was driven 
by strength in the growth markets with revenue up 11 percent, 
adjusted for currency, as the outsourcing offerings are continuing to 
help clients build out their IT infrastructures. Integrated Technology 
Services (ITS) revenue increased 8.5 percent (4 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, also led by the growth markets 
which increased 13 percent, adjusted for currency. Revenue growth 
year over year, adjusted for currency, in both GTS Outsourcing and 
ITS was relatively consistent over the course of the year. 
	
Global Business Services revenue of $19,284 million increased 
5.8 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 led by strength 
in the growth markets with revenue up 17.4 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency). Application Outsourcing revenue increased 
9.5 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 year to year. 
Consulting and Systems Integration (C&SI), which includes Consulting, 
Application Management Services systems integration and the U.S. 
Federal business, grew revenue in 2011 4.8 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency). Both GBS lines of business had strong year- 
to-year performance in the growth markets with double-digit constant 
currency revenue growth. GBS was impacted in 2011 by revenue 
declines in Japan and in the Public Sector; excluding Japan and 
the Public Sector, total GBS revenue increased 11.9 percent in 2011 
(8 percent adjusted for currency).
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$14,320
$13,194
8.5%
External gross profit margin
35.0%
34.5%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  6,284
$  5,499
14.3%
Pre-tax margin
14.9%
13.9%
1.0 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$  6,399
$  5,771
10.9%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
15.2%
14.6%
0.6 pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,545
$  5,106
8.6%
External gross profit margin
28.8%
28.0%
0.7 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  3,006
$  2,546
18.1%
Pre-tax margin
15.0%
13.4%
1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized+
$  3,052
$  2,674
14.1%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
15.2%
14.1%
1.1 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. 
**	Excludes $116 million and $273 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
+	 Excludes $45 million and $128 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively. ­
	
GTS gross profit increased 8.5 percent in 2011 and gross margin 
improved 0.5 points year to year. Margin expansion was driven by 
improved gross profit performance in all lines of business. Pre-tax 
income increased to $6,284 million in 2011 with a pre-tax margin of 
14.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in 
2011 increased 10.9 percent and margin expanded 0.6 points to 
15.2 percent. 
	
GBS gross profit increased 8.6 percent in 2011 and gross margin 
improved 0.7 points to 28.8 percent, led primarily by margin 
improvement in Application Management Services Outsourcing. 
GBS segment pre-tax income improved 18.1 percent to $3,006 million 
with a pre-tax margin of 15.0 percent. On a normalized basis, 
segment pre-tax income in 2011 increased 14.1 percent with a pre-tax 
margin of 15.2 percent, an increase of 1.1 points year to year. 
	
Total Global Services segment pre-tax income was $9,290 million 
in 2011, an increase of $1,246 million or 15.5 percent year to year. 
The combined pre-tax margin in 2011 improved 1.2 points versus 
2010. On a normalized basis, total Global Services pre-tax income 
in 2011 increased 11.9 percent with a pre-tax margin of 15.2 percent, 
up 0.8 points year to year. In 2011, the company established two 
Global Services integration hubs which will drive the business to a 
new level of global consistency, integration and standardization in 
the development and delivery of solutions to clients. Both Global 
Services segments had strong profit and margin performance in 
2011 as they continue to mix to higher value offerings and markets, 
and continue to focus on productivity and cost management.
Global Services Backlog
The estimated Global Services backlog at December 31, 2011 was 
$141 billion, a decrease of $1.7 billion (flat adjusted for currency) 
compared to the December 31, 2010 balance, and an increase of 
$3.8 billion ($4.7 billion adjusted for currency) compared to the 
September 30, 2011 balance. There are three primary drivers 
of total services revenue: backlog, new sales into the existing 
contract base and new client signings. A very high percentage 
of annual services revenue, approximately 70 percent, comes 
from the run out of the opening backlog. The December 31, 2011 
backlog position provides a very solid base of revenue for total 
Services to begin 2012. In 2012, the company expects approximately 
3 percent revenue growth from the backlog, at consistent foreign 
exchange currency rates. The estimated outsourcing backlog 
at December 31, 2011 was $93 billion, a decrease of $4.0 billion 
($2.8 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2010 
balance, and an increase of $2.2 billion ($2.8 billion adjusted 
for currency) from the September 30, 2011 level.


===== PAGE 31 =====
29
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total Global Services backlog includes GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS 
Outsourcing, Consulting and Systems Integration and Maintenance. 
Outsourcing backlog includes GTS Outsourcing and GBS Outsourcing. 
Total backlog is intended to be a statement of overall work under 
contract and therefore does include Maintenance. Backlog estimates 
are subject to change and are affected by several factors, including 
terminations, changes in the scope of contracts, periodic revalidations, 
adjustments for revenue not materialized and adjustments for currency.
	
Global Services signings are management’s initial estimate of the 
value of a client’s commitment under a Global Services contract. There 
are no third-party standards or requirements governing the calculation 
of signings. The calculation used by management involves estimates 
and judgments to gauge the extent of a client’s commitment, including 
the type and duration of the agreement, and the presence of termination 
charges or wind-down costs. 
	
Signings include GTS Outsourcing, ITS, GBS Outsourcing and 
Consulting and Systems Integration contracts. Contract extensions 
and increases in scope are treated as signings only to the extent of 
the incremental new value. Maintenance is not included in signings 
as maintenance contracts tend to be more steady state, where 
revenues equal renewals.
	
Contract portfolios purchased in an acquisition are treated as 
positive backlog adjustments provided those contracts meet the 
company’s requirements for initial signings. A new signing will be 
recognized if a new services agreement is signed incidental or 
coincidental to an acquisition or divestiture.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total signings
$57,435
$57,696
(0.5)%
(4.0)%
Outsourcing signings
$29,251
$31,268
(6.5)%
(9.7)%
Transactional signings
28,184
26,428
6.6
2.6
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$24,944
$22,485 
10.9%
8.0%
Middleware
$20,650
$18,445 
12.0%
9.0%
Key Branded Middleware
16,051
13,879
15.6
12.7
WebSphere Family
40.5
37.4
Information Management
12.5
9.6
Lotus
3.8
0.2
Tivoli
10.2
7.4
Rational
4.9
1.8
Other middleware
4,600
4,565
0.8
(1.9)
Operating systems
2,479
2,282
8.6
5.6
Other
1,814
1,758
3.2
0.4
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
($ in billions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Change 
Adjusted for
Currency
Backlog
Total backlog
$140.6
$142.4
$(1.7)
$ 0.0
Outsourcing backlog
92.5
96.5
(4.0)
(2.8)


===== PAGE 32 =====
30
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Software revenue of $24,944 million increased 10.9 percent (8 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. Adjusting for the 
divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 11.8 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011. Revenue growth was driven by key 
branded middleware, reflecting continued strong demand for the 
company’s offerings and solid growth in key focus areas such as 
Smarter Commerce and business analytics. Overall, the Software 
business had another very good year in 2011, delivering nearly 
$10 billion in segment pre-tax income, an increase of $500 million 
from 2010. The company continues to invest in additional capabilities 
for the Software business through both organic investments and 
strategic acquisitions, including the completion of five acquisitions in 
2011, plus acquisitions announced in the fourth quarter of 2011 that 
closed in the first quarter of 2012. 
	
Key branded middleware revenue increased 15.6 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency) and again gained market share 
in 2011, as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware 
market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing 
branded middleware which accounted for 64 percent of total software 
revenue in 2011, an increase of 3 points from 2010. Performance in 
2011 was led by strong double-digit growth in WebSphere. The Software 
business continued to have solid performance in its growth initiatives, 
with business analytics revenue up double digits in 2011 year to year. 
	
WebSphere revenue increased 40.5 percent (37 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 with strong performance throughout the year 
and gained share. WebSphere’s five product areas all had revenue 
growth of 18 percent or higher in 2011, led by the Smarter Commerce 
offerings, which more than tripled year to year. This performance 
contributed to the company’s overall growth in the retail industry in 
each of the last two years. The 2010 acquisitions of Sterling 
Commerce, Coremetrics and Unica Corporation all contributed to 
the WebSphere year-to-year performance.
	
Information Management revenue increased 12.5 percent 
(10 percent adjusted for currency) and gained share in 2011 compared 
to 2010. Distributed Database revenue increased 33 percent in 2011, 
led by strong performance from the Netezza offerings. Since 
acquiring Netezza in November 2010, the Software business has 
expanded its customer base by over 40 percent. The company’s 
business analytics software offerings, most of which are part of 
Information Management, continue to outpace the market with 
double-digit revenue growth, year to year in 2011. 
	
Lotus revenue increased 3.8 percent (flat adjusted for currency) 
in 2011 compared to 2010, with growth driven by the Social Business 
offerings.  
	
Tivoli revenue increased 10.2 percent (7 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 when compared to 2010 and gained share. Revenue 
growth was led by Storage software with growth of 25 percent 
(22 percent adjusted for currency). Security solutions software also 
delivered growth in 2011, with revenue up 9 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency). 
	
Rational revenue increased 4.9 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 versus 2010 and gained share. Revenue growth 
was driven by Telelogic, which increased 11 percent (7 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year. 
	
Operating systems revenue increased 8.6 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010, driven primarily by 
growth in Power Systems. 
	
Other software revenue increased 3.2 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency) with growth in software-related services partially offset 
by the divestiture of the PLM operations in the first quarter of 2010.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$22,065
$19,774
11.6%
External gross profit margin
88.5%
87.9%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  9,970
$  9,466
5.3%
Pre-tax margin
35.3%
37.2%
(1.9) pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$10,009
$  8,972
11.6%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
35.5%
35.3%
0.2 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
**	Excludes $39 million and $98 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in 
the first quarter of 2010.
Software gross profit increased 11.6 percent to $22,065 million in 
2011 driven primarily by the growth in revenue. Gross profit margin 
improved 0.5 points versus 2010. Software delivered segment 
pre-tax income of $9,970 million in 2011, an increase of 5.3 percent 
versus 2010. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income 
increased 11.6 percent and segment pre-tax margin improved 
0.2 points to 35.5 percent in 2011. The Software segment delivered 
strong margin and profit growth in 2011 and contributed to the 
company’s continued margin expansion and profit performance.


===== PAGE 33 =====
31
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$18,985
$17,973
5.6%
3.2%
System z
0.3%
(2.1)%
Power Systems
12.0
9.5
System x
5.7
2.4
Storage
5.8
3.1
Retail Store Solutions
11.6
9.4
Total Systems
6.5
3.8
Microelectronics OEM
0.2
0.1
Systems and Technology revenue increased 5.6 percent (3 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Performance in 2011 was 
driven by the growth markets which increased 14.9 percent (12 percent 
adjusted for currency). The major markets increased 2.7 percent, 
but were essentially flat at constant currency versus the prior year 
period. 
 	
System z revenue increased 0.3 percent (down 2 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. MIPS (millions of instructions per 
second) shipments increased 16 percent in 2011 versus 2010. The 
revenue performance and lower MIPS growth was a result of the 
strong prior-year performance and was consistent with prior mainframe 
product cycles, as the company successfully launched its zEnterprise 
196 server in the third quarter of 2010. Since the z196 server began 
shipping, the company has added over 115 new System z clients, with 
more than 33 percent in the growth markets.
	
Power Systems revenue increased 12.0 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010 with performance driven 
by strong growth in high-end systems. High-end systems revenue 
increased 31 percent (28 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 
compared to 2010. The company extended its market leadership in 
2011, having posted 15 consecutive quarters of year-to-year share 
gains. In addition, this was the second consecutive year that the 
company had over 1,000 competitive displacements, which this 
year generated over $1 billion of business; approximately 50 percent 
of this business was from Hewlett Packard, with most of the balance 
from Oracle/Sun.
	
System x revenue increased 5.7 percent (2 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. High-end System x revenue 
increased 35 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 
the prior year. System x revenue increased 22 percent (18 percent 
adjusted for currency) in the growth markets and closed the year with 
its ninth consecutive quarter with a double-digit increase in the 
growth markets.
	
Storage revenue increased 5.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2011 versus 2010. Total disk revenue increased 7 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, driven by growth 
in enterprise disk products. Tape revenue increased 3 percent (flat 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. When combined with 
storage software, total storage revenue increased 10 percent in 2011 
compared to the prior year. 
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 11.6 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus the prior year. The brand gained 
share in 2011 and contributed to the company’s overall improved 
performance in the retail industry.  
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 0.2 percent (flat adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 versus 2010, as the company shifted its 
production to meet internal demand.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$7,555
$6,856 
10.2%
External gross profit margin
39.8%
38.1%
1.6 pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,633
$1,456 
12.2%
Pre-tax margin
8.2%
7.8%
0.5 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$1,652
$1,513 
9.2%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
8.3%
8.1%
0.3 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
**	Excludes $19 million and $57 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2011 and 2010, respectively.
The increase in external gross profit for 2011 versus 2010 was due 
to higher revenue and an improved overall gross profit margin.
	
Overall gross margin increased 1.6 points in 2011 versus the prior 
year. The increase was primarily driven by margin improvements 
in Power Systems (1.2 points), System z (0.4 points) and System x 
(0.6 points), partially offset by lower margins in Microelectronics 
(0.6 points) and Storage (0.2 points). 
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased $177 million 
(12.2 percent) to $1,633 million in 2011 and on a normalized basis 
increased $139 million to $1,652 million in 2011, when compared 
to the prior year. Pre-tax margin increased 0.5 points, and on a 
normalized basis 0.3 points, versus the prior year.
Global Financing
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s 
segment results.


===== PAGE 34 =====
32
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$106,916
$99,870 
7.1%
3.4%
Geographies
$104,170
$97,060 
7.3%
3.6%
Americas
44,944
42,044
6.9
6.2
Europe/Middle East/Africa
33,952
31,866
6.5
1.6
Asia Pacific
25,273
23,150
9.2
1.7
Major markets
5.1%
1.6%
Growth markets
16.0%
11.4%
BRIC countries
18.6%
16.1%
Total geographic revenue increased 7.3 percent (4 percent adjusted 
for currency) to $104,170 million in 2011, led by strong performance 
in the growth markets. 
	
The growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011 and gained 4 points of market share. The growth 
markets strategy to expand into new markets, build out IT infrastructures 
and lead in specific industries is driving the strong performance and 
share gains. Revenue growth outpaced growth in the major markets 
by 10 points in 2011 on a constant currency basis. In the BRIC countries 
(Brazil, Russia, India and China), revenue increased 18.6 percent 
(16 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, with double-digit growth 
in each country. Overall in 2011, the company had double-digit constant 
currency revenue growth in nearly 40 growth market countries. 
These countries contributed nearly two-thirds of the company’s 2011 
constant currency revenue growth and represented 22 percent of 
total geographic revenue in 2011. To further drive market expansion, 
the company opened 92 new branches and added over 1,500 new 
sales resources in 2011.
	
Americas revenue increased 6.9 percent (6 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2011. Within the major market countries, the U.S. 
increased 4.2 percent and Canada increased 14.3 percent (10 percent 
adjusted for currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets 
increased 16.9 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) with growth 
in Brazil of 13.0 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue increased 6.5 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 compared to 2010. In 
the major market countries, revenue growth was led by the U.K. up 
9.4 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency), Spain up 11.2 percent 
(6 percent adjusted for currency), Germany up 5.8 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) and France up 4.4 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency). Revenue in Italy decreased 0.6 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency). The EMEA growth markets increased 11.6 percent 
(10 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011, led by growth in Russia 
of 49.8 percent (49 percent adjusted for currency). 
	
Asia Pacific revenue increased 9.2 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year. The Asia Pacific growth markets increased 
16.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by growth in 
China of 21.6 percent (18 percent adjusted for currency) and India 
of 10.9 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue 
increased 2.0 percent (decreased 7 percent adjusted for currency).
	
OEM revenue of $2,746 million in 2011 decreased 2.3 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2010, driven by the 
Microelectronics OEM business.
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$29,135
$26,291 
10.8%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(289)
(253)
14.4
Acquisition-related charges
(45)
(46)
(1.8)
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
74
210
(64.6)
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$28,875
$26,202
10.2%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.3%
26.3%
0.9 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
27.0%
26.2%
0.8 pts.


===== PAGE 35 =====
33
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total expense and other (income) increased 10.8 percent in 2011 
versus 2010. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other (income) 
increased 10.2 percent versus the prior year. The key drivers of the 
year-to-year change in total expense and other (income) for both 
expense presentations were approximately:
•	
Currency* 	
4 points
•	
Acquisitions** 	
3 points
•	
Base expense	
3 points
*	 Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs. 
**	Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
In the execution of its strategy, the company continues to invest 
in its growth initiatives, innovation and strategic acquisitions. The 
company also has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency 
and productivity across the business. 
	
For additional information regarding total expense and other 
income, see the following analyses by category.
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and    
administrative  expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$20,287
$18,585 
9.2%
Advertising and promotional expense
1,373
1,337
2.7
Workforce rebalancing charges
440
641
(31.3)
Retirement-related costs
603
494
22.1
Amortization of acquired  
intangibles assets
289
253
14.4
Stock-based compensation
514
488
5.4
Bad debt expense
88
40
116.6
Total consolidated selling, general  
and administrative expense
$23,594
$21,837
8.0%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired       
intangible assets
(289)
(253)
14.4
Acquisition-related charges
(20)
(41)
(52.3)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
(13)
84
NM
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$23,272
$21,628
7.6%
NM—Not meaningful
Total Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense increased 
8.0 percent (5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2011 versus 2010. 
Overall the increase was driven by currency impacts (3 points), 
acquisition-related spending (3 points) and base expense (2 points). 
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense increased 7.6 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by the same factors. Workforce 
rebalancing charges decreased $201 million due primarily to 
actions taken in the first quarter of 2010 ($558 million). Bad debt 
expense increased $47 million in 2011 primarily due to higher 
receivable balances and the current economic environment in 
Europe. The accounts receivable provision coverage was 1.5 percent 
at December 31, 2011, a decrease of 30 basis points from year- 
end 2010.
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$ 513
$ 303
69.2%
(Gains)/losses on derivative 
instruments
(113)
(239)
(52.9)
Interest income
(136)
(92)
48.4
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
(227)
31
NM
Other
(58)
(790)
(92.7)
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$  (20)
$(787)
(97.4)%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(25)
(4)
NM
Operating (non-GAAP)  
other (income) and expense
$  (45)
$(791)
(94.3)%
NM—Not meaningful
Other (income) and expense was income of $20 million and 
$787 million for 2011 and 2010, respectively. The decrease in income 
in 2011 was primarily driven by the net gain ($591 million) from the 
PLM transaction recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and a net gain 
associated with the disposition of a joint venture in the third quarter 
of 2010 ($57 million) reflected in Other in the table above. In addition, 
foreign currency rate volatility drove higher foreign currency transaction 
losses ($210 million) and lower gains on derivative instruments 
($126 million). These decreases in income were partially offset 
by higher net gains from securities and investment asset sales 
($258 million), primarily in the first quarter of 2011.


===== PAGE 36 =====
34
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$6,258
$6,026
3.8%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related  
(costs)/income
88
126
(30.4)
Operating (non-GAAP) research,  
development and engineering
$6,345
$6,152
3.1%
The company continues to invest in research and development, 
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities 
and to extend its technology leadership. Total research, development 
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 3.8 percent in 2011 
versus 2010, primarily driven by acquisitions (up 4 points) and 
currency impacts (up 2 points), partially offset by base expense 
(down 2 points). Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased 
3.1 percent in 2011 compared to the prior year primarily driven by 
the same factors. RD&E investments represented 5.9 percent of 
revenue in 2011, compared to 6.0 percent in 2010.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers  
of intellectual property
$   309
$   203
52.3%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
211
312
(32.5)
Custom development income
588
638
(8.0)
Total
$1,108
$1,154
(4.0)%
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may 
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing 
of divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and 
the timing of new patents and know-how development. There were 
no significant individual IP transactions in 2011 or 2010.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense
Total
$411
$368
11.6%
The increase in interest expense in 2011 versus 2010 was primarily 
driven by higher average debt levels, partially offset by lower average 
interest rates. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in 
the Consolidated State­ment of Earnings only if the related external 
borrowings are to support the Global Financing external business. 
See pages 66 and 67 for additional information regarding Global 
Financing debt and interest expense. Overall interest expense 
(excluding capitalized interest) for 2011 was $964 million, an 
increase of $41 million year to year.
Stock-Based Compensation
Total pre-tax stock-based compensation cost of $697 million 
increased $68 million compared to 2010. The increase was primarily 
the result of an increase related to the company’s assumption of stock-
based awards previously issued by acquired entities ($22 million) 
and increases related to restricted stock units and performance share 
units ($48 million), partially offset by a reduction related to stock 
options ($2 million). Cost, and the year-to-year change, was reflected 
in the following categories: Cost: $120 million, up $27 million; SG&A 
expense: $514 million, up $26 million; and RD&E expense: $62 million, 
up $14 million.
	
See note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 118 to 121 
for additional information on stock-based incentive awards.
Retirement-Related Plans 
The following table provides the total pre-tax cost for all retirement-
related plans. These amounts are included in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings within the caption (e.g., Cost, SG&A, RD&E) 
relating to the job function of the plan participants.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Retirement-related plans—cost
Service cost
$    549
$    550
(0.2)%
Amortization of prior  
service cost/(credits)
(157)
(183)
(14.6)
Cost of defined contribution plans
1,513
1,430
5.8
Total operating costs
$ 1,905
$ 1,796
6.0%
Interest cost
4,601
4,763
(3.4)
Expected return on plan assets
(6,574)
(6,488)
1.3
Recognized actuarial losses
1,788
1,194
49.7
Plan amendments/curtailments/ 
settlements
1
27
(98.0)
Multi-employer plan/other costs
112
89
26.0
Total non-operating costs/
(income)
$     (72)
$   (414)
(82.5)%
Total retirement-related  
plans—cost
$ 1,832
$ 1,382
32.6%
In 2011, total retirement-related plans cost increased by $450 million 
compared to 2010, primarily driven by an increase in recognized 
actuarial losses of $594 million and increased cost associated with 
defined contribution plans ($83 million), partially offset by lower 
interest cost of $162 million and an increased expected return on 
plan assets of $87 million.  


===== PAGE 37 =====
35
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
    As discussed in the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on 
page 18, the company characterizes certain retirement-related costs 
as operating and others as non-operating. Utilizing this characterization, 
operating retirement-related costs in 2011 were $1,905 million, an 
increase of $108 million compared to 2010, primarily driven by the 
$83 million increase in defined contribution plan costs. Non-operating 
costs of $(72) million increased $342 million in 2011 compared to the 
prior year driven primarily by the increase in recognized actuarial 
losses ($594 million), partially offset by lower interest cost ($162 million) 
and the increase in expected return on plan assets ($87 million). 
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2011 was 24.5 percent compared with 
24.8 percent in 2010. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2011 
was 24.5 percent compared with 24.4 percent in 2010. The 0.3 point 
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven 
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax earnings (0.6 points), 
the lack of prior year impacts related to certain intercompany 
payments made by foreign subsidiaries (6.6 points) and a reduced 
impact associated with the intercompany licensing of certain 
intellectual property and acquisition integration costs (2.2 points). 
These benefits were offset by a decrease in the utilization of foreign 
tax credits (3.7 points) and a decrease in the benefits associated 
with the settlements of the U.S. federal income tax audit (5.5 points). 
The remaining items were individually insignificant.
Earnings Per Share
Basic earnings per share is computed on the basis of the weighted-
average number of shares of common stock outstanding during the 
period. Diluted earnings per share is computed on the basis of the 
weighted-average number of shares of common stock outstanding 
plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares outstanding during 
the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive potential common 
shares include outstanding stock options and stock awards.
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$13.06
$11.52
13.4%
Basic
$13.25
$11.69
13.3%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP) 
$13.44
$11.67
15.2%
Weighted-average shares  
outstanding (in millions)
Assuming dilution
1,213.8
1,287.4
(5.7)%
Basic
1,197.0
1,268.8
(5.7)%
Actual shares outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010 were 
1,163.2 million and 1,228.0 million, respectively. The average number 
of common shares outstanding assuming dilution was 73.6 million 
shares lower in 2011 versus 2010. The decrease was primarily the 
result of the common stock repurchase program. See note L, “Equity 
Activity,” on page 110 for additional information regarding common 
stock activities. Also see note P, “Earnings Per Share of Common 
Stock,” on page 117.
Financial Position
Dynamics
At December 31, 2011, the company’s balance sheet and liquidity 
positions remain strong and are well positioned to support the 
company’s long-term objectives. Cash and cash equivalents at 
year end was $11,922 million, an increase of $271 million from the 
prior year-end position. During the year, the company continued 
to manage its investment portfolio to meet its capital preservation 
and liquidity objectives, which resulted in a shift to higher rated 
institutions. At year end, a significant portion of the investment 
portfolio was invested in U.S. sovereign instruments with no holdings 
of European sovereign debt securities. 
	
Total debt of $31,320 million increased $2,695 million from 
the prior year-end level. The commercial paper balance at 
December 31, 2011 was $2,300 million, an increase of $1,156 million 
from the prior year. Within total debt, $23,332 is in support of the 
Global Financing business which is leveraged at a 7.2 to 1 ratio. The 
company continues to have substantial flexibility in the market. 
During 2011, the company completed bond issuances totaling 
$4,850 million, with terms ranging from three to ten years and priced 
from 0.875 to 2.90 percent depending on the maturity. In addition, 
the company renewed its $10 billion global credit facility for five 
years, with 100 percent of the facility available on a same day basis. 
	
Consistent with accounting standards the company remeasures 
the funded status of its retirement and postretirement plans at 
December 31. At December 31, 2011, the overall net underfunded 
position was $16,389 million, an increase of $2,654 million from 
December 31, 2010 as the increase in the benefit obligation due to 
the reduction in discount rates more than offset the returns on plan 
assets. At year end, the company’s qualified defined benefit plans 
were well funded and its cash requirements related to these plans 
remain stable going-forward. In 2011, the return on the U.S. Personal 
Pension Plan assets was 8.4 percent and the plan was 98 percent 
funded. Overall, global asset returns were 6.1 percent and the company’s 
qualified defined benefit plans worldwide were 96 percent funded.
	
The company’s qualified defined benefit plans do hold European 
sovereign debt securities in their trust funds. See note S, “Retirement-
Related Benefits,” on page 129 for additional information.    
	
During 2011, the company generated $19,846 million in cash from 
operations, an increase of $298 million compared to 2010. In addition, 
the company generated $16,604 million in free cash flow in 2011, an 
increase of $305 million over the prior year. See pages 56 and 57 
for additional information on free cash flow. The company returned 
$18,519 million to shareholders in 2011, with $15,046 million in share 
repurchases and $3,473 million in dividends. In 2011, the company 
repurchased approximately 89 million shares and had $8.7 billion 
remaining in share repurchase authorization at year end. The 
company has consistently generated strong cash from operations 
and strong free cash flow and this permits the company to invest 
and deploy capital to areas with the most attractive long-term 
opportunities.
	
The assets and debt associated with the Global Financing 
business are a significant part of the company’s financial position. 
The financial position amounts appearing on page 72 are the 
consolidated amounts including Global Financing. The amounts 


===== PAGE 38 =====
36
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
appearing in the separate Global Financing section, beginning on 
page 63, are supplementary data presented to facilitate an 
understanding of the Global Financing business.
Working Capital
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Current assets
$50,928
$48,116
Current liabilities
42,123
40,562
Working capital
$  8,805
$  7,554
Current ratio
1.21:1
1.19:1
Working capital increased $1,251 million from the year-end 2010 
position. The key changes are described below:
	
Current assets increased $2,812 million ($3,734 million adjusted 
for currency), due to:
•	
An increase of $1,337 million ($1,594 million adjusted  
for currency) in short-term receivables due to:
	
– Higher volumes of financing receivables of $644 million  
($789 million adjusted for currency) driven by customer   
loans and inventory financing; and
	
– Higher software sales volumes of approximately  
$300 million, and
	
– Reclasses of approximately $300 million of long-term  
other receivables to reflect maturity dates.
•	
An increase of $1,022 million ($1,181 million adjusted for 
currency) in prepaid expenses and other current assets 
primarily due to:
	
– An increase of $387 million in collateral received related  
to derivatives valuations; and
	
– An increase of $326 million in income taxes primarily driven  
by tax payments in the U.S.; and
	
– An increase of $310 million in various prepaid expenses; and 
•	
An increase of $1,262 million ($1,755 million adjusted  
for currency) in cash and cash equivalents (see the following 
cash flow analysis); partially offset by
•	
A decline of $990 million in marketable securities due  
to sales of securities during 2011.
Current liabilities increased $1,561 million ($1,779 million adjusted for 
currency) as a result of:
•	
An increase in short-term debt of $1,685 million primarily 
driven by:
	
– New debt issuances of $6,123 million including commercial 
paper; and
	
– Reclasses of $4,325 million from long-term to short-term 
debt to reflect maturity dates; partially offset by
	
– Payments of $8,910 million. 
•	
An increase in accounts payable of $713 million ($766 million 
adjusted for currency) reflecting higher year-end activity as 
well as the increase in collateral related to derivatives; and 
•	
An increase in deferred income of $617 million ($638 million 
adjusted for currency) driven by the software business, 
including acquisitions; partially offset by
•	
A decrease of $903 million in taxes payable primarily due  
to tax payments in the U.S. during 2011; and
•	
A decrease in other accrued expenses and liabilities of  
$621 million ($473 million adjusted for currency) primarily  
due to derivatives valuations.
Cash Flow
The company’s cash flow from operating, investing and financing 
activities, as reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
on page 73, is summarized in the table below. These amounts include 
the cash flows associated with the Global Financing business.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Net cash provided by/(used in)
Operating activities
$ 19,846
$ 19,549
Investing activities
(4,396)
(8,507)
Financing activities
(13,696)
(12,429)
Effect of exchange rate changes  
on cash and cash equivalents
(493)
(135)
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
$  1,262
$  (1,522)
Net cash from operating activities increased by $298 million in 2011 
as compared to 2010 driven by the following key factors:
•	
Improved net income of $1,022 million; and 
•	
A decrease in net gains on asset sales of $459 million, driven 
by the PLM transaction gain in 2010; partially offset by
•	
A decrease in cash provided by operating assets and liabilities 
of $1,152 million due to:
	
– Higher net tax payments of approximately $900 million 
during 2011 compared to 2010; and
	
– A decrease in cash provided by receivables of $790 million 
as a result of higher volumes in 2011; partially offset by
	
– A decrease in cash used related to retirement-related plans 
of $196 million, primarily driven by lower non-U.S. employer 
funding in 2011; and
	
– A decrease in cash used for workforce rebalancing activities 
of $278 million during 2011 compared to 2010.
Net cash used in investing activities decreased $4,111 million due to 
a decrease in cash used for acquisitions.
	
Net cash used in financing activities increased $1,267 million as 
a result of:
•	
A net decrease of $991 million in cash from common 
stock transactions; and 
•	
An increase in dividends paid of $296 million in 2011  
compared to 2010; partially offset by 
•	
A decrease in common stock repurchases of $329 million  
in 2011 compared to 2010.


===== PAGE 39 =====
37
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Noncurrent Assets and Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Noncurrent assets
$65,505
$65,335
Long-term debt
$22,857
$21,846
Noncurrent liabilities (excluding debt)
$31,217
$27,871
The increase in noncurrent assets of $169 million ($902 million 
adjusted for currency) was driven by:
•	
An increase of $1,077 million in goodwill ($1,282 million 
adjusted for currency) driven by acquisitions during 2011; and
•	
An increase of $282 million in deferred taxes ($256 million 
adjusted for currency) primarily driven by retirement related 
activity; partially offset by 
•	
An increase of $227 million ($330 million adjusted  
for currency) in long-term financing receivables driven  
by increased volumes; and
•	
A decrease of $883 million ($753 million adjusted for currency) 
in investments and sundry assets driven by net asset sales of 
$395 million during 2011 as well as a reclass to short-term 
other receivables of approximately $300 million to reflect 
maturity dates; and
•	
A decrease of $225 million ($66 million adjusted  
for currency) in prepaid pension assets resulting from  
pension remeasurements; and
•	
A decrease of $214 million in property, plant and equipment 
(net) primarily due to currency.
Long-term debt increased by $1,011 million due to new debt issuances 
of $5,194 million, partially offset by reclasses of $4,325 million to 
short-term debt as certain instruments approach maturity.
	
Other noncurrent liabilities, excluding debt, increased $3,346 million 
($3,544 million adjusted for currency) primarily driven by:
•	
An increase in retirement and nonpension benefit obligations 
of $2,396 million ($2,488 million adjusted for currency) 
primarily driven by remeasurements in the U.S.,  
the United Kingdom and Japan; and
•	
An increase of $770 million ($834 million adjusted for  
currency) in other noncurrent liabilities primarily due to an 
increase in tax related liabilities.
Debt
The company’s funding requirements are continually monitored and 
strategies are executed to manage the overall asset and liability 
profile. Additionally, the company maintains sufficient flexibility to 
access global funding sources as needed. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Total company debt
$31,320
$28,624
Total Global Financing segment debt
$23,332
$22,823
Debt to support external clients
20,051
19,583
Debt to support internal clients
3,281
3,240
Global Financing provides financing predominantly for the company’s 
external client assets, as well as for assets under contract by other 
IBM units. These assets, primarily for Global Services, generate 
long-term, stable revenue streams similar to the Global Financing 
asset portfolio. Based on their attributes, these Global Services 
assets are leveraged with the balance of the Global Financing asset 
base. The debt analysis above is further detailed in the Global 
Financing section on pages 66 and 67.
	
Given the significant leverage, the company presents a debt-to-
capitalization ratio which excludes Global Financing debt and equity 
as management believes this is more representative of the company’s 
core business operations. This ratio can vary from period to period 
as the company manages its global cash and debt positions.
 	
“Core” debt-to-capitalization ratio (excluding Global Financing 
debt and equity) was 32.0 percent at December 31, 2011 compared 
to 22.6 percent at December 31, 2010. The increase was primarily 
driven by an increase in non-Global Financing debt of $2,186 million 
and by a decrease in non-Global Financing equity of $2,929 million 
from December 31, 2010 balances.
	
Consolidated debt-to-capitalization ratio at December 31, 2011 
was 60.7 percent versus 55.3 percent at December 31, 2010.
Equity
Total equity decreased by $2,937 million as a result of an increase in 
treasury stock of $14,803 million, driven by common stock repurchases 
in 2011; a higher pension adjustment of $2,448 million reflecting the 
impact of pension remeasurements as well as increased foreign 
currency translation adjustments of $711 million; partially offset by 
an increase in retained earnings of $12,326 million, and an increase 
of $2,711 million in common stock primarily driven by stock option 
exercises and stock based compensation.


===== PAGE 40 =====
38
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$50,138
$ 341
$      2
$50,481
Gross profit margin
46.9%
0.3 pts.
0.0 pts.
47.2%
SG&A
$23,594
$(309)
$   (13)
$23,272
RD&E
6,258
0
88
6,345
Other (income) and expense
(20)
(25)
0
(45)
Total expense and other (income)
29,135
(334)
74
28,875
Pre-tax income 
21,003
675
(72)
21,605
Pre-tax income margin
19.6%
0.6 pts.
(0.1) pts.
20.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  5,148
$ 179
$   (40)
$  5,287
Effective tax rate
24.5%
0.1  pts.
(0.1) pts.
24.5%
Net income
$15,855
$ 495
$   (32)
$16,318
Net income margin
14.8%
0.5 pts.
(0.0) pts.
15.3%
Diluted earnings per share
$  13.06
$0.41
$(0.03)
$  13.44
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2010:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$46,014 
$ 260 
$ (204)
$46,070 
Gross profit margin
46.1%
0.3 pts.
(0.2) pts.
46.1%
SG&A
$21,837 
$(294)
$    84 
$21,628 
RD&E
6,026
0
126
6,152
Other (income) and expense
(787)
(4)
0
(791)
Total expense and other (income)
26,291
(298)
210
26,202
Pre-tax income 
19,723
558
(414)
19,867
Pre-tax income margin
19.7%
0.6 pts.
(0.4) pts.
19.9%
Provision for income taxes*
$  4,890
$ 116 
$ (162)
$  4,844 
Effective tax rate
24.8%
(0.1) pts.
(0.3) pts.
24.4%
Net income
$14,833 
$ 443 
$ (253)
$15,023 
Net income margin
14.9%
0.4 pts.
(0.3) pts.
15.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$  11.52
$0.34 
$(0.20)
$  11.67 
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 41 =====
39
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Fourth-Quarter Results
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$29,486
$29,019 
1.6%*
Gross profit margin
49.9%
49.0%
0.9 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  7,448
$  7,271
2.4%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
25.3%
25.1%
0.2 pts.
Income before income taxes
$  7,274
$  6,956
4.6%
Provision for income taxes
  1,784
1,698
5.1%
Net income
$  5,490
$  5,257
4.4%
Net income margin
18.6%
18.1%
0.5 pts.
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    4.62
$     4.18
10.5%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,188.7
1,258.4
(5.5)%
*	 1.4 percent adjusted for currency.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for the fourth quarter of 2011 and 2010.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the fourth quarter:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$5,490
$5,257 
4.4%
Non-operating adjustments (net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
119
170
(30.0)
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
(12)
(74)
(84.0)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$5,597
$ 5,354
4.5%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)  
earnings per share
$  4.71
$  4.25 
10.8%
*	 See page 43 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
Snapshot
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the company grew revenue, expanded 
gross, pre-tax and net income margins and delivered earnings per 
share of $4.62, up 10.5 percent as reported, and $4.71, up 10.8 percent 
on an operating (non-GAAP) basis. The company generated $7.1 billion 
in cash from operations in the quarter enabling shareholder returns of 
$4.5 billion in common stock repurchases and dividends in the period. 
	
The company’s performance in the fourth quarter was driven by 
several factors. The Software segment continued its momentum 
with performance reflecting both strong demand for its offerings 
and solid sales execution. Software revenue increased 8.7 percent 
(9 percent adjusted for currency) driven by strong growth in the focus 
areas of Smarter Commerce, business analytics and storage solutions. 
Software pre-tax income increased 12.5 percent. Global Services 
delivered strong margin and profit growth, with pre-tax income up 
16.9 percent. Total Global Services revenue growth was again led 
by the growth markets which were up 11.4 percent (13 percent adjusted 
for currency). Within Systems and Technology, Power Systems 
delivered revenue growth of 6.3 percent (6 percent adjusted for 
currency) while continuing to drive competitive displacements and 
extend its share gains in Unix. In the fourth quarter, each of the 
company’s 16 brands gained or held share, with the exception of 
System z, which had the largest revenue growth in the last decade 
in the fourth quarter of 2010. The company estimates that System z 
lost share in the fourth quarter, primarily to Power Systems . 
	
The company’s ongoing focus on productivity together with the 
relative strength of the Software business drove strong margin 
performance in the fourth quarter of 2011. The consolidated gross 
profit margin increased 0.9 points versus the fourth quarter of 2010 
to 49.9 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin increased 
1.1 points to 50.2 percent. The improvement was driven by margin 
expansion in both services segments, and an improved segment 
mix due to the Software revenue performance. 
 	
Total expense and other income increased 2.4 percent in the 
fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) 
expense and other income increased 2.1 percent compared to the 
fourth quarter of 2010. The year-to-year drivers for both categories 
were approximately:
•	
Acquisitions* 	
1 point
•	
Base expense 	
1 point
*	 Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
Pre-tax income grew 4.6 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
24.7 percent, an increase of 0.7 points versus the fourth quarter of 
2010. Net income increased 4.4 percent and the net income margin 
of 18.6 percent improved 0.5 points year to year. The effective tax rate 
for the fourth quarter was 24.5 percent, compared with 24.4 percent 
in the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income grew 
5.6 percent and the operating (non-GAAP)  pre-tax margin was 
25.1 percent, an increase of 0.9 points versus the prior year. Operating 
(non-GAAP) earnings increased 4.5 percent and the operating (non-
GAAP) earnings margin of 19.0 percent increased 0.5 points versus 
the prior year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 
24.4 percent versus 23.7 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010. 
	
Diluted earnings per share improved 10.5 percent reflecting the 
growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock repurchase 
program. In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 19 million 
shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share of $4.62 
increased $0.44 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) diluted 
earnings per share of $4.71 increased $0.46 versus the fourth quarter 
of 2010 driven by the following factors:
•	
Revenue increase at actual rates	
$0.07
•	
Margin expansion	
$0.13
•	
Common stock repurchases	
$0.26
	
Gross margin expansion drove $0.19 of operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings per share growth, partially offset by a $0.02 per share 
impact from expense and a $0.04 per share impact from the higher 
tax rate. Overall, margin expansion contributed $0.13 of improvement.


===== PAGE 42 =====
40
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the fourth quarter of 2011 versus the fourth quarter of 2010 reportable segment external revenue and gross 
margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length transfer 
price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items. 
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2011
2010*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$10,452
$10,165
2.8%
2.6%
Gross margin
36.6%
34.5%
2.1 pts.
Global Business Services
4,877
4,758
2.5%
1.7%
Gross margin
29.3%
28.0%
1.3 pts.
Software
7,648
7,039
8.7%
8.7%
Gross margin
89.8%
89.6%
0.2 pts.
Systems and Technology
5,803
6,277
(7.6)%
(7.7)%
Gross margin
40.5%
43.6%
(3.1) pts.
Global Financing
548
628
(12.9)%
(12.6)%
Gross margin
49.7%
51.8%
(2.1) pts.
Other
159
151
4.7%
4.7%
Gross margin
(11.0)%
10.3%
(21.3) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$29,486
$29,019
1.6%
1.4%
Total consolidated gross profit
$14,722
$14,227
3.5%
Total consolidated gross margin
49.9%
49.0%
0.9 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangible assets
81
82
(1.2)%
Acquisition-related charges
0
0
0.0%
Retirement-related costs/(income)
(10)
(60)
(82.9)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$14,793
$14,249
3.8%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
50.2%
49.1%
1.1pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Global Services
The Global Services segments, Global Technology Services (GTS) 
and Global Business Services (GBS) delivered $15,329 million of 
revenue in the fourth quarter, an increase of 2.7 percent (2 percent 
adjusted for currency) year to year. Overall revenue growth in the 
quarter was driven by the growth markets with revenue up 11.4 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency) with double-digit constant currency 
revenue growth in the outsourcing, transactional and maintenance 
businesses. Total outsourcing revenue of $7,210 million increased 
3.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and total transactional 
revenue of $6,246 million increased 2.9 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year. Total Global Services segment pre-tax 
income was $2,771 million, an increase of 16.9 percent year to year. 
The combined pre-tax margin improved 2.1 points year to year to 
17.5 percent.
	
Global Technology Services revenue increased 2.8 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) to $10,452 million in the fourth 
quarter versus the same period in 2010. Adjusted for currency, 
the fourth-quarter revenue growth rate was consistent with the 
growth rate in the third quarter. GTS Outsourcing revenue increased 
3.4 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter 
and gained share. Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue 
increased 4.6 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 
quarter. ITS had strong performance in the growth markets, driven 
by the benefits of geographic expansion in offerings such as Business 
Continuity and Resiliency Services. GTS gross profit increased 
9.0 percent in the fourth quarter compared to the same period in 
2010 and the gross profit margin improved 2.1 points with improvement 
in all lines of business. GTS fourth-quarter 2011 pre-tax income 
increased 18.0 percent to $1,930 million with the pre-tax margin 
expanding 2.3 points to 18.0 percent, versus the prior year, driven 
by productivity and cost management, along with a mix into the 
higher margin growth markets.


===== PAGE 43 =====
41
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Global Business Services revenue increased 2.5 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) to $4,877 million in the fourth quarter 
of 2011. Application Outsourcing revenue increased 4.7 percent (4 
percent adjusted for currency), led by strong performance in the 
growth markets. Consulting and Systems Integration had revenue 
growth in the fourth quarter of 1.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for 
currency), an improved constant currency growth rate compared to 
the third quarter. Overall GBS revenue continued to be impacted by 
Japan and the Public Sector; total GBS revenue, excluding Japan 
and the Public sector, increased 8.1 percent (9 percent adjusted for 
currency) in the fourth quarter of 2011. Although, revenue declines 
in Japan and the Public Sector continued in the fourth quarter, 
performance in the Public Sector improved compared to the prior 
two quarters of 2011. GBS gross profit increased 7.2 percent in the 
fourth quarter and gross profit margin expanded 1.3 points versus 
the prior year. GBS segment pre-tax income increased 14.4 percent 
to $841 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 with pre-tax margin 
expanding 1.8 points to 16.6 percent. 
Software
Software revenue increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for 
currency) to $7,648 million in the fourth quarter. Key branded 
middleware revenue increased 11.3 percent (11 percent adjusted for 
currency) year to year. This was the fifth consecutive quarter of 
double-digit revenue growth in key branded middleware along with 
17 consecutive quarters of share gains as the business continues to 
extend its leadership in the middleware market. WebSphere revenue 
increased 21.4 percent (21 percent adjusted for currency) in the 
fourth quarter of 2011 year to year and gained share. Each of 
WebSphere’s five product areas had revenue growth of 10 percent 
or higher in the fourth quarter including the Smarter Commerce 
offerings, which were up over 25 percent. Information Management 
revenue increased 8.7 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency) in 
the fourth quarter year to year and gained share. Distributed Database 
software revenue grew double digits in the fourth quarter, led by 
performance from the Netezza offerings which were up nearly 70 
percent. Revenue from business analytics software offerings, most 
of which are part of Information Management, continued to outpace 
the market with double-digit growth in the fourth quarter. The 
acquisition of Algorithmics in the fourth quarter of 2011 further 
strengthens the business analytics and optimization offerings by 
providing risk analytics capabilities that help customers make 
informed decisions. Tivoli revenue increased 13.7 percent (14 percent 
adjusted for currency) year over year in the fourth quarter and gained 
share, driven by Storage software growth of 30 percent (30 percent 
adjusted for currency). In addition, Security solutions had revenue 
growth of 15 percent (15 percent adjusted for currency). With the 
recent acquisition of Q1 Labs, the company can now offer clients a 
new level of intelligence around security to enable them to better 
predict, prevent and detect all types of security threats. Rational 
revenue increased 3.7 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) in 
the fourth quarter and gained share, driven by strong performance 
in Telelogic. Software gross profit increased 8.9 percent and the 
gross profit margin expanded 0.2 points. Software delivered segment 
pre-tax income of $3,710 million in the fourth quarter, a growth of 
12.5 percent compared to the fourth quarter of 2010, with a pre-tax 
margin of 43.7 percent, up 1.4 points.
Systems and Technology
Systems and Technology revenue decreased 7.6 percent (8 percent 
adjusted for currency) to $5,803 million in the fourth quarter versus 
the same period in 2010. The year-to-year decline reflects very strong 
growth in the fourth quarter of 2010 of over 20 percent, driven by 
mainframe growth of nearly 70 percent. System z revenue decreased 
31.2 percent (31 percent adjusted for currency) and MIPS (millions 
of instructions per second) shipments decreased 4 percent year to 
year. The decline in revenue was a result of the strong fourth quarter 
of 2010 when the company successfully launched its zEnterprise 
196 server. Power Systems revenue increased 6.3 percent (6 percent 
adjusted for currency) and gained share. This reflected 15 consecutive 
quarters of share gains in Power Systems. In the fourth quarter, the 
company had over 350 competitive displacements resulting in over 
$350 million of business; approximately 60 percent of this business 
was from Hewlett Packard with most of the balance coming from 
Oracle/Sun. This was the strongest quarter of competitive 
displacements since the company started tracking this activity in 
2006. System x revenue decreased 2.5 percent (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) in the fourth quarter year to year. Storage revenue 
decreased 1.2 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in the fourth 
quarter of 2011 versus the comparable period in 2010. Total disk 
revenue decreased 1 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) and 
tape revenue decreased 4 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency) 
in the fourth quarter. When combined with the storage software 
revenue growth of 30 percent, total storage revenue increased 
5 percent in the fourth quarter compared to the prior year. Retail 
Stores Solutions revenue increased 8.9 percent (9 percent adjusted 
for currency) in the fourth quarter and continued to gain share. 
Systems and Technology gross margin decreased 3.1 points versus 
the prior year driven primarily by product mix (approximately 2 points). 
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income decreased 32.6 percent 
to $790 million in the fourth quarter and pre-tax margin decreased 
4.8 points to 13.2 percent. 
Global Financing
Global Financing revenue of $548 million decreased 12.9 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency), driven primarily by a decrease in 
used equipment sales revenue. The Global Financing segment 
fourth-quarter pre-tax income decreased 9.1 percent to $514 million 
and the pre-tax margin declined 0.9 points to 46.1 percent. 


===== PAGE 44 =====
42
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
Total geographic revenue increased 1.9 percent (2 percent adjusted 
for currency) to $28,772 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 compared 
to the prior year. Revenue in the major markets increased 0.5 percent 
(flat adjusted for currency) in the fourth quarter. In North America, 
revenue performance was led by Canada which was up 11.6 percent 
(13 percent adjusted for currency). The U.S. was up 1.1 percent 
compared to a strong fourth quarter of 2010, which increased 
10 percent driven by mainframe performance. In Europe, the revenue 
growth rate at constant currency improved sequentially compared 
to the third quarter of 2011. Germany returned to growth in the 
quarter with revenue up 2.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). 
Revenue increased in Spain 8.2 percent (9 percent adjusted for 
currency) and in the U.K. 8.4 percent (9 percent adjusted for currency). 
This was the fifth and ninth consecutive quarters of constant 
currency revenue growth in Spain and the U.K, respectively. Growth 
markets revenue increased 7.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for 
currency) in the fourth quarter and outpaced growth in the major 
markets by 8 points on a constant currency basis. The growth markets 
gained 4 points of share in the fourth quarter. Revenue performance 
was broad based with double-digit constant currency revenue growth 
in 40 growth market countries. In the BRIC countries, combined 
revenue increased 9.6 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency).
Expense
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter:
2011
2010
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$7,448
$7,271
2.4%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(72)
(75)
(4.2)
Acquisition-related charges
(13)
(23)
(42.8)
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
25
61
(58.9)
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$7,388
$7,235
2.1%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
25.3%
25.1%
0.2 pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
25.1%
24.9%
0.1 pts.
Total expense and other income increased 2.4 percent year to 
year with an expense-to-revenue-ratio of 25.3 percent compared 
to 25.1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2010. The increase in total 
expense and other income was primarily driven by the company’s 
acquisitions over the past 12 months (1 point) and higher base 
expense (1 point). There was effectively no year-to-year impact 
from the combination of currency translation and hedging dynamics 
in the fourth quarter. Within Selling, general and administrative 
expense, accounts receivable provisions increased approximately 
$55 million in the fourth quarter of 2011 year to year due to higher 
receivables balances and the European credit environment. The 
accounts receivable reserve coverage at December 31, 2011 decreased 
30 basis points compared to December 31, 2010, and decreased 
20 basis points since September 2011.
Cash Flow
The company generated $7,097 million in cash flow from operations, 
an increase of $302 million compared to the fourth quarter of 2010, 
primarily driven by higher net income. Net cash used in investing 
activities of $3,505 million decreased $577 million, primarily due 
to less cash used for acquisitions ($1,340 million), partially offset 
by a net reduction of $762 million from purchases and sales of 
marketable securities and other investments in 2011 versus 2010. Net 
cash used in financing activities of $2,810 million increased $950 
million compared to the prior year, primarily due to a net decrease 
in cash from common stock transactions ($704 million).
	
In the fourth quarter, the company repurchased 19 million shares 
of its common stock. The weighted-average number of diluted common 
shares outstanding in the fourth quarter of 2011 was 1,188.7 million 
compared with 1,258.4 million in the fourth quarter of 2010.


===== PAGE 45 =====
43
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter 2011:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$14,722
$   81
$   (10)
$14,793
Gross profit margin
49.9%
0.3 pts.
(0.0) pts.
50.2%
SG&A
$  6,076
$  (82)
$      2
$  5,996
RD&E
1,555
0
23
1,578
Other (income) and expense
(44)
(2)
0
(46)
Total expense and other (income)
7,448
(85)
25
7,388
Pre-tax income 
7,274
166
(35)
7,405
Pre-tax income margin
24.7%
0.6 pts.
(0.1) pts.
25.1%
Provision for income taxes*
$  1,784
$   47
$   (24)
$  1,808
Effective tax rate
24.5%
0.1 pts.
(0.2) pts.
24.4%
Net income
$  5,490
$ 119
$  (12)
$  5,597
Net income margin
18.6%
0.4 pts.
(0.0) pts.
19.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$    4.62
$0.10
$(0.01)
$    4.71
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions)
For the fourth quarter 2010:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$14,227 
$   82 
$   (60)
$14,249 
Gross profit margin
49.0%
0.3 pts.
(0.2) pts.
49.1%
SG&A
$  5,951
$  (95)
$    28
$  5,884
RD&E
1,578
0
33
1,611
Other (income) and expense
(42)
(2)
0
(44)
Total expense and other (income)
7,271
(98)
61
7,235
Pre-tax income 
6,956
180
(121)
7,015
Pre-tax income margin
24.0%
0.6 pts.
(0.4) pts.
24.2%
Provision for income taxes*
$  1,698
$   10
$   (47)
$  1,661
Effective tax rate
24.4%
(0.5) pts.
(0.3) pts.
23.7%
Net income
$  5,257
$ 170
$   (74)
$  5,354
Net income margin
18.1%
0.6 pts.
(0.3) pts.
18.5%
Diluted earnings per share
$    4.18
$0.14
$(0.06)
$    4.25
*	 The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 46 =====
44
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Prior Year in Review
The “Prior Year in Review” section provides a summary of the 
company’s financial performance in 2010 as compared to 2009. 
The 2010 and 2009 segment results and performance have been 
reclassified to reflect operating earnings, consistent with the 
company’s current management and measurement system as 
described on page 18. For a detailed discussion of prior year 
performance, see the 2010 Annual Report.
($ and shares in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Revenue
$  99,870
$  95,758 
4.3%*
Gross profit margin
46.1%
45.7%
0.3 pts.
Total expense and other income
$  26,291
$  25,647
2.5%
Total expense and other  
income-to-revenue ratio
26.3%
26.8%
(0.5) pts.
Income before income taxes
$  19,723
$  18,138
8.7%
Provision for income taxes
4,890
4,713
3.8%
Net income
$  14,833
$  13,425
10.5%
Net income margin
14.9%
14.0%
0.8 pts.
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    11.52
$    10.01
15.1%
Weighted-average shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,287.4
1,341.4
(4.0)%
Assets**
$113,452
$109,022
4.1%
Liabilities**
$  90,279
$  86,267
4.7%
Equity**
$  23,172
$  22,755
1.8%
*	 3.3 percent adjusted for currency. 
** At December 31.
The following table provides the company’s operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings for 2010 and 2009. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Net income as reported
$14,833
$13,425 
10.5%
Non-operating adjustments            
(net of tax)
Acquisition-related charges
443
357
24.1
Non-operating retirement-related 
costs/(income)
(253)
(330)
(23.5)
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$15,023
$13,452
11.7%
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)  
earnings per share
$  11.67
$  10.03
16.4%
*	 See page 54 for a more detailed reconciliation of net income to operating earnings.
Snapshot
In 2010, the company delivered strong financial results highlighted 
by improved revenue performance, continued margin expansion, 
solid cash generation and record levels of net income and earnings 
per share. The financial performance continued to be driven by 
the strength of the company’s global model and the results of the 
strategic transformation of the business.
	
For the year, the company delivered $11.52 in diluted earnings 
per share, an increase of 15.1 percent year to year, and $11.67 in 
diluted operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share, an increase of 
16.4 percent year to year. As reported, this was the eighth consecutive 
year of double-digit earnings per share growth. In 2007, the company 
developed a road map for growth with an earnings per share objective 
for 2010 of $10 to $11 per share as reported. With its performance 
in 2010, the company exceeded the low end of its objective by $1.52 
per share and the high end by $0.52 per share. The resilience of the 
business model enabled the company to exceed its objective even 
while managing through the severe global recession. 
	
Total revenue for 2010 increased 4.3 percent (3 percent adjusted 
for currency) compared to 2009; excluding the divested Product 
Lifecycle Management (PLM) operations, total revenue increased 
4.9 percent (4 percent adjusted for currency). Revenue from the 
growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent adjusted for 
currency) with performance led by the BRIC countries of Brazil, 
Russia, India and China which increased 18 percent, adjusted for 
currency. Within the growth markets, 40 countries grew revenue 
at a double-digit rate at constant currency in 2010 compared to 
the prior year. Segment performance was driven by Systems and 
Technology which increased 11.0 percent year to year (11 percent 
adjusted for currency) and Software which increased 5.1 percent 
(5 percent adjusted for currency). Software revenue, excluding PLM, 
grew 8.1 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency). Within Software, 
performance was led by key branded middleware which increased 
10.8 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency) compared to the 
prior year. Systems and Technology revenue growth was driven by 
new product introductions and very strong performance in the 
growth markets which increased 20 percent (19 percent adjusted 
for currency).
	
The gross profit margin increased 0.3 points versus 2009 to 
46.1 percent. The operating (non-GAAP) gross margin increased 
0.5 points to 46.1 percent. The margin improvement reflected the 
improved business mix, operating leverage and the continued 
success of the company’s productivity initiatives. This was the 
seventh consecutive year of improvement in the gross profit margin. 
	
In 2010, the company continued to invest for innovation and 
growth. These investments supported the introduction of the new 
System z mainframe and POWER7 products and the success in the 
performance of the growth markets. The company also invested 
$6 billion to acquire 17 companies, adding significant new capabilities 
to support its growth initiatives.


===== PAGE 47 =====
45
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Total expense and other income increased 2.5 percent in 2010 
versus 2009. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense and other income 
increased 2.3 percent in 2010 versus 2009. The year-to-year drivers 
for both categories were approximately:
•	
Base expense 	(2)	points
•	
Currency*	
1	 point
•	
Acquisitions**	 3	 points
*	 Reflects impacts of translation and hedging programs.
**	Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period.
Pre-tax income grew 8.7 percent and the pre-tax margin was 
19.7 percent, an increase of 0.8 points versus 2009. Net income 
increased 10.5 percent reflecting an improvement in the tax rate. 
The effective tax rate was 24.8 percent compared with 26.0 percent 
in the prior year. Net income margin improved 0.8 points to 14.9 percent. 
Operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income increased 9.6 percent and 
the operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax margin was 19.9 percent, an 
increase of 1.0 points versus the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings increased 11.7 percent and the operating (non-GAAP) 
earnings margin of 15.0 percent increased 1.0 points versus the prior 
year. The operating (non-GAAP) effective tax rate was 24.4 percent 
versus 25.8 percent in 2009.
	
Diluted earnings per share improved 15.1 percent reflecting the 
strong growth in net income and the benefits of the common stock 
repurchase program. In 2010, the company repurchased approximately 
118 million shares of its common stock. Diluted earnings per share 
of $11.52 increased $1.51 from the prior year. Operating (non-GAAP) 
diluted earnings per share of $11.67 increased $1.64 versus 2009 
driven by the following factors:
•	
Revenue increase at actual rates 	
$0.43
•	
Margin expansion 	
$0.74
•	
Common stock repurchases 	
$0.47
Workforce rebalancing charges were recorded in the first quarter 
of 2009 and 2010. The PLM and Geodis divestiture transactions 
were recorded in the first quarter of 2010 and the first quarter of 
2009, respectively. These transactions impacted the year-to-year 
segment results for 2010 compared to 2009. Workforce rebalancing 
charges were incurred in every segment while the PLM transaction 
gain was recorded in Software and the Geodis transaction gain was 
recorded in the following segments: Global Technology Services 
($81 million), Global Business Services ($46 million), Software 
($106 million) and Systems and Technology ($64 million). In the 
following segment analysis and in the Global Financing analysis 
on pages 63 and 64, each segment’s pre-tax income and pre-tax 
margin for 2010 and 2009 are presented on an as-reported basis 
and on a basis normalized for these transactions in both years to 
provide a better perspective of the underlying operational performance 
of the segments. 


===== PAGE 48 =====
46
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Segment Details
The following is an analysis of the 2010 and 2009 reportable segment results. The table below presents each reportable segment’s external 
revenue and gross margin results. Segment pre-tax income includes transactions between the segments that are intended to reflect an 
arm’s length transfer price and excludes certain unallocated corporate items.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010*
2009*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Revenue
Global Technology Services
$38,201 
$37,347 
2.3%
0.7%
Gross margin
34.5%
34.8%
(0.3) pts.
Global Business Services
18,223
17,653
3.2%
1.6%
Gross margin
28.0%
27.8%
0.3 pts.
Software
22,485
21,396
5.1%
4.8%
Gross margin
87.9%
86.7%
1.2 pts.
Systems and Technology
17,973
16,190
11.0%
11.1%
Gross margin
38.1%
37.5%
0.7 pts.
Global Financing
2,238
2,302
(2.8)%
(4.3)%
Gross margin
51.3%
47.5%
3.8 pts.
Other
750
869
(13.7)%
(13.8)%
Gross margin
(8.6)%
17.5%
(26.1) pts.
Total consolidated revenue
$99,870 
$95,758 
4.3%
3.3%
Total consolidated gross profit
$46,014
$43,785
5.1%
Total consolidated gross margin
46.1%
45.7%
0.3 pts.
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired intangibles assets
260
204
27.5%
Acquisition-related charges
0
—
NM
Retirement-related costs/(income)
(204)
(259)
(21.4)%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross profit
$46,070 
$43,730
5.4%
Operating (non-GAAP) gross margin
46.1%
45.7%
0.5 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
NM—Not meaningful


===== PAGE 49 =====
47
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Global Services
The Global Services segments, GTS and GBS, delivered combined 
revenue of $56,424 million, an increase of 2.6 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 when compared to 2009. Services 
revenue performance at constant currency improved over the course 
of 2010 led by the transaction businesses. In the first and second 
quarter, revenue, adjusted for currency, decreased 2 percent 
and increased 1 percent, respectively, versus the prior year periods. 
In the third and fourth quarters, revenue increased 2 percent, 
at constant currency, in each period. The estimated Global 
Global Technology Services revenue of $38,201 million increased 
2.3 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. 
The rate of year-to-year revenue growth, adjusted for currency, 
demonstrated an improving trend over the second half of 2010. 
In the first half, revenue, adjusted for currency, was flat versus the 
prior year, and in the second half, revenue increased 1 percent, at 
constant currency, compared to the prior year period. GTS Outsourcing 
revenue increased 2.9 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency) in 
2010 with fairly consistent year-to-year growth, adjusted for currency, 
throughout the year. Revenue growth was led by performance in the 
growth markets, up 18.4 percent (8 percent adjusted for currency), 
as the outsourcing offerings help clients build out their IT infrastructures. 
Integrated Technology Services (ITS) revenue decreased 0.6 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. ITS revenue 
performance, adjusted for currency, improved over the course of 2010 
and the growth markets had good year-to-year growth, up 8 percent 
at constant currency, throughout 2010. Maintenance revenue increased 
4.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2009 with 
consistent performance, at constant currency, throughout the year.
	
Global Business Services revenue increased 3.2 percent 
(2 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 and delivered growth 
in outsourcing and in the transactional businesses: consulting 
and systems integration. Revenue growth was strongest in North 
America, up 8.5 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and was 
broad based across the industry sectors with Financial Services, 
Distribution, Industrial, Public and General Business each delivering 
growth on a constant currency basis. GBS had good performance 
in its growth initiatives in 2010, with revenue and transactional 
signings growth in the growth markets and revenue growth of over 
35 percent in business analytics. GBS added over 4,000 consultants 
in 2010 and had over 7,800 dedicated consultants in its business 
analytics practice at the end of 2010. 
Services backlog at actual currency rates was $142 billion at 
December 31, 2010, an increase of $5 billion ($4 billion adjusted for 
currency) compared to the December 31, 2009 level. Backlog for 
the outsourcing businesses at actual currency rates was estimated 
to be $97 billion at December 31, 2010, an increase of $3 billion 
($1 billion adjusted for currency) from December 31, 2009. The 
Global Services segments delivered a combined pre-tax profit of 
$8,044 million in 2010, a growth of 0.8 percent versus 2009 with a 
pre-tax margin of 13.7 percent, down 0.2 points year to year.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010*
2009*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/ 
Margin 
Change
Global Services
Global Technology Services
External gross profit
$13,194 
$13,014 
1.4%
External gross profit margin
34.5%
34.8%
(0.3) pts.
Pre-tax income
$  5,499
$  5,482
0.3%
Pre-tax margin
13.9%
14.2%
(0.2) pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$  5,771
$  5,516
4.6%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
14.6%
14.2%
0.4 pts.
Global Business Services
External gross profit
$  5,106
$  4,902
4.2%
External gross profit margin
28.0%
27.8%
0.3 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  2,546
$  2,501
1.8%
Pre-tax margin
13.4%
13.5%
(0.1) pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized+
$  2,674
$  2,577
3.7%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
14.1%
13.9%
0.2 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. 
**	Excludes $273 million and $115 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and ($81) million related to the Geodis gain 
in the first quarter of 2009.
+	 Excludes $128 million and $123 million of workforce rebalancing charges in 	the first 
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and ($46) million related to the Geodis gain 
in the first quarter of 2009. ­
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Global Services external revenue
$56,424 
$55,000 
2.6%
1.0%
Global Technology Services
$38,201 
$37,347 
2.3%
0.7%
Outsourcing
22,241
21,620
2.9
1.1
Integrated Technology Services
8,714
8,771
(0.6)
(1.8)
Maintenance
7,250
6,956
4.2
2.6
Global Business Services
$18,223 
$17,653 
3.2%
1.6%


===== PAGE 50 =====
48
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GTS gross profit margin declined 0.3 points to 34.5 percent in 2010. 
Segment pre-tax profit increased to $5,499 million with a pre-tax 
margin of 13.9 percent. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax 
income in 2010 increased 4.6 percent and margin expanded 0.4 points 
to 14.6 percent reflecting the benefits from workforce rebalancing 
and an improved revenue growth trend.
	
GBS gross profit increased 4.2 percent in 2010, in line with 
revenue growth. Gross profit margin of 28.0 percent increased 
0.3 points year to year. Segment pre-tax profit improved 1.8 percent 
to $2,546 million with a pre-tax margin decline of 0.1 points year over 
year. On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income in 2010 increased 
3.7 percent with a pre-tax margin of 14.1 percent, an increase of 
0.2 points compared to 2009. Throughout 2010, GBS improved 
utilization and delivery excellence, while continuing to invest in globally 
integrated capabilities and skills to support growth initiatives.
Software
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Software external revenue
$22,485 
$21,396 
5.1%
4.8%
Middleware
$18,444 
$17,125 
7.7%
7.5%
Key Branded Middleware
13,876
12,524
10.8
10.7
WebSphere
20.8
20.6
Information Management
8.6
8.3
Lotus
(2.3)
(2.1)
Tivoli
15.0
15.1
Rational
4.8
4.8
Other middleware
4,568
4,602
(0.7)
(1.2)
Operating systems
2,282
2,163
5.5
4.9
Other
1,759
2,108
(16.6)
(17.0)
Software revenue of $22,485 million increased 5.1 percent 
(5 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to 2009. Adjusting 
for the divested PLM operations, revenue grew at 8.1 percent (8 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010. Software revenue growth continued 
to be led by the key branded middleware products with strong 
performance in the areas of business commerce, business analytics, 
storage management and business integration. Overall, the Software 
business performed well in 2010, delivering over $9 billion in segment 
pre-tax profit, an increase of 12 percent as reported versus 2009. 
In addition, the company continued to invest in additional capabilities 
for the software business through both organic investments and the 
completion of 13 acquisitions in 2010.
	
Key branded middleware revenue increased 10.8 percent 
(11 percent adjusted for currency) and gained market share again in 
2010 as the Software business extended its lead in the middleware 
market. Software revenue continued to mix to the faster growing 
branded middleware which accounted for 62 percent of total software 
revenue in 2010, an increase of 3 points from 2009. Adjusted for 
currency, growth in 2010 was led by growth in WebSphere and Tivoli. 
The Software business continued to benefit from the company’s 
growth initiatives, with business analytics revenue up year over year.
	
WebSphere revenue increased 20.8 percent (21 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2010 with strong performance throughout the year. 
Application Servers software had revenue growth of 12.0 percent 
(12 percent adjusted for currency) year to year. Business Integration 
software, which includes the ILOG, Sterling Commerce and Lombardi 
acquisitions, delivered strong revenue growth in 2010, up 33.6 percent 
(33 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Information Management revenue increased 8.6 percent 
(8 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus the prior year 
with revenue growth in both Information Management solutions 
and infrastructure offerings. The software business continued to 
expand its Information Management capabilities through strategic 
acquisitions, as the company completed the acquisitions of Netezza, 
OpenPages, PSS Systems, Clarity Systems and Initiate Systems.
	
Tivoli revenue increased 15.0 percent (15 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2010 when compared to 2009, with revenue growth in 
each element of the Integrated Service management strategy—
Systems management, Security and Storage management. Tivoli 
provides clients an integrated approach to service management.
	
Rational revenue increased 4.8 percent (5 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2010 versus 2009.
	
Operating systems revenue increased 5.5 percent (5 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to 2009, driven by Power 
Systems and System x related products.
	
Other software revenue decreased 16.6 percent (17 percent 
adjusted for currency) due primarily to the divestiture of the PLM 
operations in the first quarter of 2010. 


===== PAGE 51 =====
49
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010*
2009*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Software
External gross profit
$19,774 
$18,553 
6.6%
External gross profit margin
87.9%
86.7%
1.2 pts.
Pre-tax income
$  9,466
$  8,319
13.8%
Pre-tax margin
37.2%
34.6%
2.7 pts.
Pre-tax income-normalized**
$  8,972
$  8,229
9.0%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
35.3%
34.2%
1.1 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. 
**	Excludes $98 million and $17 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and $(591) million related to the PLM gain in 
the first quarter of 2010 and $(106) million related to the Geodis gain in the first quarter 
of 2009.
Software gross profit of $19,774 million in 2010 increased 6.6 percent 
versus 2009, driven primarily by the year-to-year growth in software 
revenue. The improvement in the gross profit margin was primarily 
driven by the divestiture of the lower gross margin PLM revenue. 
The Software segment delivered $9,466 million of pre-tax profit in 
2010, an increase of $1,147 million, or 13.8 percent, versus 2009. The 
segment pre-tax profit margin expanded 2.7 points to 37.2 percent. 
On a normalized basis, segment pre-tax income increased 9.0 percent 
and segment pre-tax margin expanded 1.1 points to 35.3 percent.
Systems and Technology
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Systems and Technology external revenue
$17,973 
$16,190 
11.0%
11.1%
System z
16.4%
17.7%
Power Systems
(8.4)
(8.5)
System x
27.5
26.8
Storage
7.6
8.1
Retail Store Solutions
22.4
23.2
Total Systems
9.5
9.6
Microelectronics OEM
24.8
24.7
Systems and Technology revenue increased 11.0 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. Revenue performance 
was driven by double-digit growth in System z, System x, Micro-
electronics OEM, Storage disk products and Retail Store Solutions. 
Systems and Technology had very strong performance in the growth 
markets, which grew 20 percent (19 percent adjusted for currency), 
driven by the BRIC countries which increased 29 percent (28 percent 
adjusted for currency). The company gained share in high-end servers, 
while total servers and storage held share.
	
System z revenue increased 16.4 percent (18 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The increase in revenue was driven 
by the new mainframe product introduced in the third quarter and 
strong performance in both the growth markets and major markets. 
MIPS (millions of instructions per second) shipments increased 
22 percent in 2010 versus 2009. This performance reflected the 
value and innovation System z delivers to the company’s clients. The 
new z Enterprise 196 server delivers 40 percent more performance 
than the prior generation mainframe, driven by the world’s fastest 
processor which operates at more than 5 gigahertz. 
	
Power Systems revenue decreased 8.4 percent (9 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. Revenue increased 
in the fourth quarter 1.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) 
as the company benefited from new POWER7 products which were 
introduced late in the third quarter. Although revenue declined in 
2010, Power Systems gained share and continued to be the market 
share leader. The decrease in revenue was primarily driven by high-
end servers which declined 26 percent (27 percent adjusted 
for currency), partially offset by increases in midrange systems of 
7 percent (7 percent adjusted for currency) and blades 7 percent 
(7 percent adjusted for currency). The company had over 1,000 
competitive unit displacements in 2010, which drove approximately 
$1 billion of business. Approximately 60 percent of these wins came 
from Oracle/Sun UNIX installed accounts and 30 percent from Hewlett-
Packard installed accounts. In addition, the company also drove x86 
consolidations to Power Systems, with over 100 competitive wins. 


===== PAGE 52 =====
50
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Geographic Revenue
In addition to the revenue presentation by reportable segment, the company also measures revenue performance on a geographic basis. 
The following geographic, regional and country-specific revenue performance excludes OEM revenue, which is discussed separately below.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent Change 
Adjusted for 
Currency
Total revenue
$99,870 
$95,758 
4.3%
3.3%
Geographies
$97,060 
$93,477 
3.8%
2.8%
Americas
42,044
40,184
4.6
3.5
Europe/Middle East/Africa
31,866
32,583
(2.2)
0.8
Asia Pacific
23,150
20,710
11.8
4.7
Major markets
1.1%
1.0%
Growth markets
16.0%
10.9%
BRIC countries
22.8%
18.4%
Total geographic revenue increased 3.8 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) to $97,060 million in 2010 when compared to 2009, with 
constant currency growth in each of the geographic areas and markets. Overall performance was driven by the growth markets. 
	
System x revenue increased 27.5 percent (27 percent adjusted 
for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. In the growth markets, revenue 
increased 30 percent versus the prior year. High-end System x revenue 
increased 22 percent (21 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 
versus 2009, while total server revenue increased 27 percent 
(27 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. System x 
blades revenue increased 20 percent (20 percent adjusted for 
currency) versus the prior year.
	
Storage revenue increased 7.6 percent (8 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2010 versus the prior year. In the growth markets, storage 
revenue grew 21 percent year over year (21 percent adjusted for 
currency). Total disk revenue increased 13 percent (14 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The increase was driven 
by strength in enterprise disk products which increased 16.4 percent 
(17 percent adjusted for currency) led by XIV and DS8000. Through 
December 2010, XIV added over 975 new customers since the 
acquisition in the fourth quarter of 2007. Tape revenue declined 
6 percent in 2010 versus 2009.
	
Microelectronics OEM revenue increased 24.8 percent (25 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. The company had strong 
revenue growth from its OEM customers in networking, game 
consoles and wireless communications.
	
Retail Stores Solutions revenue increased 22.4 percent (23 percent 
adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009 as the company extended 
its leadership position as a point of sale provider. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010*
2009*
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Systems and Technology
External gross profit
$6,856 
$6,069 
13.0%
External gross profit margin
38.1%
37.5%
0.7 pts.
Pre-tax income
$1,456 
$1,298 
12.1%
Pre-tax margin
7.8%
7.6%
0.2 pts.
Pre-tax income—normalized**
$1,513 
$1,238 
22.2%
Pre-tax margin—normalized
8.1%
7.2%
0.8 pts.
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
**	Excludes $57 million and $4 million of workforce rebalancing charges in the first 
quarter of 2010 and 2009, respectively, and $(64) million related to the Geodis gain 
in the first quarter of 2009. 
The increase in external gross profit for 2010 versus 2009 was due 
to improved operating leverage driven by higher revenue.
	
Overall gross margin increased 0.7 points in 2010 versus the prior 
year. The increase was primarily driven by improved margins in Micro-
electronics (1.6 points), System x (0.8 points) and Storage (0.3 points), 
partially offset by a decline due to revenue mix (0.9 points) and lower 
margins in Power Systems (0.6 points) and System z (0.5 points).
	
Systems and Technology’s pre-tax income increased 22.2 percent 
in 2010 on a normalized basis when compared to the prior year. 
Pre-tax margin increased 0.8 points in 2010 on a normalized basis 
versus 2009. 
Global Financing
See pages 63 through 67 for an analysis of Global Financing’s 
segment results.


===== PAGE 53 =====
51
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total Expense and Other Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent/
Margin 
Change
Total consolidated expense  
and other (income)
$26,291 
$25,647 
2.5%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(253)
(285)
(11.3)
Acquisition-related charges
(46)
(9)
NM
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
210
250
(15.9) 
Total operating (non-GAAP)  
expense and other (income)
$26,202
$25,603
2.3%
Total consolidated  
expense-to-revenue ratio
26.3%
26.8%
(0.5) pts.
Operating (non-GAAP)  
expense-to-revenue ratio
26.2%
26.7%
(0.5) pts.
NM—Not meaningful
Total expense and other (income) increased 2.5 percent in 2010 
compared to the prior year. Total operating (non-GAAP) expense 
and other (income) increased 2.3 percent in 2010 versus 2009. The 
key drivers of the year-to-year change in total expense and other 
(income) for both expense presentations were approximately:
•	
Acquisitions*	
3	 points
•	
Currency**	
1	 point
•	
Base expense	 (2)	points
*	 Includes acquisitions completed in prior 12-month period. 
**	Reflects impacts of tranlation and hedging programs. 
The company’s expense-to-revenue ratio improved in both presentations 
in 2010 versus 2009. The increase in total expense and other income 
was primarily driven by the company’s acquisitions and the effects 
of currency. 
	
Base expense improved approximately 2 points in both 
presentations in 2010 when compared to the prior year. The company 
has had an ongoing focus on increasing efficiency and driving 
productivity across the business. Savings from productivity initiatives 
result in improved profitability and enables continued investments 
in innovation and key growth initiatives.
	
Examples of the company’s investments in 2010 include:
•	
Industry sales skills to support Smarter Planet
•	
Sales capabilities for business analytics, including  
the establishment of eight analytics solution centers
•	
Development, sales and marketing to support new high-end 
technology solutions in mainframes and POWER7
•	
Sales resources and sales enablement to drive growth  
market performance
•	
Acquisition of 17 companies adding significant capabilities
For additional information regarding total expense and other income, 
see the following analyses by category.
	
Revenue from the major markets increased 1.1 percent (1 percent 
adjusted for currency) and was led by growth in the U.S., the U.K. 
and France. Performance in the major markets improved in the 
second half of 2010. The major markets grew 0.3 percent (declined 
1 percent adjusted for currency) in the first half and increased 
1.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in the second half. 
Revenue from the growth markets increased 16.0 percent (11 percent 
adjusted for currency). The growth markets performance, adjusted 
for currency, outpaced the more established major markets by 
10 points in 2010 and geographic revenue contribution increased to 
21 percent, 2 points higher versus 2009. The combined revenue in 
the BRIC countries, which represented approximately 40 percent of 
the growth markets in 2010, increased 22.8 percent (18 percent 
adjusted for currency) with growth in each of the four countries 
and strong growth in China and Russia. The company continued to 
make investments in these markets to drive market expansion 
and infrastructure development. The growth markets performance 
overall was broad based with double-digit growth at constant 
currency in a total of 40 growth market countries.
	
Americas revenue increased 4.6 percent (3 percent adjusted for 
currency) in 2010. Within the major market countries, the U.S. increased 
2.7 percent and Canada increased 10.4 percent (flat adjusted for 
currency). Revenue in the Latin America growth markets increased 
15.4 percent (14 percent adjusted for currency) led by Brazil with 
growth of 20.4 percent (12 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Europe/Middle East/Africa (EMEA) revenue decreased 2.2 percent 
(increased 1 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 compared to 
2009. In the major market countries, revenue increased in the U.K. 
4.5 percent (6 percent adjusted for currency), while revenue declined 
in Spain 5.6 percent (1 percent adjusted for currency), Germany 
7.7 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) and Italy 8.7 percent 
(4 percent adjusted for currency). In France, revenue declined 1.8 percent 
as reported, but increased 4 percent at constant currency. Russia 
revenue increased 49.0 percent (48 percent adjusted for currency).
	
Asia Pacific revenue increased 11.8 percent (5 percent adjusted 
for currency) year over year. Asia Pacific growth market countries 
increased 18.3 percent (11 percent adjusted for currency), led by 
growth in China and India. China revenue increased 23.4 percent 
(23 percent adjusted for currency) and India revenue increased 
19.2 percent (13 percent adjusted for currency). Japan revenue 
increased 5.0 percent as reported but declined 2 percent adjusted 
for currency in 2010 compared to the prior year.
	
OEM revenue of $2,811 million in 2010 increased 23.3 percent 
(23 percent adjusted for currency) compared to 2009 driven by 
growth in the Microelectronics OEM business.


===== PAGE 54 =====
52
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other (Income) and Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Other (income) and expense
Foreign currency transaction  
losses/(gains)
$ 303
$    (1)
NM
(Gains)/losses on  
derivative instruments
(239)
(12)
NM
Interest income
(92)
(94)
(2.3)%
Net (gains)/losses from securities  
and investment assets
31
112
(72.1)
Other
(790)
(357)
121.2
Total consolidated other  
(income) and expense
$(787)
$(351)
124.5%
Non-operating adjustment
Acquisition-related charges
(4)
(1)
277.4
Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense
$(791)
$(352)
125.0%
NM—Not meaningful
Other (income) and expense was income of $787 million in 2010, an 
increase in income of $436 million year to year. The increase in 
income was primarily driven by several key factors reflected in Other 
in the table above: the net gain from the PLM transaction in the first 
quarter of 2010 ($591 million); a net gain associated with the disposition 
of a joint venture in third quarter of 2010 ($57 million) versus a gain 
from the divestiture of the core logistics operations to Geodis in the 
first quarter of 2009 ($298 million); and a provision for losses related 
to a joint venture investment ($119 million) recorded in the second 
quarter of 2009. In addition, foreign currency rate volatility drove higher 
foreign currency transaction losses ($304 million) and increased gains 
on derivative instruments ($227 million). Operating (non-GAAP) other 
(income) and expense reflected increased income of $439 million in 
2010 compared to 2009 driven by the same factors.
Research, Development and Engineering
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Total consolidated research, 
development and engineering
$6,026 
$5,820 
3.5%
Non-operating adjustment
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
126
123
2.6
Operating (non-GAAP) research, 
development and engineering
$6,152 
$5,943 
3.5%
The company continued to invest in research and development, 
focusing its investments on high-value, high-growth opportunities 
and to extend its technology leadership. Total research, development 
and engineering (RD&E) expense increased 3.5 percent in 2010 
versus 2009, primarily driven by acquisitions (up 2 points) and 
Selling, General and Administrative
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Selling, general and administrative  
expense
Selling, general and  
administrative—other
$18,585 
$17,872 
4.0%
Advertising and promotional expense
1,337
1,255
6.6
Workforce rebalancing charges
641
474
35.3
Retirement-related costs
494
503
(1.7)
Amortization of acquired  
intangibles assets
253
285
(11.3)
Stock-based compensation
488
417
16.9
Bad debt expense
40
147
(72.5)
Total consolidated selling, general 
and administrative expense
$21,837
$20,952
4.2%
Non-operating adjustments
Amortization of acquired        
intangible assets
(253)
(285)
(11.3)
Acquisition-related charges
(41)
(8)
NM
Non-operating retirement-related 
(costs)/income
84
127
(33.8)
Operating (non-GAAP)  
selling, general and 
administrative expense
$21,628
$20,787
4.0%
NM—Not meaningful
Total selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense increased 
4.2 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency) in 2010 versus 2009. 
Overall, the increase was driven by acquisition-related spending 
(3 points) and currency impacts (1 point), while base expense was 
essentially flat. Workforce reductions expense increased $167 million 
due primarily to actions taken in the first quarter of 2010, with the 
majority of the spending in Europe and Asia Pacific. Bad debt expense 
decreased $107 million reflecting the improved credit environment. 
The allowance for credit losses coverage rate at December 31, 2010 
was 1.8 percent, a decrease of 20 basis points from year-end 2009. 
Operating (non-GAAP) SG&A expense increased 4.0 percent 
(3 percent adjusted for currency) primarily driven by the same factors.


===== PAGE 55 =====
53
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
currency impacts (up 1 point). RD&E investments represented 
6.0 percent of total revenue in 2010, compared to 6.1 percent in 2009. 
Operating (non-GAAP) RD&E expense increased 3.5 percent in 2010 
compared to the prior year driven by the same factors.
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Sales and other transfers of 
intellectual property
$   203
$   228
(10.8)%
Licensing/royalty-based fees
312
370
(15.6)
Custom development income
638
579
10.3
Total
$1,154 
$1,177 
(1.9)%
The timing and amount of sales and other transfers of IP may 
vary significantly from period to period depending upon timing of 
divestitures, industry consolidation, economic conditions and the 
timing of new patents and know-how development. There were no 
significant individual IP transactions in 2010 or 2009.
Interest Expense
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2010
2009
Yr.-to-Yr. 
Percent 
Change
Interest expense 
Total
$368
$402
(8.5)%
The decrease in interest expense was primarily due to lower average 
interest rates in 2010 versus 2009, partially offset by higher average 
debt balances in 2010 versus 2009. Total debt at December 31, 2010 
was $28.6 billion; an increase of $2.5 billion from the prior year-end 
position. Interest expense is presented in cost of financing in the 
Consolidated Statement of Earnings if the related external borrowings 
are to support the Global Financing external business. Overall interest 
expense for 2010 was $923 million, a decrease of $185 million 
versus 2009.
Income Taxes
The effective tax rate for 2010 was 24.8 percent, compared with 
26.0 percent in 2009. The operating (non-GAAP) tax rate for 2010 
was 24.4 percent compared to 25.8 percent in 2009. The 1.2 point 
decrease in the as-reported effective tax rate was primarily driven 
by a more favorable geographic mix of pre-tax income and incentives 
(2.5 points), the increased utilization of foreign tax credits (4.1 points) 
and the completion in 2010 of the U.S. federal income tax examination 
for the years 2006 and 2007 including the associated reserve 
redeterminations (6.4 points). These benefits were partially offset by 
tax charges related to certain intercompany payments made by foreign 
subsidiaries (6.6 points), the tax impact of certain business restructuring 
transactions (2.7 points) and the tax costs associated with the 
intercompany licensing of certain intellectual property (2.9 points). 
The remaining items were individually insignificant.
Financial Position
Key drivers in the company’s balance sheet and total cash flows in 
2010 compared to 2009 are highlighted below.
 	
Total assets increased $4,430 million ($3,609 million adjusted 
for currency) from December 31, 2009, driven by: 
•	
Increased goodwill ($4,946 million) and intangible assets  
($975 million) driven by 2010 acquisitions;
•	
Higher level of total receivables ($1,337 million) and increased 
total other assets ($679 million); partially offset by
•	
Decreases in cash and cash equivalents ($1,522 million)  
and marketable securities ($800 million); and
•	
Lower total deferred taxes ($1,140 million).
Total liabilities increased $4,012 million ($3,673 million adjusted for 
currency) from December 31, 2009 driven by:
•	
Higher total debt ($2,525 million);
•	
Increase in deferred income ($839 million); and an
•	
Increase in compensation and benefits ($523 million).
Total equity of $23,172 million increased $418 million from the prior 
year-end balance as a result of:
•	
Higher retained earnings ($11,632 million); 
•	
Increase in common stock ($3,608 million);
•	
Increase in foreign currency translation adjustments  
($643 million); and an
•	
Increase in net unrealized gains on hedge of cash flow  
derivatives ($385 million); partially offset by an
•	
Increase in treasury stock ($14,918 million); and
•	
Decrease in retirement-related items ($992 million).
The company generated $19,549 million in cash flow from operations, 
a decrease of $1,224 million, compared to 2009, primarily driven by 
a decrease in cash from total receivables ($2,620 million), partially 
offset by the increase in net income ($1,408 million). Net cash used 
in investing activities of $8,507 million was $1,778 million higher than 
2009, primarily due to increased acquisitions ($4,728 million), 
decreased cash from divestitures ($345 million) and increased net 
capital spending ($299 million), partially offset by the year-to-year 
net impacts related to marketable securities and other investments 
($3,753 million).
 	
Net cash used in financing activities of $12,429 million was 
$2,271 million lower versus 2009, primarily due to the net benefit 
from debt ($9,812 million) and an increase in cash from other 
common stock transactions ($722 million), partially offset by higher 
common stock repurchases ($7,946 million).


===== PAGE 56 =====
54
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
GAAP Reconciliation
The tables below provide a reconciliation of the company’s income statement results as reported under GAAP to its operating earnings 
presentation which is a non-GAAP measure. The company’s calculation of operating earnings, as presented, may differ from similarly titled 
measures reported by other companies. Please refer to the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for the company’s rationale 
for presenting operating earnings information.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2010:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$46,014 
$ 260 
$ (204)
$46,070 
Gross profit margin
46.1%
0.3 pts.
(0.2) pts.
46.1%
SG&A
$21,837 
$(294)
$    84 
$21,628 
RD&E
6,026
0
126
6,152
Other (income) and expense
(787)
(4)
0
(791)
Total expense and other (income)
26,291
(298)
210
26,202
Pre-tax income 
19,723
558
(414)
19,867
Pre-tax income margin
19.7%
0.6 pts.
(0.4) pts.
19.9%
Provision for income taxes*
$  4,890
$ 116 
$ (162)
$  4,844 
Effective tax rate
24.8%
(0.1) pts.
(0.3) pts.
24.4%
Net income
$14,833 
$ 443 
$ (253)
$15,023 
Net income margin
14.9%
0.4 pts.
(0.3) pts.
15.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$  11.52
$0.34 
$(0.20)
$  11.67 
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31, 2009:
GAAP
Acquisition-
related 
Adjustments
Retirement-
related 
Adjustments
Operating 
(non-GAAP)
Gross profit
$43,785 
$ 204 
$ (259)
$43,730 
Gross profit margin
45.7%
0.2 pts.
(0.3) pts.
45.7%
SG&A
$20,952 
$(293)
$  127 
$20,787 
RD&E
5,820
0
123
5,943
Other (income) and expense
(351)
(1)
0
(352)
Total expense and other (income)
25,647
(294)
250
25,603
Pre-tax income 
18,138
498
(509)
18,126
Pre-tax income margin
18.9%
0.5 pts.
(0.5) pts.
18.9%
Provision for income taxes*
$  4,713 
$ 141 
$ (179)
$  4,675 
Effective tax rate
26.0%
0.1pts.
(0.3) pts.
25.8%
Net income
$13,425 
$ 357 
$ (330)
$13,452 
Net income margin
14.0%
0.4 pts.
(0.3) pts.
14.0%
Diluted earnings per share
$  10.01 
$0.27 
$(0.25)
$  10.03 
* The tax impact on operating (non-GAAP) pre-tax income is calculated under the same accounting principles applied to the GAAP pre-tax income which employs an annual 
effective tax rate method to the results.


===== PAGE 57 =====
55
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Other Information
Looking Forward
In 2011, the company delivered revenue of $106.9 billion, a year-to-
year increase of 7.1 percent (3 percent adjusted for currency), net 
income of $15.9 billion, up 6.9 percent and earnings per share of 
$13.06, an increase of 13.4 percent compared to 2010. Operating 
(non-GAAP) earnings per share was $13.44, an increase of 15.2 percent 
versus the prior year. The 2011 results put the company well on track 
to its 2015 operating earnings per share road map objective.  
	
The company measures the success of its business model over 
the long term, not any individual quarter or year. The company’s 
strategies, investments and actions are all taken with an objective 
of optimizing long-term performance.
	
In May 2010, the company met with investors and introduced a 
new road map for earnings per share in 2015. The objective of the 
new road map for growth is to achieve at least $20 of operating 
(non-GAAP) earnings per diluted share in 2015. Consistent with 
the prior road map, the company has identified the major drivers 
of financial performance: revenue growth, margin expansion and 
common stock share repurchase. The revenue growth will come 
from a combination of base revenue growth, a shift to faster 
growing businesses and from acquisitions closed between 2010 
and 2015. The contribution from margin expansion will be driven 
by the mix of higher margin businesses and enterprise productivity. 
The company will also continue to return value to its shareholders, 
with approximately $50 billion of share repurchase and $20 billion 
of dividends expected during the road map period. Overall, the 
company expects fairly balanced contribution from revenue growth, 
margin expansion and share repurchase.  
	
Looking forward, the company expects continued opportunity 
in the growth markets and in the higher value solutions, including 
business analytics, Smarter Planet and cloud computing, where the 
company believes its enterprise clients will continue to focus.  The 
company is confident in its ability to continue to leverage its business 
model to expand margin, grow profit, generate cash and return value 
to shareholders. In January 2012, the company disclosed that it is 
expecting GAAP earnings of at least $14.16 and operating (non-
GAAP) earnings of at least $14.85 per diluted share for the full year 
2012. The operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share expectation 
excludes acquisition-related charges of $0.43 per share and non-
operating retirement-related costs of $0.26 per share. This 
expectation results in an increase year to year of 8 percent in GAAP 
earnings per share and an increase of 10 percent year to year in 
operating (non-GAAP) earnings per share which keeps the company 
on track to its 2015 objective.  
	
From a segment perspective, the Software business delivered 
excellent results in 2011 and goes into 2012 with momentum and a 
strong set of opportunities. The company’s acquisitions in both 2010 
and in 2011 performed well in 2011 and contributed to the Software 
business performance. The company expects the Software business 
to generate double-digit pre-tax income growth in 2012. Within Global 
Services, the company expects approximately 3 percent revenue 
growth from the backlog and this would represent approximately 
70 percent of the services revenue for the full year. The balance of 
the revenue would come from new signings and base growth. While 
not expected, even if new signings and base growth were flat in 
2012, then 70 percent of the 3 percent would generate 2 points of 
revenue growth in total Services. The company demonstrated in 
2011 that it could deliver double-digit pre-tax income growth on that 
revenue base and expects in 2012 to execute a similar strategy 
to drive for double-digit profit growth again in the Services 
business. The Systems and Technology business will face a tough 
comparison in the first half of 2012 driven primarily by the System z 
mainframe product cycle performance in the first half of 2011. With 
new product announcements expected in 2012, by the second half 
of the year, the company expects Systems and Technology to return 
to mid single-digit revenue growth and double-digit profit growth. 
	
Within its EPS expectation for 2012, the company expects profit 
growth to be slightly skewed—one to two points—in the second 
half of the year compared to the first half. This differentiation is driven 
by the expectations for the Systems and Technology business 
discussed above. Overall, the company’s expectation for 2012 
is consistent with its business model: revenue growth, margin 
expansion driven by a mix to software and continued productivity 
and prudent use of cash to drive investments, acquisitions and share 
repurchase. The company will continue to improve its portfolio 
through acquisitions and divestitures and will continue to invest in 
market opportunities and drive productivity. The company will 
continue to rebalance its workforce to opportunities and skills aligned 
with its key investments and hire resources to drive growth initiatives. 
The company expects a higher level of workforce rebalancing 
charges in 2012, similar to the amount incurred in 2010. The company 
expects to offset this expense within net income consistent with its 
earnings expectation for 2012.
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the company’s 
receivables, and therefore the allowance for credit losses. The 
company will continue to apply its rigorous credit policies and analysis, 
and will also continue to monitor the current economic environment, 
particularly in Europe. At December 31, 2011, total receivables in 
Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece and Spain were approximately $2.6 
billion, net of allowances, and represented approximately 7 percent of 
total net trade and financing accounts receivables. In the fourth quarter 
of 2011, the company increased its allowance for credit losses and will 
continue to monitor potential exposures in these countries in 
conjunction with the application of its credit policies. 
	
The company expects 2012 pre-tax retirement-related plan 
cost to be approximately $2.3 billion, an increase of approximately 
$500 million compared to 2011. This estimate reflects current pension 
plan assumptions at December 31, 2011. Within total retirement-
related plan cost, operating retirement-related plan cost is expected 
to be approximately $1.9 billion, approximately flat versus 2011. 
Non-operating retirement-related plan cost is expected to be 
approximately $0.4 billion versus income of $0.1 billion in 2011. 
See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 121 to 135 for 
additional information.
	
Effective January 1, 2012, the company will implement a new 
accounting standard issued by the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board which amends existing guidance and disclosure for fair value 
measurements. The company has evaluated the new guidance and 
does not expect a material impact on the consolidated financial results. 
See note B, “Accounting Changes,” on page 87 for additional information.


===== PAGE 58 =====
56
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The company has consistently generated strong cash flow from 
operations, providing a source of funds ranging between $16.1 billion 
and $20.8 billion per year over the past five years. The company 
provides for additional liquidity through several sources: maintaining 
an adequate cash balance, access to global funding sources, a 
committed global credit facility and other committed and uncommitted 
lines of credit worldwide. The following table provides a summary of 
the major sources of liquidity for the years ended December 31, 2007 
through 2011.
Cash Flow and Liquidity Trends
($ in billions)
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
Net cash from  
operating activities
$19.8 
$19.5 
$20.8 
$18.8 
$16.1 
Cash and short-term  
marketable securities
$11.9 
$11.7 
$14.0 
$12.9 
$16.1 
Committed global  
credit facilities
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
$10.0 
The major rating agencies’ ratings on the company’s debt securities 
at December 31, 2011 appear in the following table and remain 
unchanged from December 31, 2010. The company’s debt securities 
do not contain any acceleration clauses which could change the 
scheduled maturities of the obligation. In addition, the company does 
not have “ratings trigger” provisions in its debt covenants or 
documentation, which would allow the holders to declare an event 
of default and seek to accelerate payments thereunder in the event 
of a change in credit rating. The company’s contractual agreements 
governing derivative instruments contain standard market clauses 
which can trigger the termination of the agreement if the company’s 
credit rating were to fall below investment grade. At December 31, 2011, 
the fair value of those instruments that were in a liability position was 
$531 million, before any applicable netting, and this position is subject 
to fluctuations in fair value period to period based on the level of the 
company’s outstanding instruments and market conditions. The 
company has no other contractual arrangements that, in the event 
of a change in credit rating, would result in a material adverse effect 
on its financial position or liquidity.
Standard 
& Poor’s
Moody’s 
Investors 
Service
Fitch 
Ratings
Senior long-term debt
A+
Aa3
A+
Commercial paper
A-1
Prime-1
F1
The company prepares its Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows 
in accordance with applicable accounting standards for cash flow 
presentation on page 73 and highlights causes and events underlying 
sources and uses of cash in that format on page 36. For purposes 
of running its business, the company manages, monitors and analyzes 
cash flows in a different format.
	
Management uses a free cash flow measure to evaluate the 
company’s operating results, plan share repurchase levels, evaluate 
strategic investments and assess the company’s ability and need 
to incur and service debt. Free cash flow is not a defined term under 
GAAP and it should not be inferred that the entire free cash flow 
amount is available for discretionary expenditures. The company 
defines free cash flow as net cash from operating activities less the 
change in Global Financing receivables and net capital expenditures, 
including the investment in software. As discussed on page 24, a 
key objective of the Global Financing business is to generate strong 
returns on equity. Increasing receivables is the basis for growth in a 
financing business. Accordingly, management considers Global 
Financing receivables as a profit-generating investment, not as working 
capital that should be minimized for efficiency. After considering 
Global Financing receivables as an investment, the remaining net 
operational cash flow less net capital expenditures is viewed by the 
company as free cash flow.
	
From the perspective of how management views cash flow, in 
2011, free cash flow was $16.6 billion, an increase of $0.3 billion 
compared to 2010; excluding the impact of higher net income tax 
payments driven by audit settlements in 2011, compared to the prior 
year, free cash flow would have increased year to year by approximately 
$1.1 billion, which approximates the company’s net income growth 
for 2011.
	
Over the past five years, the company generated over $74 billion 
in free cash flow. During that period, the company invested over 
$16 billion in strategic acquisitions and returned over $81 billion to 
shareholders through dividends and share repurchases. The amount 
of prospective returns to shareholders in the form of dividends and 
share repurchases will vary based upon several factors including 
each year’s operating results, capital expenditure requirements, 
research and development investments and acquisitions, as well as 
the factors discussed below.
	
The company’s Board of Directors meets quarterly to consider 
the dividend payment. In the second quarter of 2011, the Board of 
Directors increased the company’s quarterly common stock dividend 
from $0.65 to $0.75 per share.


===== PAGE 59 =====
57
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
The table below represents the way in which management reviews cash flow as described above.
($ in billions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
Net cash from operating activities per GAAP
$ 19.8
$ 19.5 
$20.8
$ 18.8
$ 16.1 
Less: the change in Global Financing receivables
(0.8)
(0.7)
1.9
(0.0)
(1.3)
Net cash from operating activities, excluding Global Financing receivables
20.7
20.3
18.9
18.8
17.4
Capital expenditures, net
(4.1)
(4.0)
(3.7)
(4.5)
(5.0)
Free cash flow 
16.6
16.3
15.1
14.3
12.4
Acquisitions
(1.8)
(5.9)
(1.2)
(6.3)
(1.0)
Divestitures
0.0
0.1
0.4
0.1
0.3
Share repurchase
(15.0)
(15.4)
(7.4)
(10.6)
(18.8)
Dividends
(3.5)
(3.2)
(2.9)
(2.6)
(2.1)
Non-Global Financing debt
1.7
2.3
(4.7)
(3.2)
10.9
Other (includes Global Financing receivables and Global Financing debt) 
2.3
3.5
1.7
5.0
3.8
Change in cash, cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities
$   0.3
$  (2.3)
$  1.1
$  (3.2)
$   5.5
Events that could temporarily change the historical cash flow 
dynamics discussed above include significant changes in operating 
results, material changes in geographic sources of cash, unexpected 
adverse impacts from litigation, future pension funding requirements 
during periods of severe downturn in the capital markets or the 
timing of tax payments. Whether any litigation has such an adverse 
impact will depend on a number of variables, which are more 
completely described in note M, “Contingencies and Commitments,” 
on pages 112 to 114. With respect to pension funding, in 2011, the 
company contributed $798 million to its non-U.S. defined benefit 
plans, versus $865 million in 2010. As highlighted in the Contractual 
Obligations table on page 58, the company expects to make legally 
mandated pension plan contributions to certain non-U.S. plans of 
approximately $3.9 billion in the next five years. The 2012 contributions 
are currently expected to be approximately $800 million. Financial 
market performance and/or further weakening in the European 
sovereign debt credit environment in 2012 could increase the legally 
mandated minimum contributions in certain non-U.S. countries that 
require more frequent remeasurement of the funded status. The 
company is not quantifying any further impact from pension funding 
because it is not possible to predict future movements in the capital 
markets or pension plan funding regulations.
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 was enacted into law in 2006, 
and, among other things, increases the funding requirements for certain 
U.S. defined benefit plans beginning after December 31, 2007. No 
mandatory contribution is required for the U.S. defined benefit plan 
in 2012 as of December 31, 2011.
	
The company’s U.S. cash flows continue to be sufficient to fund 
its current domestic operations and obligations, including investing 
and financing activities such as dividends and debt service. The 
company’s U.S. operations generate substantial cash flows, and, 
in those circumstances where the company has additional cash 
requirements in the U.S., the company has several liquidity options 
available. These options include the ability to borrow funds at 
reasonable interest rates, utilizing its committed global credit facility, 
repatriating certain foreign earnings and calling intercompany loans 
that are in place with certain foreign subsidiaries. 
	
The company does earn a significant amount of its pre-tax 
income outside the U.S. The company’s policy is to indefinitely 
reinvest the undistributed earnings of its foreign subsidiaries, and 
accordingly, no provision for federal income taxes has been made 
on accumulated earnings of foreign subsidiaries. The company 
periodically repatriates a portion of these earnings to the extent that 
it does not incur an additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the 
deferred tax liability, if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested 
earnings is not practicable. While the company currently does not 
have a need to repatriate funds held by its foreign subsidiaries, if 
these funds are needed for operations and obligations in the U.S., 
the company could elect to repatriate these funds which could result 
in a reassessment of the company’s policy and increased tax expense.


===== PAGE 60 =====
58
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Contractual Obligations
($ in millions)
Total Contractual 
Payment Stream
Payments Due In
2012
2013-14
2015-16
After 2016
Long-term debt obligations
$26,616
$4,292
$  9,217
$3,185
$  9,921
Interest on long-term debt obligations
10,585
1,128
1,711
1,362
6,384
Capital (finance) lease obligations
86
19
41
21
5
Operating lease obligations
5,631
1,562
2,324
1,132
613
Purchase obligations
2,207
1,368
586
201
52
Other long-term liabilities
Minimum pension funding (mandated)*
3,900
800
1,500
1,600
—
Executive compensation
1,440
89
194
214
944
Long-term termination benefits
1,374
132
163
141
938
Tax reserves**
3,728
138
—
—
—
Other
1,250
64
88
86
1,011
Total
$56,817
$9,592
$15,824
$7,942
$19,868
*	 Represents future pension contributions that are mandated by local regulations or statute, all associated with non-U.S. qualified defined benefit and multi-employer pension 
plans. See note S, “Retirement-Related Benefits,” on pages 121 to 135 for additional information on the non-U.S. plans’ investment strategies and expected contributions and for 
information regarding the company’s total underfunded pension plans of $19,232 million at December 31, 2011. As the funded status on the plans will vary, obligations for mandated 
minimum pension payments after 2016 could not be reasonably estimated.
**	These amounts represent the liability for unrecognized tax benefits. The company estimates that approximately $138 million of the liability is expected to be settled within the next 
12 months. The settlement period for the noncurrent portion of the income tax liability cannot be reasonably estimated as the timing of the payments will depend on the progress 
of tax examinations with the various tax authorities; however, it is not expected to be due within the next 12 months. 
Total contractual obligations are reported in the table above excluding 
the effects of time value and therefore, may not equal the amounts 
reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
	
Purchase obligations include all commitments to purchase goods 
or services of either a fixed or minimum quantity that meet any of 
the following criteria: (1) they are noncancelable, (2) the company 
would incur a penalty if the agreement was canceled, or (3) the 
company must make specified minimum payments even if it does 
not take delivery of the contracted products or services (take-or-pay). 
If the obligation to purchase goods or services is noncancelable, the 
entire value of the contract is included in the table above. If the 
obligation is cancelable, but the company would incur a penalty if 
canceled, the dollar amount of the penalty is included as a purchase 
obligation. Contracted minimum amounts specified in take-or-pay 
contracts are also included in the table as they represent the portion 
of each contract that is a firm commitment.
	
In the ordinary course of business, the company enters into 
contracts that specify that the company will purchase all or a portion 
of its requirements of a specific product, commodity or service from 
a supplier or vendor. These contracts are generally entered into in 
order to secure pricing or other negotiated terms. They do not specify 
fixed or minimum quantities to be purchased and, therefore, the 
company does not consider them to be purchase obligations.
	
Interest on floating-rate debt obligations is calculated using the 
effective interest rate at December 31, 2011, plus the interest rate 
spread associated with that debt, if any. 
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
From time to time, the company may enter into off-balance sheet 
arrangements as defined by the SEC Financial Reporting Release 
67 (FRR-67), “Disclosure in Management’s Discussion and Analysis 
about Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements and Aggregate Con­tractual 
Obligations.”
	
At December 31, 2011, the company had no off-balance sheet 
arrangements that have, or are reasonably likely to have, a material 
current or future effect on financial condition, changes in financial 
condition, revenues or expenses, results of operations, liquidity, 
capital expenditures or capital resources. See the table above for 
the company’s contractual obligations and note M, “Contingencies 
and Commitments,” on pages 114 and 115, for detailed information 
about the company’s guarantees, financial commitments and 
indemnification arrangements. The company does not have retained 
interests in assets transferred to unconsolidated entities or other 
material off-balance sheet interests or instruments.
Critical Accounting Estimates
The application of GAAP requires the company to make estimates 
and assumptions about certain items and future events that directly 
affect its reported financial condition. The accounting estimates and 
assumptions discussed in this section are those that the company 
considers to be the most critical to its financial statements. An 
accounting estimate is considered critical if both (a) the nature of 
the estimate or assumption is material due to the levels of subjectivity 
and judgment involved, and (b) the impact within a reasonable range 
of outcomes of the estimate and assumption is material to the 
company’s financial condition. Senior management has discussed 


===== PAGE 61 =====
59
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
the development, selection and disclosure of these estimates with 
the Audit Committee of the company’s Board of Directors. The 
company’s significant accounting policies are described in note A, 
“Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 76 to 86.
	
A quantitative sensitivity analysis is provided where that information 
is reasonably available, can be reliably estimated and provides material 
information to investors. The amounts used to assess sensitivity 
(e.g., 1 percent, 10 percent, etc.) are included to allow users of the 
Annual Report to understand a general direction cause and effect 
of changes in the estimates and do not represent management’s 
predictions of variability. For all of these estimates, it should be noted 
that future events rarely develop exactly as forecasted, and estimates 
require regular review and adjustment.
Pension Assumptions
For the company’s defined benefit pension plans, the measurement 
of the benefit obligation to employees and net periodic pension 
(cost/income) requires the use of certain assumptions, including, 
among others, estimates of discount rates and expected return 
on plan assets.
	
Changes in the discount rate assumptions will impact the (gain)/
loss amortization and interest cost components of the net periodic 
pension cost/(income) calculation (see page 127 for information 
regarding the discount rate assumptions) and the projected benefit 
obligation (PBO). As presented on page 127, the company decreased 
the discount rate assumption for the IBM Personal Pension Plan 
(PPP), a U.S.-based defined benefit plan, by 80 basis points to 
4.20 percent on December 31, 2011. This change will increase pre-
tax cost and expense recognized in 2012 by an estimated $250 million. 
If the discount rate assumption for the PPP increased by 80 basis 
points on December 31, 2011, pre-tax cost and expense recognized 
in 2012 would have decreased by an estimated $265 million. Changes 
in the discount rate assumptions will impact the PBO which, in turn, 
may impact the company’s funding decisions if the PBO exceeds 
plan assets. Each 25 basis point increase or decrease in the 
discount rate will cause a corresponding decrease or increase, 
respectively, in the PPP’s PBO of an estimated $1.4 billion based 
upon December 31, 2011 data. The PPP’s PBO (after the decrease 
in discount rate presented on page 127) and plan assets as of 
December 31, 2011 are presented on page 125. 
	
The expected long-term return on plan assets is used in 
calculating the net periodic pension (income)/cost. See page 128 
for information regarding the expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption. Expected returns on plan assets are calculated 
based on the market-related value of plan assets, which recognizes 
changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically over a five-year 
period in the expected return on plan assets line in net periodic 
(income)/cost. The differences between the actual return on plan 
assets and expected return on plan assets are recognized as 
a component of actuarial gains/losses, which are recognized in 
net periodic (income)/cost over the service lives of the employees 
in the plan, provided such amounts exceed thresholds based 
upon the obligation or the value of plan assets, as provided by 
accounting standards.
	
To the extent the outlook for long-term returns changes such 
that management changes its expected long-term return on plan 
assets assumption, each 50 basis point increase or decrease in the 
expected long-term return on PPP plan assets assumption will have 
an estimated increase or decrease, respectively, of $253 million 
on the following year’s pre-tax net periodic pension (income)/ 
cost (based upon the PPP’s plan assets at December 31, 2011 
and assuming no contributions are made in 2012).
	
The company may voluntarily make contributions or be required, 
by law, to make contributions to its pension plans. Actual results that 
differ from the estimates may result in more or less future company 
funding into the pension plans than is planned by management. 
Impacts of these types of changes on the company’s pension plans 
in other countries worldwide will vary depending upon the status of 
each respective plan.
Revenue Recognition
Application of the various accounting principles in GAAP related to 
the measurement and recognition of revenue requires the company 
to make judgments and estimates. Specifically, complex arrangements 
with nonstandard terms and conditions may require significant 
contract interpretation to determine the appropriate accounting, 
including whether the deliverables specified in a multiple element 
arrangement should be treated as separate units of accounting. 
Other significant judgments include determining whether IBM or a 
reseller is acting as the principal in a transaction and whether 
separate contracts are considered part of one arrangement.
	
Revenue recognition is also impacted by the company’s ability 
to estimate sales incentives, expected returns and collectibility. The 
company considers various factors, including a review of specific 
transactions, the creditworthiness of the customers, historical 
experience and market and economic conditions when calculating 
these provisions and allowances. Evaluations are conducted each 
quarter to assess the adequacy of the estimates. If these estimates 
were changed by 10 percent in 2011, net income would have been 
impacted by $85 million (excluding Global Financing receivables 
reserves discussed on page 65).
Costs to Complete Service Contracts
The company enters into numerous service contracts through its 
GTS and GBS businesses. During the contractual period, revenue, 
cost and profits may be impacted by estimates of the ultimate 
profitability of each contract, especially contracts for which the 
company uses the percentage-of-completion (POC) method of 
accounting. If at any time these estimates indicate the POC contract 
will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the remainder of 
the contract is recorded immediately in cost. The company performs 
ongoing profitability analyses of its services contracts in order to 
determine whether the latest estimates require updating. Key factors 
reviewed by the company to estimate the future costs to complete 
each contract are future labor costs, future product costs and 
expected productivity efficiencies. Contract loss provisions recorded 
as a component of other accrued expenses and liabilities were 
approximately $52 million and $23 million at December 31, 2011 and 
2010, respectively.


===== PAGE 62 =====
60
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Income Taxes
The company is subject to income taxes in the U.S. and numerous 
foreign jurisdictions. Significant judgments are required in determining 
the consolidated provision for income taxes.
	
During the ordinary course of business, there are many 
transactions and calculations for which the ultimate tax determination 
is uncertain. As a result, the company recognizes tax liabilities based 
on estimates of whether additional taxes and interest will be due. 
These tax liabilities are recognized when, despite the company’s 
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company 
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review 
by tax authorities. The company believes that its accruals for tax 
liabilities are adequate for all open audit years based on its assessment 
of many factors, including past experience and interpretations of tax 
law. This assessment relies on estimates and assumptions and may 
involve a series of complex judgments about future events. To the 
extent that new information becomes available which causes the 
company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy of existing 
tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact income tax 
expense in the period in which such determination is made.
	
Significant judgment is also required in determining any valuation 
allowance recorded against deferred tax assets. In assessing the 
need for a valuation allowance, management considers all available 
evidence for each jurisdiction including past operating results, 
estimates of future taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax 
planning strategies. In the event that the company changes its 
determination as to the amount of deferred tax assets that can be 
realized, the company will adjust its valuation allowance with a 
corresponding impact to income tax expense in the period in which 
such determination is made.
	
The consolidated provision for income taxes will change period-
to-period based on nonrecurring events, such as the settlement of 
income tax audits and changes in tax laws, as well as recurring 
factors including the geographic mix of income before taxes, the 
timing and amount of foreign dividend repatriation, state and local 
taxes and the effects of various global income tax strategies.
	
To the extent that the provision for income taxes increases/
decreases by 1 percent of income before income taxes, consolidated 
net income would have improved/decreased by $210 million in 2011.
Valuation of Assets
The application of business combination and impairment accounting 
requires the use of significant estimates and assumptions. The 
acquisition method of accounting for business combinations requires 
the company to estimate the fair value of assets acquired, liabilities 
assumed, and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree to properly 
allocate purchase price consideration between assets that are 
depreciated and amortized from goodwill. Impairment testing for 
assets, other than goodwill, requires the allocation of cash flows to 
those assets or group of assets and if required, an estimate of fair 
value for the assets or group of assets. The company’s estimates 
are based upon assumptions believed to be reasonable, but which 
are inherently uncertain and unpredictable. These valuations require 
the use of management’s assumptions, which would not reflect 
unanticipated events and circumstances that may occur.
Valuation of Goodwill
The company reviews goodwill for impairment annually and whenever 
events or changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value of 
goodwill may not be recoverable. In the fourth quarter of 2011, the 
company early adopted new Financial Accounting Standards Board 
guidance that simplifies how an entity tests goodwill for impairment. 
It provides an option to first assess qualitative factors to determine 
whether it is more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit 
is less than its carrying amount. 
	
The company assesses qualitative factors in each of its 
reporting units that carry goodwill. Among other relevant events 
and circumstances that affect the fair value of reporting units, 
the company assesses individual factors such as: 
•	
A significant adverse change in legal factors  
or the business climate
•	
An adverse action or assessment by a regulator
•	
Unanticipated competition
•	
A loss of key personnel
•	
A more-likely-than-not expectation that a reporting  
unit or a significant portion of a reporting unit will be sold  
or otherwise disposed of
The company assesses these qualitative factors to determine 
whether it is necessary to perform the two-step quantitative goodwill 
impairment test. Under the new guidance, this quantitative test 
is required only if the company concludes that it is more likely than 
not that a reporting unit’s fair value is less than its carrying amount. 
After performing the annual goodwill impairment qualitative analysis 
during the fourth quarter of 2011, the company determined it was 
not necessary to perform the two-step goodwill impairment test.
Loss Contingencies
The company is currently involved in various claims and legal 
proceedings. Quarterly, the company reviews the status of each 
significant matter and assesses its potential financial exposure. If 
the potential loss from any claim or legal proceeding is considered 
probable and the amount can be reasonably estimated, the company 
accrues a liability for the estimated loss. Significant judgment is 
required in both the determination of probability and the determination 
as to whether an exposure is reasonably estimable. Because of 
uncertainties related to these matters, accruals are based only on 
the best information available at the time. As additional information 
becomes available, the company reassesses the potential liability 
related to its pending claims and litigation and may revise its 
estimates. These revisions in the estimates of the potential liabilities 
could have a material impact on the company’s results of operations 
and financial position. 
Global Financing Receivables Allowance for Credit Losses 
The Global Financing business reviews its financing receivables 
port­folio at least quarterly in order to assess collectibility. A 
description of the methods used by management to estimate the 
amount of uncollectible receivables is included in note A, “Significant 
Accounting Policies,” on pages 85 and 86. Factors that could result 


===== PAGE 63 =====
61
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
in actual receivable losses that are materially different from the estim­
ated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant 
change in the economic health of a particular client that represents 
a concentration in Global Financing’s receivables portfolio.
	
To the extent that actual collectibility differs from management’s 
estimates currently provided for by 10 percent, Global Financing’s 
segment pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income 
before income taxes would be higher or lower by an estimated 
$35 million (using 2011 data), depending upon whether the actual 
collectibility was better or worse, respectively, than the estimates.
Residual Value 
Residual value represents the estimated fair value of equipment 
under lease as of the end of the lease. Residual value estimates 
impact the determination of whether a lease is classified as operating 
or capital. Global Financing estimates the future fair value of leased 
equipment by using historical models, analyzing the current market 
for new and used equipment and obtaining forward-looking product 
information such as marketing plans and technological innovations. 
Residual value estimates are periodically reviewed and “other than 
temporary” declines in estimated future residual values are recognized 
upon identification. Anticipated increases in future residual values 
are not recognized until the equipment is remarketed. Factors that 
could cause actual results to materially differ from the estimates 
include significant changes in the used-equipment market brought 
on by unforeseen changes in technology innovations and any 
resulting changes in the useful lives of used equipment.
	
To the extent that actual residual value recovery is lower than 
management’s estimates by 10 percent, Global Financing’s segment 
pre-tax income and the company’s consolidated income before 
income taxes for 2011 would have been lower by an estimated 
$104 million. If the actual residual value recovery is higher than 
management’s estimates, the increase in income will be realized at 
the end of lease when the equipment is remarketed.
Currency Rate Fluctuations
Changes in the relative values of non-U.S. currencies to the U.S. 
dollar affect the company’s financial results and financial position. 
At December 31, 2011, currency changes resulted in assets and 
liabilities denominated in local currencies being translated into fewer 
dollars than at year-end 2010. The company uses financial hedging 
instruments to limit specific currency risks related to financing 
transactions and other foreign currency-based transactions. Further 
discussion of currency and hedging appears in note D, “Financial 
Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100. 
	
Foreign currency fluctuations often drive operational responses 
that mitigate the simple mechanical translation of earnings. During 
periods of sustained movements in currency, the marketplace and 
competition adjust to the changing rates. For example, when pricing 
offerings in the marketplace, the company may use some of the 
advantage from a weakening U.S. dollar to improve its position 
competitively, and price more aggressively to win the business, 
essentially passing on a portion of the currency advantage to 
its customers. Competition will frequently take the same action. 
Consequently, the company believes that some of the currency-
based changes in cost impact the prices charged to clients. The 
company also maintains currency hedging programs for cash 
management purposes which mitigate, but do not eliminate, the 
volatility of currency impacts on the company’s financial results. 
	
The company translates revenue, cost and expense in its non-
U.S. operations at current exchange rates in the reported period. 
References to “adjusted for currency” or “constant currency” reflect 
adjustments based upon a simple constant currency mathematical 
translation of local currency results using the comparable prior 
period’s currency conversion rate. However, this constant currency 
methodology that the company utilizes to disclose this information 
does not incorporate any operational actions that management may 
take in reaction to fluctuating currency rates. Based on the currency 
rate movements in 2011, total revenue increased 7.1 percent as 
reported and 3.4 percent at constant currency versus 2010. On a 
pre-tax income basis, these translation impacts offset by the net 
impact of hedging activities resulted in a theoretical maximum 
(assuming no pricing or sourcing actions) increase of approximately 
$600 million in 2011. The same mathematical exercise resulted in a 
decrease of approximately $225 million in 2010. The company views 
these amounts as a theoretical maximum impact to its as-reported 
financial results. Considering the operational responses mentioned 
above, movements of exchange rates, and the nature and timing of 
hedging instruments, it is difficult to predict future currency impacts 
on any particular period, but the company believes it could be 
substantially less than the theoretical maximum given the competitive 
pressure in the marketplace.
	
For non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches that operate in U.S. 
dollars or whose economic environment is highly inflationary, 
translation adjustments are reflected in results of operations. Generally, 
the company manages currency risk in these entities by linking prices 
and contracts to U.S. dollars. The company continues to monitor 
the economic conditions in Venezuela. On December 30, 2010, the 
official rate for essential goods was eliminated, with no change to 
the SITME rate. The SITME rate remained constant throughout 2011. 
Future gains or losses from devaluation of the SITME rate are not 
expected to have a material impact given the size of the company’s 
operations in Venezuela (less than 1 percent of total 2010 and 
2011 revenue).
Market Risk
In the normal course of business, the financial position of the 
company is routinely subject to a variety of risks. In addition to the 
market risk associated with interest rate and currency movements 
on outstanding debt and non-U.S. dollar denominated assets and 
liabilities, other examples of risk include collectibility of accounts 
receivable and recoverability of residual values on leased assets.
	
The company regularly assesses these risks and has established 
policies and business practices to protect against the adverse effects 
of these and other potential exposures. As a result, the company 
does not anticipate any material losses from these risks.
	
The company’s debt, in support of the Global Financing business 
and the geographic breadth of the company’s operations, contains 
an element of market risk from changes in interest and currency 
rates. The company manages this risk, in part, through the use of a 


===== PAGE 64 =====
62
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
variety of financial instruments including derivatives, as explained in 
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100.
	
To meet disclosure requirements, the company performs a 
sensitivity analysis to determine the effects that market risk exposures 
may have on the fair values of the company’s debt and other financial 
instruments.
	
The financial instruments that are included in the sensitivity 
analysis comprise all of the company’s cash and cash equivalents, 
marketable securities, short-term and long-term loans, commercial 
financing and installment payment receivables, investments, long-
term and short-term debt and all derivative financial instruments. 
The company’s derivative financial instruments generally include 
interest rate swaps, foreign currency swaps and forward contracts.
	
To perform the sensitivity analysis, the company assesses the 
risk of loss in fair values from the effect of hypothetical changes in 
interest rates and foreign currency exchange rates on market-
sensitive instruments. The market values for interest and foreign 
currency exchange risk are computed based on the present value 
of future cash flows as affected by the changes in rates that 
are attributable to the market risk being measured. The discount 
rates used for the present value computations were selected 
based on market interest and foreign currency exchange rates in 
effect at December 31, 2011 and 2010. The differences in this 
comparison are the hypothetical gains or losses associated with 
each type of risk.
	
Information provided by the sensitivity analysis does not necessarily 
represent the actual changes in fair value that the company would 
incur under normal market conditions because, due to practical 
limitations, all variables other than the specific market risk factor are 
held constant. In addition, the results of the model are constrained 
by the fact that certain items are specifically excluded from the 
analysis, while the financial instruments relating to the financing or 
hedging of those items are included by definition. Excluded items 
include short-term and long-term receivables from sales-type and 
direct financing leases, forecasted foreign currency cash flows and 
the company’s net investment in foreign operations. As a consequence, 
reported changes in the values of some of the financial instruments 
impacting the results of the sensitivity analysis are not matched with 
the offsetting changes in the values of the items that those instruments 
are designed to finance or hedge.
	
The results of the sensitivity analysis at December 31, 2011, and 
2010, are as follows: 
Interest Rate Risk
At December 31, 2011, a 10 percent decrease in the levels of interest 
rates with all other variables held constant would result in a decrease 
in the fair market value of the company’s financial instruments of 
$310 million as compared with a decrease of $341 million at 
December 31, 2010. A 10 percent increase in the levels of interest 
rates with all other variables held constant would result in an increase 
in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of $290 million 
as compared to an increase of $315 million at December 31, 2010. 
Changes in the relative sensitivity of the fair value of the company’s 
financial instrument portfolio for these theoretical changes in the 
level of interest rates are primarily driven by changes in the company’s 
debt maturities, interest rate profile and amount. 
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
At December 31, 2011, a 10 percent weaker U.S. dollar against foreign 
currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result in an 
increase in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments of 
$1,303 million as compared with an increase of $546 million at 
December 31, 2010. Conversely, a 10 percent stronger U.S. dollar against 
foreign currencies, with all other variables held constant, would result 
in a decrease in the fair value of the company’s financial instruments 
of $1,303 million compared with a decrease of $546 million at 
December 31, 2010. The change in impact from 2010 to 2011 was 
comprised of: assets ($341 million), debt ($211 million) and derivatives 
($205 million). 
Financing Risks
See the “Description of Business” on page 24 for a discussion of the 
financing risks associated with the Global Financing business and 
management’s actions to mitigate such risks.
Cybersecurity
While neither a business segment nor a worldwide organization, the 
company’s approach on cybersecurity demonstrates its ability to 
adapt to a changing environment, as well as the depth and breadth 
of its global capabilities. IBM has leveraged its extensive knowledge 
and experience on cybersecurity matters to help its customers. The 
company has a suite of software solutions that showcase IBM’s 
broad capabilities in identity and access management, data security, 
application security, network security and endpoint security. IBM’s 
software solutions include a security intelligence dashboard that 
can collect information on customer IT security events and provide 
detailed information to customers about potential threats and security 
posture. The company’s services businesses offer professional 
solutions for security from assessment to deployment. In addition, 
the company offers managed and outsourced security solutions 
from multiple security operations centers around the world. Finally, 
security is embedded in a multitude of IBM offerings through secure 
engineering processes and by critical functions (encryption, access 
control, etc.) in servers, storage, software, services and other solutions. 
	
From an enterprise perspective, IBM has implemented a multi-
faceted approach involving people, tools, and processes to identify 
and address cybersecurity risks. The company has established 
policies and procedures that provide the foundation by which IBM’s 
infrastructure and data are managed, which help protect IBM and 
client data. In addition, the company utilizes a combination of online 
education, Web articles and other awareness initiatives to enable 
its workforce to be knowledgeable about cybersecurity threats and 
their responsibilities to identify and mitigate these risks. IBM performs 
ongoing assessments regarding its technical controls and its 
methods for identifying emerging risks related to cybersecurity. The 
company uses a layered approach with overlapping controls to 
defend against cybersecurity attacks on networks, end-user devices, 
data centers, and applications.


===== PAGE 65 =====
63
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Employees and Related Workforce
Yr.-to-Yr. Change
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011-10
2010-09
IBM/wholly owned subsidiaries
433,362
426,751
399,409
1.5%
6.8%
Less-than-wholly owned subsidiaries
7,523
9,334
11,421
(19.4)
(18.3)
Complementary
25,500
27,784
26,946
(8.2)
3.1
As a globally integrated enterprise, the company operates in over 
170 countries and is continuing to shift its business to the higher 
value segments of enterprise computing. The company continually 
assesses its resource needs with the objective of balancing its 
workforce globally to improve the company’s global reach and 
competitiveness. In 2011, total employees at IBM and its wholly owned 
subsidiaries increased more than 6,500 compared to the prior year. 
	
The complementary workforce is an approximation of equivalent 
full-time employees hired under temporary, part-time and limited 
term employment arrangements to meet specific business needs 
in a flexible and cost-effective manner.
Global Financing 
Global Financing is a reportable segment that is measured as a 
stand-alone entity. 
	
In 2011, as the global economy continued to face a challenging 
credit environment, the Global Financing business remained focused 
on its core competencies—providing IT financing to the company’s 
clients and business partners. For the year, Global Financing increased 
total revenue by 2.8 percent and improved total gross margin by 
1.2 points, while the pre-tax income margin was essentially flat year 
to year. Total pre-tax income of $2,011 million increased 2.8 percent 
compared to 2010.
	
In addition to the overall health of the economy and its impact 
on corporate IT budgets, key drivers of Global Financing’s results 
are interest rates and originations. Interest rates directly impact Global 
Financing’s business by increasing or decreasing both financing 
revenue and the associated borrowing costs. Originations, which 
determine the asset base of Global Financing’s annuity-like business, 
are impacted by IBM’s non-Global Financing sales and services 
volumes and Global Financing’s participation rates. Participation 
rates are the propensity of IBM’s clients to finance their transactions 
through Global Financing in lieu of paying IBM up-front cash or 
financing through a third party. 
Results of Operations
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
2009*
External revenue
$2,102
$2,238 
$2,302 
Internal revenue
2,092
1,842
1,774
Total revenue
4,195
4,080
4,076
Cost
1,467
1,474
1,555
Gross profit
$2,728
$2,606 
$2,520 
Gross profit margin
65.0%
63.9%
61.8%
Pre-tax income
$2,011
$1,956 
$1,724 
After-tax income**
$1,338
$1,292 
$1,132 
Return on equity**
40.7%
41.1%
34.2%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. 
**	See page 67 for the details of the after-tax income and return on equity calculation. 
Total revenue in 2011 increased $115 million versus 2010 as a result of:
•	
An increase in internal revenue of 13.6 percent primarily  
driven by an increase in used equipment sales revenue  
(up 19.7 percent to $1,528 million); partially offset by 
•	
A decline in external revenue of 6.1 percent (9 percent  
adjusted for currency) driven by a decrease in used equipment 
sales revenue (down 25.5 percent to $490 million), partially 
offset by an increase in financing revenue (up 2.0 percent to 
$1,612 million).
The increase in external financing revenue was due to higher average 
asset balance and an increase in remarketing lease revenue.
	
Global Financing gross profit increased 4.7 percent compared 
to 2010 due to higher used equipment sales and financing gross 
profit. Gross margin increased 1.2 points primarily due to a higher 
used equipment sales margin. 


===== PAGE 66 =====
64
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Total revenue in 2010 increased $4 million versus 2009 as a result of:
•	
An increase in internal revenue of 3.8 percent driven by  
an increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 7.0 percent 
to $1,277 million), partially offset by a decrease in financing 
revenue (down 2.6 percent to $565 million); offset by
•	
A decline in external revenue of 2.8 percent (4 percent 
adjusted for currency), due to a decrease in financing revenue 
(down 7.9 percent to $1,580 million), partially offset by an 
increase in used equipment sales revenue (up 12.1 percent  
to $659 million).
The decreases in external and internal financing revenue were due 
to lower average asset balances and lower asset yields. 
	
Global Financing gross profit increased 3.4 percent compared to 
2009 primarily due to higher used equipment sales gross profit. Gross 
margin increased 2.0 points primarily due to a higher financing margin.
	
Global Financing pre-tax income increased 2.8 percent in 2011 
versus 2010, following an increase of 13.5 percent in 2010 versus 
2009. The increase in 2011 was driven by the increase in gross profit 
of $122 million, partially offset by increases in financing receivables 
provisions of $51 million and SG&A expenses of $13 million. 
Normalizing for $2 million of workforce rebalancing charges in 2011 
and 2010, respectively, pre-tax income increased 2.8 percent versus 
2010. The increase in 2010 was primarily driven by a decrease in 
financing receivables provisions of $152 million and the increase in 
gross profit of $85 million. The increase in financing receivables 
provisions in 2011 was primarily due to the current economic 
environment in Europe. The overall allowance for credit losses 
coverage rate is 1.3 percent, a decrease of 0.2 points versus 2010.
	
The decrease in return on equity from 2010 to 2011 was driven 
by a higher average equity balance, and the increase in return on 
equity from 2009 to 2010 was driven by higher after-tax income and 
a lower average equity balance.
Financial Condition
Balance Sheet
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Cash and cash equivalents
$  1,308
$  1,353
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
9,209
9,370
Equipment under operating leases
External clients (a)
1,567
1,827
Internal clients (b)(c)
219
500
Client loans
11,363
10,630
Total client financing assets
22,358
22,326
Commercial financing receivables
7,130
6,819
Intercompany financing receivables (b)(c)
4,586
4,204
Other receivables
334
321
Other assets
712
790
Total assets
$36,427
$35,813 
Intercompany payables (b)
$  6,213
$  6,717
Debt (d)
23,332
22,823
Other liabilities
3,633
3,016
Total liabilities
33,178
32,557
Total equity
3,249
3,256
Total liabilities and equity
$36,427
$35,813 
(a)	Includes intercompany mark up, priced on an arm’s-length basis, on products purchased 
from the company’s product divisions, which is eliminated in IBM’s consolidated 
results. 
(b)	Entire amount eliminated for purposes of IBM’s consolidated results and therefore 
does not appear on page 72.
(c)	These assets, along with all other financing assets in this table, are leveraged at the 
value in the table using Global Financing debt. ­
(d)	Global Financing debt is comprised of intercompany loans and external debt. 
A portion of Global Financing debt is in support of the company’s internal business, 
or related to intercompany mark up embedded in the Global Financing assets. See 
table on page 67. ­
Sources and Uses of Funds 
The primary use of funds in Global Financing is to originate client 
and commercial financing assets. Client financing assets for end 
users consist primarily of IBM systems, software and services, but 
also include non-IBM equipment, software and services to meet 
IBM clients’ total solutions requirements. Client financing assets are 
primarily sales-type, direct financing and operating leases for systems 
products as well as loans for systems, software and services with 
terms generally from one to seven years. Global Financing’s client 
loans are primarily for software and services and are unsecured. 
These loans are subjected to additional credit analysis to evaluate 
the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are 
taken to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include 
covenants to protect against credit deterioration during the life of 
the obligation. Client financing also includes internal activity as 
described on page 24.


===== PAGE 67 =====
65
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
Commercial financing receivables arise primarily from inventory 
and accounts receivable financing for dealers and remarketers of 
IBM and non-IBM products. Payment terms for inventory financing 
and accounts receivable financing generally range from 30 to 90 days. 
These short-term receivables are primarily unsecured and are also 
subjected to additional credit analysis in order to evaluate the 
associated risk.
	
At December 31, 2011, substantially all financing assets are IT 
related assets, and approximately 63 percent of the external portfolio 
is with investment grade clients with no direct exposure to consumers 
or mortgage assets. 
Originations 
The following are total external financing and internal lease financing 
originations.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Client financing
External
$14,390
$12,632 
$11,760 
Internal
—
116
755
Commercial financing
35,282
32,366
27,126
Total
$49,673
$45,113 
$39,641 
In 2011, new financing originations exceeded cash collections for 
both client and commercial financing. This resulted in a net increase 
in total financing assets from December 31, 2010. The increase in 
originations in both 2011 versus 2010 and 2010 versus 2009 was due 
to improving external volumes in both client and commercial financing. 
Internal loan financing with Global Services is executed under a loan 
facility and is not considered originations. 
	
Cash generated by Global Financing in 2011 was primarily deployed 
to pay the intercompany payables and dividends to IBM.
Global Financing Receivables and Allowances
The following table presents external financing receivables excluding 
residual values, and the allowance for credit losses.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Gross financing receivables
$27,366
$26,565 
Specific allowance for credit losses
226
305
Unallocated allowance for credit losses
124
96
Total allowance for credit losses
350
401
Net financing receivables
$27,016
$26,164 
Allowance for credit losses coverage
1.3%
1.5%
Roll Forward of Global Financing Receivables  
Allowance for Credit Losses
($ in millions)
January 1, 2011
Allowance 
Used*
Additions/ 
(Reductions)
Other**
December 31, 
2011
$401
$(87 )
$42 
$(7 )
$350 
*	 Represents reserved receivables, net of recoveries, that were disposed of during the 
period. 
**	Primarily represents translation adjustments. 
The percentage of Global Financing receivables reserved 
decreased from 1.5 percent at December 31, 2010 to 1.3 percent at 
December 31, 2011 primarily due to the disposition of receivables 
previously reserved, and the increase in gross financing receivables. 
Specific reserves decreased 25.9 percent from $305 million at 
December 31, 2010 to $226 million at December 31, 2011. Unallocated 
reserves increased 29.2 percent from $96 million at December 31, 2010, 
to $124 million at December 31, 2011. Global Financing’s bad debt 
expense was an increase of $42 million for 2011, compared to 
a decrease of $9 million for 2010. The year-to-year increase was 
primarily attributed to the current economic environment in Europe.
Residual Value 
Residual value is a risk unique to the financing business and 
management of this risk is dependent upon the ability to accurately 
project future equipment values at lease inception. Global Financing 
has insight into product plans and cycles for the IBM products under 
lease. Based upon this product information, Global Financing 
continually monitors projections of future equipment values and 
compares them with the residual values reflected in the portfolio. 
See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on page 86 for the 
company’s accounting policy for residual values.
	
Global Financing optimizes the recovery of residual values by 
selling assets sourced from end of lease, leasing used equipment 
to new clients, or extending lease arrangements with current clients. 
Sales of equipment, which are primarily sourced from equipment 
returned at the end of a lease, represented 48.1 percent of Global 
Financing’s revenue in 2011 and 47.4 percent in 2010. The gross 
margins on these sales were 54.8 percent and 52.8 percent in 2011 
and 2010, respectively. The increase was primarily driven by an 
increase in the internal sales margin. 


===== PAGE 68 =====
66
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
	
The table below presents the recorded amount of unguaranteed 
residual value for sales-type, direct financing and operating leases 
at December 31, 2010 and 2011. In addition, the table presents the 
residual value as a percentage of the related original amount financed 
and a run out of when the unguaranteed residual value assigned to 
equipment on lease at December 31, 2011 is expected to be 
returned to the company. In addition to the unguaranteed residual 
value, on a limited basis, Global Financing will obtain guarantees of 
the future value of the equipment to be returned at end of lease. 
While primarily focused on IBM products, guarantees are also 
obtained for certain OEM products. These third-party guarantees 
are included in minimum lease payments as provided for by accounting 
standards in the determination of lease classifications for the covered 
equipment and provide protection against risk of loss arising from 
declines in equipment values for these assets. 
	
The residual value guarantee increases the minimum lease 
payments that are utilized in determining the classification of a lease 
as a sales-type lease, direct financing lease or operating lease. The 
aggregate asset values associated with the guarantees for sales-type 
leases were $821 million and $714 million for the financing transactions 
originated during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively. In 2011, the residual value guarantee program resulted 
in the company recognizing approximately $532 million of revenue 
that would otherwise have been recognized in future periods as 
operating lease revenue. If the company had chosen to not participate 
in a residual value guarantee program in 2011 and prior years, the 
2011 impact would be substantially mitigated by the effect of prior- 
year asset values being recognized as operating lease revenue in 
the current year. The associated aggregate guaranteed future values 
at the scheduled end of lease was $43 million for the financing 
transactions originated during 2011 and 2010, respectively. The cost 
of guarantees was $4 million for the year ended December 31, 2011 
and $5 million for the year ended December 31, 2010.
Unguaranteed Residual Value
($ in millions)
Total
Estimated Run Out of 2011 Balance
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015 and 
Beyond
Sales-type and direct financing leases
$     871
$     745
$177
$194
$241
$132
Operating leases
328
296
121
97
64
14
Total unguaranteed residual value
$  1,199
$  1,041
$298
$291
$305
$146
Related original amount financed
$20,412 
$18,635
Percentage
5.9%
5.6%
Debt
At December 31:
2011
2010
Debt-to-equity ratio
7.2x
7.0x
The company funds Global Financing through borrowings using a 
debt-to-equity ratio target of approximately 7 to 1. The debt used to 
fund Global Financing assets is composed of intercompany loans 
and external debt. The terms of the intercompany loans are set by 
the company to substantially match the term and currency underlying 
the financing receivable and are based on arm’s-length pricing. Both 
assets and debt are presented in the Global Financing Balance Sheet 
on page 64.
	
Global Financing provides funding predominantly for the company’s 
external clients assets, as well as for assets under contract by other 
IBM units. As previously stated, the company measures Global 
Financing as a stand-alone entity, and accordingly, interest expense 
relating to debt supporting Global Financing’s external client and 
internal business is included in the “Global Financing Results of 
Operations” on pages 63 and 64 and in note T, “Segment Infor-
mation,” on pages 135 to 139.
	
In the company’s Consolidated Statement of Earnings on page 
70, however, the external debt-related interest expense supporting 
Global Financing’s internal financing to the company is reclassified 
from cost of financing to interest expense.


===== PAGE 69 =====
67
Management Discussion
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Global Financing is a segment of the company and therefore, is 
supported by the company’s overall liquidity position and access to 
capital markets. Cash generated by Global Financing was primarily 
deployed to pay intercompany payables and dividends to the 
company in order to maintain an appropriate debt-to-equity ratio. 
Return on Equity
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010*
Numerator
Global Financing after-tax income (a)**
$1,338
$1,292
Denominator
Average Global Financing equity (b)+
$3,286
$3,145
Global Financing return on equity (a) /(b)
40.7%
41.1%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation. 
**	Calculated based upon an estimated tax rate principally based on Global Financing’s 
geographic mix of earnings as IBM’s provision for income taxes is determined on a 
consolidated basis. 
+	 Average of the ending equity for Global Financing for the last five quarters.
Looking Forward
Global Financing’s financial position provides flexibility and funding 
capacity which enables the company to be well positioned in the 
current environment. Global Financing’s assets and new financing 
volumes are primarily IBM products and services financed to the 
company’s clients and business partners, and substantially all financing 
assets are IT related assets which provide a stable base of business 
for future growth. Global Financing’s offerings are competitive and 
available to clients as a result of the company’s borrowing cost and 
access to the capital markets. Overall, Global Financing’s originations 
will be dependent upon the demand for IT products and services 
as well as client participation rates.
	
IBM continues to access both the short-term commercial paper 
market and the medium- and long-term debt markets. A protracted 
period where IBM could not access the capital markets would likely 
lead to a slowdown in originations. 
	
Interest rates and the overall economy (including currency 
fluctuations) will have an effect on both revenue and gross profit. 
The company’s interest rate risk management policy, however, 
combined with the Global Financing pricing strategy should mitigate 
gross margin erosion due to changes in interest rates. 
	
The economy could impact the credit quality of the Global 
Financing receivables portfolio and therefore the level of provision 
for credit losses. Global Financing will continue to apply rigorous 
credit policies in both the origination of new business and the 
evaluation of the existing portfolio.
	
As discussed on pages 65 and 66, Global Financing has 
historically been able to manage residual value risk both through 
insight into the company’s product cycles, as well as through its 
remarketing business.
	
Global Financing has policies in place to manage each of the 
key risks involved in financing. These policies, combined with product 
and client knowledge, should allow for the prudent management of 
the business going forward, even during periods of uncertainty with 
respect to the global economy.
The following table provides additional information on total company debt. In this table, intercompany activity includes internal loans and 
leases at arm’s-length pricing in support of Global Services’ long-term contracts and other internal activity. The company believes these 
assets should be appropriately leveraged in line with the overall Global Financing business model.
($ in millions)
December 31, 2011
December 31, 2010
Global Financing Segment
$23,332 
$22,823 
Debt to support external clients
$20,051 
$19,583 
Debt to support internal clients
3,281
3,240
Non-Global Financing Segments
7,987
5,801
Debt supporting operations
11,269
9,041
Intercompany activity
(3,281)
(3,240)
Total company debt
$31,320 
$28,624 


===== PAGE 70 =====
68
Report of Management
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Management Responsibility  
for Financial Information
Responsibility for the integrity and objectivity of the financial information 
presented in this Annual Report rests with IBM management. The 
accompanying financial statements have been prepared in accordance 
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States 
of America, applying certain estimates and judgments as required. 
	
IBM maintains an effective internal control structure. It consists, 
in part, of organizational arrangements with clearly defined lines of 
responsibility and delegation of authority, and comprehensive 
systems and control procedures. An important element of the control 
environment is an ongoing internal audit program. Our system also 
contains self-monitoring mechanisms, and actions are taken to correct 
deficiencies as they are identified.
	
To assure the effective administration of internal controls, we 
carefully select and train our employees, develop and disseminate 
written policies and procedures, provide appropriate communication 
channels and foster an environment conducive to the effective 
functioning of controls. We believe that it is essential for the company 
to conduct its business affairs in accordance with the highest ethical 
standards, as set forth in the IBM Business Conduct Guidelines. 
These guidelines, translated into numerous languages, are distributed 
to employees throughout the world, and re-emphasized through 
internal programs to assure that they are understood and followed. 
	
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an independent registered public 
accounting firm, is retained to audit IBM’s Consolidated Financial 
Statements and the effectiveness of the internal control over financial 
reporting. Its accompanying report is based on audits conducted 
in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board (United States). 
	
The Audit Committee of the Board of Directors is composed 
solely of independent, non-management directors, and is responsible 
for recommending to the Board the independent registered public 
accounting firm to be retained for the coming year, subject to 
stockholder ratification. The Audit Committee meets periodically 
and privately with the independent registered public accounting firm, 
with the company’s internal auditors, as well as with IBM management, 
to review accounting, auditing, internal control structure and financial 
reporting matters. 
Management’s Report on Internal Control  
Over Financial Reporting
Management is responsible for establishing and maintaining 
adequate internal control over financial reporting of the company. 
Internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to 
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial 
reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external 
purposes in accordance with accounting principles generally accepted 
in the United States of America.
	
The company’s internal control over financial reporting includes 
those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance 
of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the 
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; 
(ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded 
as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in 
accordance with accounting principles generally accepted in the 
United States of America, and that receipts and expenditures of the 
company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of 
management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable 
assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized 
acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could 
have a material effect on the financial statements. 
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections 
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to 
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes 
in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or 
procedures may deteriorate.
	
Management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of 
internal control over financial reporting based on the framework in 
Internal Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). 
Based on this evaluation, management concluded that the 
company’s internal control over financial reporting was effective 
as of December 31, 2011.
Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer
February 28, 2012
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and Chief Financial Officer,
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
February 28, 2012


===== PAGE 71 =====
69
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
To the Stockholders and Board of  
Directors of International Business  
Machines Corporation:
In our opinion, the accompanying Consolidated Financial State­ments 
appearing on pages 70 through 139 present fairly, in all material 
respects, the financial position of International Business Machines 
Corporation and its subsidiaries at December 31, 2011 and 2010 
and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of 
the three years in the period ended December 31, 2011 in conformity 
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States 
of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all 
material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting 
as of December 31, 2011, based on criteria established in Internal 
Control—Integrated Framework issued by the Committee of 
Sponsoring Organ­izations of the Treadway Commission (COSO). 
The Company’s management is responsible for these financial 
statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial 
reporting and for its assessment of the effectiveness of internal 
control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying 
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting 
appearing on page 68. Our responsibility is to express opinions on 
these financial statements and on the Company’s internal control 
over financial reporting based on our integrated audits. We conducted 
our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company 
Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards require 
that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable assurance 
about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement 
and whether effective internal control over financial reporting was 
maintained in all material respects. Our audits of the financial statements 
included examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts 
and disclosures in the financial statements, assessing the accounting 
principles used and significant estimates made by management, 
and evaluating the overall financial statement presentation. Our audit 
of internal control over financial reporting included obtaining an 
understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing 
the risk that a material weakness exists, and testing and evaluating 
the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on 
the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other 
procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We 
believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
	
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process 
designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability 
of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements 
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial 
reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to 
the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately 
and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of 
the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions 
are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial 
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are 
being made only in accordance with authorizations of management 
and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance 
regarding prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, 
use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a 
material effect on the financial statements.
	
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial 
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections 
of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to 
the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes 
in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or 
procedures may deteriorate.
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
New York, New York
February 28, 2012


===== PAGE 72 =====
70
Consolidated Statement of Earnings
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2011
2010
2009
Revenue
Services
$  60,721
$56,868 
$55,128 
Sales
44,063
40,736
38,300
Financing
2,132
2,267
2,331
Total revenue
106,916
99,870
95,758
Cost
Services
40,740
38,383
37,146
Sales
14,973
14,374
13,606
Financing
1,065
1,100
1,220
Total cost
56,778
53,857
51,973
Gross profit
50,138
46,014
43,785
Expense and other income
Selling, general and administrative
23,594
21,837
20,952
Research, development and engineering
O
6,258
6,026
5,820
Intellectual property and custom development income
(1,108)
(1,154)
(1,177)
Other (income) and expense
(20)
(787)
(351)
Interest expense
D&J
411
368
402
Total expense and other income
29,135
26,291
25,647
Income before income taxes
21,003
19,723
18,138
Provision for income taxes
N
5,148
4,890
4,713
Net income 
$  15,855
$14,833 
$13,425 
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
P
$    13.06
$  11.52
$  10.01
Basic
P
$    13.25
$  11.69
$  10.12
Weighted-average number of common shares outstanding
Assuming dilution
1,213,767,985 1,287,355,388 1,341,352,754
Basic
1,196,951,006 1,268,789,202 1,327,157,410
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 73 =====
71
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
Notes
2011
2010
2009
Net income
$15,855
$14,833
$13,425 
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax:
Foreign currency translation adjustments
L
(693)
712
1,675
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
(14)
70
118
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(231)
0
64
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
4
8
—
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
(241)
78
182
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
L
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
(266)
371
(718)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
511
203
(94)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
245
573
(812)
Retirement-related benefit plans
L
Prior service costs/(credits)
(28)
28
375
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(5,463)
(2,728)
1,433
Curtailments and settlements
11
10
(125)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(157)
(183)
(162)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,847
1,249
1,105
Total retirement-related benefit plans
(3,790)
(1,624)
2,626
Other comprehensive income/(loss), before tax
L
(4,479)
(260)
3,671
Income tax (expense)/benefit related to items of other comprehensive income
L
1,339
348
(656)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
L
(3,142)
87
3,015
Total comprehensive income
$12,713
$14,920
$16,440 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 74 =====
72
Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
At December 31:
Notes
2011
2010
Assets
Current assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$   11,922
$  10,661
Marketable securities
D
0
990
Notes and accounts receivable—trade (net of allowances of $256 in 2011 and $324 in 2010)
11,179
10,834
Short-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $311 in 2011 and $342 in 2010)
F
16,901
16,257
Other accounts receivable (net of allowances of $11 in 2011 and $10 in 2010)
1,481
1,134
Inventories
E
2,595
2,450
Deferred taxes
N
1,601
1,564
Prepaid expenses and other current assets
5,249
4,226
Total current assets
50,928
48,116
Property, plant and equipment
G
40,124
40,289
Less: Accumulated depreciation
G
26,241
26,193
Property, plant and equipment—net
G
13,883
14,096
Long-term financing receivables (net of allowances of $38 in 2011 and $58 in 2010)
F
10,776
10,548
Prepaid pension assets
S
2,843
3,068
Deferred taxes
N
3,503
3,220
Goodwill
I
26,213
25,136
Intangible assets—net
I
3,392
3,488
Investments and sundry assets
H
4,895
5,778
Total assets
$ 116,433 
$113,452 
Liabilities and equity
Current liabilities
Taxes
N
$     3,313
$    4,216
Short-term debt
D&J
8,463
6,778
Accounts payable
8,517
7,804
Compensation and benefits
5,099
5,028
Deferred income
12,197
11,580
Other accrued expenses and liabilities
4,535
5,156
Total current liabilities
42,123
40,562
Long-term debt
D&J
22,857
21,846
Retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations
S
18,374
15,978
Deferred income
3,847
3,666
Other liabilities
K
8,996
8,226
Total liabilities
96,197
90,279
Contingencies and commitments
M
Equity
L
IBM stockholders’ equity
Common stock, par value $.20 per share, and additional paid-in capital
48,129
45,418
Shares authorized: 4,687,500,000
Shares issued (2011—2,182,469,838; 2010—2,161,800,054)
Retained earnings
104,857
92,532
Treasury stock, at cost (shares: 2011—1,019,287,274; 2010—933,806,510)
(110,963)
(96,161)
Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss)
(21,885)
(18,743)
Total IBM stockholders’ equity
20,138
23,046
Noncontrolling interests
A
97
126
Total equity
20,236
23,172
Total liabilities and equity
$ 116,433 
$113,452 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 75 =====
73
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Cash flows from operating activities
Net income 
$ 15,855
$ 14,833
$ 13,425
Adjustments to reconcile net income  
to cash provided by operating activities
Depreciation
3,589
3,657
3,773
Amortization of intangibles
1,226
1,174
1,221
Stock-based compensation
697
629
558
Deferred taxes
1,212
1,294
1,773
Net (gain)/loss on asset sales and other
(342)
(801)
(395)
Change in operating assets and liabilities, net of acquisitions/divestitures
Receivables (including financing receivables)
(1,279)
(489)
2,131
Retirement related
(1,371)
(1,963)
(2,465)
Inventories
(163)
92
263
Other assets/other liabilities
(28)
949
319
Accounts payable
451
174
170
Net cash provided by operating activities
19,846
19,549
20,773
Cash flows from investing activities
Payments for property, plant and equipment
(4,108)
(4,185)
(3,447)
Proceeds from disposition of property, plant and equipment
608
770
330
Investment in software
(559)
(569)
(630)
Purchases of marketable securities and other investments
(1,594)
(6,129)
(5,604)
Proceeds from disposition of marketable securities and other investments
3,345
7,877
3,599
Non-operating finance receivables—net
(291)
(405)
(184)
Acquisition of businesses, net of cash acquired
(1,811)
(5,922)
(1,194)
Divestiture of businesses, net of cash transferred
14
55
400
Net cash used in investing activities
(4,396)
(8,507)
(6,729)
Cash flows from financing activities
Proceeds from new debt
9,996
8,055
6,683
Payments to settle debt
(8,947)
(6,522)
(13,495)
Short-term borrowings/(repayments) less than 90 days—net
1,321
817
(651)
Common stock repurchases
(15,046)
(15,375)
(7,429)
Common stock transactions—other
2,453
3,774
3,052
Cash dividends paid
(3,473)
(3,177)
(2,860)
Net cash used in financing activities
(13,696)
(12,429)
(14,700)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(493)
(135)
98
Net change in cash and cash equivalents
1,262
(1,522)
(558)
Cash and cash equivalents at January 1
10,661
12,183
12,741
Cash and cash equivalents at December 31
$ 11,922
$ 10,661
$ 12,183
Supplemental data
Income taxes paid—net of refunds received
$   4,168
$   3,238
$   1,567
Interest paid on debt
$      956
$      951
$   1,240
Capital lease obligations
$        39
$        30
$        15
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 76 =====
74
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2009
Equity, January 1, 2009
$39,129 
$70,353 
$(74,171)
$(21,845)
$13,465 
$119 
$13,584 
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
13,425
 13,425
 13,425
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
3,015
3,015
3,015
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$16,440 
$16,440 
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(2,860)
(2,860)
(2,860)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (30,034,808 shares)
3,011
3,011
3,011
Purchases (1,550,846 shares) and  
sales (6,408,265 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(19)
462
443
443
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (68,650,727 shares)
(7,534)
(7,534)
(7,534)
Changes in other equity
(330)
(330)
(330)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(1)
(1)
Equity, December 31, 2009
$41,810 
$80,900 
$(81,243)
$(18,830)
$22,637 
$118 
$22,755 
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2010
Equity, January 1, 2010
$41,810
$80,900
$(81,243)
$(18,830)
$ 22,637
$118 
$ 22,755
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
14,833
14,833
14,833
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
87
87
87
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 14,920
$ 14,920
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(3,177)
(3,177)
(3,177)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (34,783,386 shares)
3,579
3,579
3,579
Purchases (2,334,932 shares) and  
sales (7,929,318 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(24)
501
477
477
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (117,721,650 shares)
(15,419)
(15,419)
(15,419)
Changes in other equity
28
28
28
Changes in noncontrolling interests
8
8
Equity, December 31, 2010
$45,418
$92,532
$(96,161)
$(18,743)
$ 23,046
$126
$ 23,172
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 77 =====
75
Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions)
Common 
Stock and 
Additional 
Paid-In Capital
Retained 
Earnings
Treasury 
Stock
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
Total IBM 
Stockholders 
Equity
’ 
Non- 
Controlling 
Interests
Total 
Equity
2011
Equity, January 1, 2011
$45,418
$  92,532
$  (96,161)
$(18,743)
$ 23,046 
$126
$ 23,172
Net income plus other comprehensive  
income/(loss)
Net income
15,855
15,855
15,855
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(3,142)
(3,142)
(3,142)
Total comprehensive income/(loss)
$ 12,713
$ 12,713
Cash dividends declared—common stock
(3,473)
(3,473)
(3,473)
Common stock issued under  
employee plans (20,669,785 shares)
2,394
2,394
2,394
Purchases (1,717,246 shares) and  
sales (4,920,198 shares) of treasury  
stock under employee plans—net
(56)
231
175
175
Other treasury shares purchased,  
not retired (88,683,716 shares)
(15,034)
(15,034)
(15,034)
Changes in other equity
317
317
317
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(29)
(29)
Equity, December 31, 2011
$48,129
$104,857
$(110,963)
$(21,885)
$ 20,138
$  97
$ 20,236
Amounts may not add due to rounding.
The accompanying notes on pages 76 through 139 are an integral part of the financial statements.


===== PAGE 78 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
76
Note A. 
Significant Accounting Policies
Basis of Presentation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements and foot­notes 
of the International Business Machines Corpor­ation (IBM or the 
company) have been prepared in accordance with accounting 
principles generally accepted in the United States of America (GAAP).
	
Within the financial statements and tables presented, certain 
columns and rows may not add due to the use of rounded numbers 
for disclosure purposes. Percentages presented are calculated from 
the underlying whole-dollar amounts. Certain prior year amounts 
have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation. 
This is annotated where applicable.
	
Noncontrolling interest amounts in income of $6 million, $9 million 
and $5 million, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 
and 2009, respectively, are included in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings within the other (income) and expense line item. Additionally, 
changes to noncontrolling interests in the Consolidated Statement 
of Changes in Equity were $(29) million, $8 million and $(1) million 
for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. 
Principles of Consolidation
The Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of IBM 
and its controlled subsidiaries, which are generally majority owned. 
Any noncontrolling interest in the equity of a subsidiary is reported 
in Equity in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. Net 
income and losses attributable to the noncontrolling interest is 
reported as described above in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings. The accounts of variable interest entities (VIEs) are included 
in the Consolidated Financial Statements, if required. Investments in 
business entities in which the company does not have control, but 
has the ability to exercise significant influence over operating and 
financial policies, are accounted for using the equity method and the 
company’s proportionate share of income or loss is recorded in other 
(income) and expense. The accounting policy for other investments 
in equity securities is described on page 85 within “Marketable 
Securities.” Equity investments in non-publicly traded entities are 
primarily accounted for using the cost method. All intercompany 
transactions and accounts have been eliminated in consolidation.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP 
requires management to make estimates and assumptions that 
affect the amounts of assets, liabilities, revenue, costs, expenses 
and other comprehensive income/(loss) that are reported in the 
Consolidated Financial Statements and accompanying disclosures. 
These estimates are based on management’s best knowledge of 
current events, historical experience, actions that the company may 
undertake in the future and on various other assumptions that are 
believed to be reasonable under the circumstances. As a result, actual 
results may be different from these estimates. See “Critical Accounting 
Estimates” on pages 58 to 61 for a discussion of the company’s 
critical accounting estimates.
Revenue
The company recognizes revenue when it is realized or realizable 
and earned. The company considers revenue realized or realizable 
and earned when it has persuasive evidence of an arrangement, 
delivery has occurred, the sales price is fixed or determinable and 
collectibility is reasonably assured. Delivery does not occur until 
products have been shipped or services have been provided to the 
client, risk of loss has transferred to the client, and either client 
acceptance has been obtained, client acceptance provisions have 
lapsed, or the company has objective evidence that the criteria 
specified in the client acceptance provisions have been satisfied. 
The sales price is not considered to be fixed or determinable until 
all contingencies related to the sale have been resolved. 
	
The company recognizes revenue on sales to solution providers, 
resellers and distributors (herein referred to as “resellers”) when the 
reseller has economic substance apart from the company, credit risk, 
title and risk of loss to the inventory, the fee to the company is not 
contingent upon resale or payment by the end user, the company 
has no further obligations related to bringing about resale or delivery 
and all other revenue recognition criteria have been met.
	
The company reduces revenue for estimated client returns, stock 
rotation, price protection, rebates and other similar allowances. (See 
Schedule II, “Valuation and Qualifying Accounts and Reserves” 
included in the company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K). Revenue 
is recognized only if these estimates can be reasonably and reliably 
determined. The company bases its estimates on historical results 
taking into consideration the type of client, the type of transaction 
and the specifics of each arrangement. Payments made under 
cooperative marketing programs are recognized as an expense only 
if the company receives from the client an identifiable benefit sufficiently 
separable from the product sale whose fair value can be reasonably 
and reliably estimated. If the company does not receive an identifiable 
benefit sufficiently separable from the product sale whose fair value 
can be reasonably estimated, such payments are recorded as a 
reduction of revenue. 
	
Revenue from sales of third-party vendor products or services 
is recorded net of costs when the company is acting as an agent 
between the client and the vendor and gross when the company 
is a principal to the transaction. Several factors are considered to 
determine whether the company is an agent or principal, most 
notably whether the company is the primary obligor to the client, 
or has inventory risk. Consideration is also given to whether the 
company adds meaningful value to the vendor’s product or service, 
was involved in the selection of the vendor’s product or service, has 
latitude in establishing the sales price or has credit risk. 
	
The company reports revenue net of any revenue-based taxes 
assessed by governmental authorities that are imposed on and 
concurrent with specific revenue-producing transactions. In addition 
to the aforementioned general policies, the following are the specific 
revenue recognition policies for multiple-deliverable arrangements 
and for each major category of revenue.


===== PAGE 79 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
77
Multiple-Deliverable Arrangements
The company enters into revenue arrangements that may consist 
of multiple deliverables of its products and services based on the 
needs of its clients. These arrangements may include any combination 
of services, software, hardware and/or financing. For example, a 
client may purchase a server that includes operating system software. 
In addition, the arrangement may include post-contract support for 
the software and a contract for post-warranty maintenance service 
for the hardware. These types of arrangements can also include 
financing provided by the company. These arrangements consist of 
multiple deliverables, with the hardware and software delivered in 
one reporting period and the software support and hardware 
maintenance services delivered across multiple reporting periods. 
In another example, a client may outsource the running of its data-
center operations to the company on a long-term, multiple-year 
basis and periodically purchase servers and/or software products 
from the company to upgrade or expand its facility. The outsourcing 
services are provided on a continuous basis across multiple 
reporting periods and the hardware and software products are 
delivered in one reporting period. To the extent that a deliverable in 
a multiple-deliverable arrangement is subject to specific guidance 
that deliverable is accounted for in accordance with such specific 
guidance. Examples of such arrangements may include leased 
hardware which is subject to specific leasing guidance or software 
which is subject to specific software revenue recognition guidance 
(see “Software” on page 78) on whether and/or how to separate 
multiple-deliverable arrangements into separate units of accounting 
(separability) and how to allocate the arrangement consideration 
among those separate units of accounting (allocation). For all other 
deliverables in multiple-deliverable arrangements, the guidance 
below is applied for separability and allocation. A multiple-deliverable 
arrangement is separated into more than one unit of accounting if 
the following criteria are met:
•	
The delivered item(s) has value to the client on a stand-alone 
basis; and 
•	
If the arrangement includes a general right of return relative  
to the delivered item(s), delivery or performance of the 
undelivered item(s) is considered probable and substantially  
in the control of the company. 
If these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted for as 
one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being recognized 
ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the earlier of when 
such criteria are met or when the last undelivered element is delivered. 
If these criteria are met for each element and there is a relative selling 
price for all units of accounting in an arrangement, the arrangement 
consideration is allocated to the separate units of accounting based 
on each unit’s relative selling price. The following revenue policies 
are then applied to each unit of accounting, as applicable.
	
Revenue from the company’s business analytics, smarter planet 
and cloud offerings follow the specific revenue recognition policies 
for multiple deliverable arrangements and for each major category 
of revenue depending on the type of offering which can be comprised 
of services, hardware and/or software. 
Services
The company’s primary services offerings include information 
technology (IT) datacenter and business process outsourcing, 
application management services, consulting and systems integration, 
technology infrastructure and system maintenance, Web hosting 
and the design and development of complex IT systems to a client’s 
specifications (design and build). These services are provided on 
a time-and-material basis, as a fixed-price contract or as a fixed-
price per measure of output contract and the contract terms range 
from less than one year to over 10 years. 
	
Revenue from IT datacenter and business process outsourcing 
contracts is recognized in the period the services are provided using 
either an objective measure of output or on a straight-line basis 
over the term of the contract. Under the output method, the amount 
of revenue recognized is based on the services delivered in the period. 
	
Revenue from application management services, technology 
infrastructure and system maintenance and Web hosting contracts 
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the terms of the contracts. 
Revenue from time-and-material contracts is recognized as labor 
hours are delivered and direct expenses are incurred. Revenue 
related to extended warranty and product maintenance contracts 
is recognized on a straight-line basis over the delivery period. 
	
Revenue from fixed-price design and build contracts is recognized 
under the percentage-of-completion (POC) method. Under the POC 
method, revenue is recognized based on the labor costs incurred 
to date as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill 
the contract. If circumstances arise that change the original estimates 
of revenues, costs, or extent of progress toward completion, revisions 
to the estimates are made. These revisions may result in increases 
or decreases in estimated revenues or costs, and such revisions 
are reflected in income in the period in which the circumstances 
that gave rise to the revision become known by management. 
	
The company performs ongoing profitability analyses of its 
services contracts accounted for under the POC method in order 
to determine whether the latest estimates of revenue, costs and 
profits require updating. If at any time these estimates indicate that 
the contract will be unprofitable, the entire estimated loss for the 
remainder of the contract is recorded immediately. For non-POC 
method service contracts, any losses are recorded as incurred.
	
In some services contracts, the company bills the client prior to 
recognizing revenue from performing the services. Deferred income 
of $7,363 million and $7,195 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, is included in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. In other services contracts, the company performs the 
services prior to billing the client. Unbilled accounts receivable of 
$2,166 million and $2,244 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, is included in notes and accounts receivable-trade in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
	
Billings usually occur in the month after the company performs 
the services or in accordance with specific contractual provisions. 
Unbilled receivables are expected to be billed within four months.


===== PAGE 80 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
78
Hardware
The company’s hardware offerings include the sale or lease of system 
servers, storage solutions, retail store systems and the sale of 
semiconductors. The company also offers installation services for 
its more complex products. 
	
Revenue from hardware sales and sales-type leases is recognized 
when risk of loss has transferred to the client and there are no unfulfilled 
company obligations that affect the client’s final acceptance of the 
arrangement. Any cost of standard warranties and remaining obligations 
that are inconsequential or perfunctory are accrued when the 
corresponding revenue is recognized. Revenue from rentals and 
operating leases is recognized on a straight-line basis over the term 
of the rental or lease.
Software
Revenue from perpetual (one-time charge) license software is 
recognized at the inception of the license term if all revenue recognition 
criteria have been met. Revenue from term (recurring license charge) 
license software is recognized on a subscription basis over the 
period that the client is entitled to use the license. Revenue from 
subscription and support, which includes unspecified upgrades on 
a when-and-if-available basis, is recognized on a straight-line basis 
over the period such items are delivered. In multiple-deliverable 
arrangements that include software that is more than incidental to 
the products or services as a whole (software multiple-deliverable 
arrangements), software and software-related elements are 
accounted for in accordance with software revenue recognition 
guidance. Software-related elements include software products 
and services for which a software deliverable is essential to its 
functionality. Tangible products containing software components 
and non-software components that function together to deliver the 
tangible product’s essential functionality are not within the scope of 
software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted for based 
on other applicable revenue recognition guidance.
	
A software multiple-deliverable arrangement is separated into 
more than one unit of accounting if all of the following criteria are met:
•	
The functionality of the delivered element(s) is not dependent 
on the undelivered element(s);
•	
There is vendor-specific objective evidence (VSOE) of fair 
value of the undelivered element(s). VSOE of fair value is  
based on the price charged when the deliverable is sold 
separately by the company on a regular basis and not  
as part of the multiple-deliverable arrangement; and 
•	
Delivery of the delivered element(s) represents the culmination 
of the earnings process for that element(s).
If any one of these criteria are not met, the arrangement is accounted 
for as one unit of accounting which would result in revenue being 
recognized ratably over the contract term or being deferred until the 
earlier of when such criteria are met or when the last undelivered 
element is delivered. If these criteria are met for each element 
and there is VSOE of fair value for all units of accounting in an 
arrangement, the arrangement consideration is allocated to the 
separate units of accounting based on each unit’s relative VSOE of 
fair value. There may be cases, however, in which there is VSOE of 
fair value of the undelivered item(s) but no such evidence for the 
delivered item(s). In these cases, the residual method is used to 
allocate the arrangement consideration. Under the residual method, 
the amount of consideration allocated to the delivered item(s) equals 
the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate VSOE of fair 
value of the undelivered elements.
	
The company’s multiple-deliverable arrangements may have a 
stand-alone software deliverable that is subject to the existing 
software revenue recognition guidance. The revenue for these 
multiple-deliverable arrangements is allocated to the software 
deliverable and the non-software deliverables based on the relative 
selling prices of all of the deliverables in the arrangement using 
the hierarchy: VSOE, third-party evidence (TPE) or best estimate of 
selling price (BESP). In the limited circumstances where the company 
cannot determine VSOE or TPE of the selling price for all of the 
deliverables in the arrangement, including the software deliverable, 
BESP is used for the purpose of performing this allocation.
Financing
Financing income attributable to sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans is recognized on the accrual basis using the 
effective interest method. Operating lease income is recognized on 
a straight-line basis over the term of the lease.
Best Estimate of Selling Price
In certain limited instances, the company is not able to establish 
VSOE for all elements in a multiple-deliverable arrangement. When 
VSOE cannot be established, the company attempts to establish 
the selling price of each element based on TPE. TPE is determined 
based on competitor prices for similar deliverables when sold separately. 
	
When the company is unable to establish selling price using 
VSOE or TPE, the company uses BESP in its allocation of arrangement 
consideration. The objective of BESP is to determine the price at 
which the company would transact a sale if the product or service 
were sold on a stand-alone basis. Due to the fact that the company 
sells its products and services on a stand-alone basis, and therefore 
has established VSOE for its products and services offerings, the 
company uses BESP to determine the relative selling price for a 
product or service in a multiple-deliverable arrangement on an 
infrequent basis. An example of when BESP would be used is when 
the company sells a new product, for which VSOE and TPE does 
not yet exist, in a multiple-deliverable arrangement prior to selling 
the new product on a stand-alone basis.


===== PAGE 81 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
79
	
The company determines BESP by considering multiple factors 
including, but not limited to, overall market conditions, including 
geographic or regional specific factors, competitive positioning, 
competitor actions, internal costs, profit objectives and pricing 
practices. The determination of BESP is a formal process that 
includes review and approval by the company’s management. In 
addition, the company regularly reviews VSOE and TPE for its 
products and services, in addition to BESP.
Services Costs
Recurring operating costs for services contracts, including costs 
related to bid and proposal activities, are recognized as incurred. 
For fixed-price design and build contracts, the costs of external 
hardware and software accounted for under the POC method are 
deferred and recognized based on the labor costs incurred to date, 
as a percentage of the total estimated labor costs to fulfill the 
contract. Certain eligible, nonrecurring costs incurred in the initial 
phases of outsourcing contracts are deferred and subsequently 
amortized. These costs consist of transition and setup costs related 
to the installation of systems and processes and are amortized on 
a straight-line basis over the expected period of benefit, not to exceed 
the term of the contract. Additionally, fixed assets associated with 
outsourcing contracts are capitalized and depreciated on a straight-
line basis over the expected useful life of the asset. If an asset is 
contract specific, then the depreciation period is the shorter of the 
useful life of the asset or the contract term. Amounts paid to clients 
in excess of the fair value of acquired assets used in outsourcing 
arrangements are deferred and amortized on a straight-line basis 
as a reduction of revenue over the expected period of benefit not to 
exceed the term of the contract. The company performs periodic 
reviews to assess the recoverability of deferred contract transition 
and setup costs. This review is done by comparing the estimated 
minimum remaining undiscounted cash flows of a contract to the 
unamortized contract costs. If such minimum undiscounted cash flows 
are not sufficient to recover the unamortized costs, a loss is recognized. 
	
Deferred services transition and setup costs were $2,589 million 
and $2,614 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
Amortization expense of deferred services transition and setup 
costs is estimated at December 31, 2011 to be $844 million in 2012, 
$652 million in 2013, $477 million in 2014, $314 million in 2015 and 
$302 million thereafter. 
	
Deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair value of 
acquired assets used in outsourcing arrangements were $65 million 
and $78 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
Amortization of deferred amounts paid to clients in excess of the fair 
value of acquired assets is recorded as an offset of revenue and is 
estimated at December 31, 2011 to be $25 million in 2012, $18 million 
in 2013, $16 million in 2014, $5 million in 2015 and $1 million thereafter. 
In situations in which an outsourcing contract is terminated, the 
terms of the contract may require the client to reimburse the company 
for the recovery of unbilled accounts receivable, unamortized 
deferred costs incurred to purchase specific assets utilized in the 
delivery of services and to pay any additional costs incurred by the 
company to transition the services.
Software Costs
Costs that are related to the conceptual formulation and design of 
licensed software programs are expensed as incurred to research, 
development and engineering expense; costs that are incurred to 
produce the finished product after technological feasibility has been 
established are capitalized as an intangible asset. Capitalized 
amounts are amortized on a straight-line basis over periods ranging 
up to three years. The company performs periodic reviews to ensure 
that unamortized program costs remain recoverable from future 
revenue. Costs to support or service licensed programs are charged 
to software cost as incurred. 
	
The company capitalizes certain costs that are incurred to 
purchase or to create and implement internal-use software programs, 
including software coding, installation, testing and certain data 
conversions. These capitalized costs are amortized on a straight-
line basis over periods up to two years and are recorded in selling, 
general and administrative expense. See note I, “Intangible Assets 
Including Goodwill,” on pages 105 and 106. 
Product Warranties
The company offers warranties for its hardware products that 
generally range up to three years, with the majority being either one 
or three years. Estimated costs for warranty terms standard to the 
deliverable are recognized when revenue is recorded for the related 
deliverable. The company estimates its warranty costs standard to 
the deliverable based on historical warranty claim experience and 
applies this estimate to the revenue stream for products under 
warranty. Estimated future costs for warranties applicable to revenue 
recognized in the current period are charged to cost of revenue. 
The warranty liability is reviewed quarterly to verify that it properly 
reflects the remaining obligation based on the anticipated expenditures 
over the balance of the obligation period. Adjustments are made 
when actual warranty claim experience differs from estimates. Costs 
from fixed-price support or maintenance contracts, including extended 
warranty contracts, are recognized as incurred. 


===== PAGE 82 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
80
	
Revenue from separately priced extended warranty contracts is 
recorded as deferred income and subsequently recognized on a 
straight-line basis over the delivery period. Changes in the company’s 
deferred income for extended warranty contracts and warranty 
liability for standard warranties, which are included in other accrued 
expenses and liabilities and other liabilities in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position, are presented in the following tables:
Standard Warranty Liability
($ in millions)
2011
2010
Balance at January 1
$ 375
$ 316
Current period accruals
435
407
Accrual adjustments to reflect actual experience
18
69
Charges incurred
(420)
(418)
Balance at December 31
$ 407
$ 375
Extended Warranty Liability (Deferred Income)
($ in millions)
2011
2010
Balance at January 1
$ 670
$ 665
Revenue deferred for new extended  
warranty contracts
314
329
Amortization of deferred revenue
(330)
(301)
Other*
(19)
(22)
Balance at December 31
$ 636
$ 670
Current portion
$ 301
$ 315
Noncurrent portion
335
355
Balance at December 31
$ 636
$ 670
*	 Other consists primarily of foreign currency translation adjustments.
Shipping and Handling
Costs related to shipping and handling are recognized as incurred 
and included in cost in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
Expense and Other Income
Selling, General and Administrative
Selling, general and administrative (SG&A) expense is charged to 
income as incurred. Expenses of promoting and selling products 
and services are classified as selling expense and include such items 
as compensation, advertising, sales commissions and travel. General 
and administrative expense includes such items as compensation, 
office supplies, non-income taxes, insurance and office rental. In 
addition, general and administrative expense includes other operating 
items such as an allowance for credit losses, workforce rebalancing 
accruals for contractually obligated payments to employees terminated 
in the ongoing course of business, acquisition costs related to 
business combinations, amortization of certain intangible assets 
and environmental remediation costs.
Advertising and Promotional Expense
The company expenses advertising and promotional costs when 
incurred. Cooperative advertising reimbursements from vendors are 
recorded net of advertising and promotional expense in the period 
in which the related advertising and promotional expense is incurred. 
Advertising and promotional expense, which includes media, 
agency and promotional expense, was $1,373 million, $1,337 million 
and $1,255 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, and is 
recorded in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Research, Development and Engineering
Research, development and engineering (RD&E) costs are expensed 
as incurred. Software costs that are incurred to produce the finished 
product after technological feasibility has been established are 
capitalized as an intangible asset. See “Software Costs” on page 79. 
Intellectual Property and Custom Development Income
The company licenses and sells the rights to certain of its intellectual 
property (IP) including internally developed patents, trade secrets 
and technological know-how. Certain IP transactions to third parties 
are licensing/royalty-based and others are transaction-based sales 
and other transfers. Licensing/royalty-based fees involve transfers 
in which the company earns the income over time, or the amount of 
income is not fixed or determinable until the licensee sells future 
related products (i.e., variable royalty, based upon licensee’s revenue). 
Sales and other transfers typically include transfers of IP whereby 
the company has fulfilled its obligations and the fee received is 
fixed or determinable at the transfer date. The company also enters 
into cross-licensing arrangements of patents, and income from 
these arrangements is recorded only to the extent cash is received. 
Furthermore, the company earns income from certain custom 
development projects for strategic technology partners and specific 
clients. The company records the income from these projects when 
the fee is realized or realizable and earned, is not refundable and 
is not dependent upon the success of the project.
Other (Income) and Expense
Other (income) and expense includes interest income (other than 
from Global Financing external business transactions), gains and 
losses on certain derivative instruments, gains and losses from 
securities and other investments, gains and losses from certain real 
estate transactions, foreign currency transaction gains and losses, 
gains and losses from the sale of businesses and amounts related 
to accretion of asset retirement obligations. 


===== PAGE 83 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
81
Business Combinations and  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
The company accounts for business combinations using the 
acquisition method and accordingly, the identifiable assets acquired, 
the liabilities assumed, and any noncontrolling interest in the acquiree 
are recorded at their acquisition date fair values. Goodwill represents 
the excess of the purchase price over the fair value of net assets, 
including the amount assigned to identifiable intangible assets. The 
primary drivers that generate goodwill are the value of synergies 
between the acquired entities and the company and the acquired 
assembled workforce, neither of which qualifies as an identifiable 
intangible asset. Identifiable intangible assets with finite lives are 
amortized over their useful lives. Amortization of completed technology 
is recorded in cost, and amortization of all other intangible assets is 
recorded in SG&A expense. See note C, “Acquisitions/Divestitures,” 
on pages 89 to 93 and note I, “Intangible Assets Including Goodwill,” 
on pages 105 and 106, for additional information. Acquisition-related 
costs, including advisory, legal, accounting, valuation and other costs, 
are expensed in the periods in which the costs are incurred. The 
results of operations of acquired businesses are included in the 
Consolidated Financial Statements from the acquisition date.
Impairment
Long-lived assets, other than goodwill, are tested for impairment 
based on undiscounted cash flows and, if impaired, written down to 
fair value based on either discounted cash flows or appraised values. 
Goodwill is tested annually, in the fourth quarter, for impairment, or 
sooner when circumstances indicate an impairment may exist, using 
a qualitative analysis at the reporting unit level. A reporting unit is the 
operating segment, or a business, which is one level below that 
operating segment (the “component” level) if discrete financial 
information is prepared and regularly reviewed by management at 
the segment level. Components are aggregated as a single reporting 
unit if they have similar economic characteristics.
Depreciation and Amortization
Property, plant and equipment are carried at cost and depreciated 
over their estimated useful lives using the straight-line method. The 
estimated useful lives of certain depreciable assets are as follows: 
buildings, 30 to 50 years; building equipment, 10 to 20 years; land 
improvements, 20 years; plant, laboratory and office equipment, 
2 to 20 years; and computer equipment, 1.5 to 5 years. Leasehold 
improvements are amortized over the shorter of their estimated 
useful lives or the related lease term, rarely exceeding 25 years. 
	
Capitalized software costs incurred or acquired after technological 
feasibility has been established are amortized over periods ranging 
up to 3 years. Capitalized costs for internal-use software are amortized 
on a straight-line basis over periods up to 2 years. (See “Software 
Costs” on page 79 for additional information). Other intangible assets 
are amortized over periods between 1 and 7 years. 
Environmental
The cost of internal environmental protection programs that are 
preventative in nature are expensed as incurred. When a cleanup 
program becomes likely, and it is probable that the company will 
incur cleanup costs and those costs can be reasonably estimated, 
the company accrues remediation costs for known environmental 
liabilities. The company’s maximum exposure for all environmental 
liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts are recorded for 
environmental liabilities that are not probable or estimable.
Asset Retirement Obligations
Asset retirement obligations (ARO) are legal obligations associated 
with the retirement of long-lived assets. These liabilities are initially 
recorded at fair value and the related asset retirement costs are 
capitalized by increasing the carrying amount of the related assets 
by the same amount as the liability. Asset retirement costs are 
subsequently depreciated over the useful lives of the related assets. 
Subsequent to initial recognition, the company records period-to-
period changes in the ARO liability resulting from the passage of 
time in interest expense and revisions to either the timing or the 
amount of the original expected cash flows to the related assets.
Defined Benefit Pension and  
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
and nonpension postretirement benefit plans (retirement-related 
benefit plans) is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position. The funded status is measured as the difference 
between the fair value of plan assets and the benefit obligation at 
December 31, the measurement date. For defined benefit pension 
plans, the benefit obligation is the projected benefit obligation (PBO), 
which represents the actuarial present value of benefits expected 
to be paid upon retirement based on employee services already 
rendered and estimated future compensation levels. For the 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the benefit obligation is 
the accumulated postretirement benefit obligation (APBO), which 
represents the actuarial present value of postretirement benefits 
attributed to employee services already rendered. The fair value 
of plan assets represents the current market value of cumulative 
company and participant contributions made to an irrevocable trust 
fund, held for the sole benefit of participants, which are invested by 
the trust fund. Overfunded plans, with the fair value of plan assets 
exceeding the benefit obligation, are aggregated and recorded as 
a prepaid pension asset equal to this excess. Underfunded plans, 
with the benefit obligation exceeding the fair value of plan assets, 
are aggregated and recorded as a retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligation equal to this excess. 
	
The current portion of the retirement and nonpension post-
retirement benefit obligations represents the actuarial present value 
of benefits payable in the next 12 months exceeding the fair value of 
plan assets, measured on a plan-by-plan basis. This obligation is 
recorded in compensation and benefits in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. 


===== PAGE 84 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
82
	
Net periodic pension and nonpension postretirement benefit 
cost/(income) is recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
and includes service cost, interest cost, expected return on plan 
assets, amortization of prior service costs/(credits) and (gains)/losses 
previously recognized as a component of other comprehensive 
income/(loss) and amortization of the net transition asset remaining 
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss). Service cost 
represents the actuarial present value of participant benefits earned 
in the current year. Interest cost represents the time value of money 
cost associated with the passage of time. Certain events, such as 
changes in the employee base, plan amendments and changes in 
actuarial assumptions, result in a change in the benefit obligation 
and the corresponding change in other comprehensive income/
(loss). The result of these events is amortized as a component of 
net periodic cost/(income) over the service lives or life expectancy 
of the participants, depending on the plan, provided such amounts 
exceed thresholds which are based upon the benefit obligation or 
the value of plan assets. Net periodic cost/(income) is recorded in 
cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings 
based on the employees’ respective function. 
	
(Gains)/losses and prior service costs/(credits) not recognized 
as a component of net periodic cost/(income) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings as they arise are recognized as a component 
of other comprehensive income in the Consolidated Statement of 
Comprehensive Income. Those (gains)/losses and prior service costs/ 
(credits) are subsequently recognized as a component of net periodic 
cost/(income) pursuant to the recognition and amortization provisions 
of applicable accounting guidance. (Gains)/losses arise as a result 
of differences between actual experience and assumptions or as a 
result of changes in actuarial assumptions. Prior service costs/(credits) 
represent the cost of benefit changes attributable to prior service 
granted in plan amendments. 
	
The measurement of benefit obligations and net periodic cost/
(income) is based on estimates and assumptions approved by the 
company’s management. These valuations reflect the terms of the 
plans and use participant-specific information such as compensation, 
age and years of service, as well as certain assumptions, including 
estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan assets, rate of 
compensation increases, interest crediting rates and mortality rates.
Defined Contribution Plans
The company’s contribution for defined contribution plans is recorded 
when the employee renders service to the company, essentially 
coinciding with the cash contributions to the plans. The charge is 
recorded in cost, SG&A and RD&E in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings based on the employees’ respective function.
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation represents the cost related to stock-
based awards granted to employees. The company measures stock-
based compensation cost at the grant date, based on the estimated 
fair value of the award and recognizes the cost on a straight-line 
basis (net of estimated forfeitures) over the employee requisite 
service period. The company estimates the fair value of stock 
options using a Black-Scholes valuation model. The company also 
grants its employees Restricted Stock Units (RSUs), including 
Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs), and Performance Share 
Units (PSUs). RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that 
entitle the holder to shares of common stock as the award vests, 
typically over a one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards 
is determined and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s 
stock price, adjusted for the exclusion of dividend equivalents. All 
stock-based compensation cost is recorded in cost, SG&A, and 
RD&E in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the 
employees’ respective function. 
	
The company records deferred tax assets for awards that result 
in deductions on the company’s income tax returns, based on the 
amount of compensation cost recognized and the statutory tax rate 
in the jurisdiction in which it will receive a deduction. Differences 
between the deferred tax assets recognized for financial reporting 
purposes and the actual tax deduction reported on the income tax 
return are recorded in additional paid-in capital (if the tax deduction 
exceeds the deferred tax asset) or in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings (if the deferred tax asset exceeds the tax deduction 
and no additional paid-in capital exists from previous awards). See 
note R, “Stock-Based Compensation,” on pages 118 to 121 for 
additional information.
Income Taxes
Income tax expense is based on reported income before income 
taxes. Deferred income taxes reflect the tax effect of temporary 
differences between asset and liability amounts that are recognized 
for financial reporting purposes and the amounts that are recognized 
for income tax purposes. These deferred taxes are measured by 
applying currently enacted tax laws. Valuation allowances are 
recognized to reduce deferred tax assets to the amount that will 
more likely than not be realized. In assessing the need for a valuation 
allowance, management considers all available evidence for each 
jurisdiction including past operating results, estimates of future 
taxable income and the feasibility of ongoing tax planning strategies. 
When the company changes its determination as to the amount of 
deferred tax assets that can be realized, the valuation allowance is 
adjusted with a corresponding impact to income tax expense in the 
period in which such determination is made. 
	
The company recognizes tax liabilities when, despite the company’s 
belief that its tax return positions are supportable, the company 
believes that certain positions may not be fully sustained upon review 
by tax authorities. Benefits from tax positions are measured at the 
largest amount of benefit that is greater than 50 percent likely of 
being realized upon settlement. The current portion of tax liabilities 
is included in taxes and the noncurrent portion of tax liabilities is 


===== PAGE 85 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
83
included in other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position. To the extent that new information becomes available which 
causes the company to change its judgment regarding the adequacy 
of existing tax liabilities, such changes to tax liabilities will impact 
income tax expense in the period in which such determination is 
made. Interest and penalties, if any, related to accrued liabilities for 
potential tax assessments are included in income tax expense.
Translation of Non-U.S. Currency Amounts
Assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries that have a local 
functional currency are translated to United States (U.S.) dollars at 
year-end exchange rates. Translation adjustments are recorded in 
other comprehensive income. Income and expense items are translated 
at weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. 
	
Inventories, property, plant and equipment—net and other non-
monetary assets and liabilities of non-U.S. subsidiaries and branches 
that operate in U.S. dollars are translated at the approximate exchange 
rates prevailing when the company acquired the assets or liabilities. 
All other assets and liabilities denominated in a currency other than 
U.S. dollars are translated at year-end exchange rates with the 
transaction gain or loss recognized in other (income) and expense. 
Cost of sales and depreciation are translated at historical exchange 
rates. All other income and expense items are translated at the 
weighted-average rates of exchange prevailing during the year. These 
translation gains and losses are included in net income for the period 
in which exchange rates change.
Derivative Financial Instruments
All derivatives are recognized in the Consolidated Statement of 
Financial Position at fair value and are reported in prepaid expenses 
and other current assets, investments and sundry assets, other 
accrued expenses and liabilities or other liabilities. Classification of 
each derivative as current or noncurrent is based upon whether the 
maturity of the instrument is less than or greater than 12 months. To 
qualify for hedge accounting, the company requires that the instruments 
be effective in reducing the risk exposure that they are designated 
to hedge. For instruments that hedge cash flows, hedge designation 
criteria also require that it be probable that the underlying transaction 
will occur. Instruments that meet established accounting criteria are 
formally designated as hedges. These criteria demonstrate that the 
derivative is expected to be highly effective at offsetting changes in 
fair value or cash flows of the underlying exposure both at inception 
of the hedging relationship and on an ongoing basis. The method of 
assessing hedge effectiveness and measuring hedge ineffectiveness 
is formally documented at hedge inception. The company assesses 
hedge effectiveness and measures hedge ineffectiveness at least 
quarterly throughout the designated hedge period.
	
Where the company applies hedge accounting, the company 
designates each derivative as a hedge of: (1) the fair value of a 
recognized financial asset or liability or of an unrecognized firm 
commitment (fair value hedge attributable to interest rate or foreign 
currency risk); (2) the variability of anticipated cash flows of a forecasted 
transaction or the cash flows to be received or paid related to a 
recognized financial asset or liability (cash flow hedge attributable 
to interest rate or foreign currency risk); or (3) a hedge of a long-term 
investment (net investment hedge) in a foreign operation. In addition, 
the company may enter into derivative contracts that economically 
hedge certain of its risks, even though hedge accounting does not 
apply or the company elects not to apply hedge accounting. In these 
cases, there exists a natural hedging relationship in which changes 
in the fair value of the derivative, which are recognized currently in 
net income, act as an economic offset to changes in the fair value 
of the underlying hedged item(s). 
	
Changes in the fair value of a derivative that is designated as a 
fair value hedge, along with offsetting changes in the fair value of the 
underlying hedged exposure, are recorded in earnings each period. 
For hedges of interest rate risk, the fair value adjustments are 
recorded as adjustments to interest expense and cost of financing 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. For hedges of currency 
risk associated with recorded financial assets or liabilities, derivative 
fair value adjustments are recognized in other (income) and expense 
in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Changes in the fair value 
of a derivative that is designated as a cash flow hedge are recorded, 
net of applicable taxes, in other comprehensive income, in the 
Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive Income. When net 
income is affected by the variability of the underlying cash flow, the 
applicable offsetting amount of the gain or loss from the derivative 
that is deferred in equity is released to net income and reported 
in interest expense, cost, SG&A expense or other (income) and 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings based on the 
nature of the underlying cash flow hedged. Effectiveness for net 
investment hedging derivatives is measured on a spot-to-spot basis. 
The effective portion of changes in the fair value of net investment 
hedging derivatives and other non-derivative financial instruments 
designated as net investment hedges are recorded as foreign 
currency translation adjustments in other comprehensive income. 
Changes in the fair value of the portion of a net investment hedging 
derivative excluded from the effectiveness assessment are recorded 
in interest expense. If the underlying hedged item in a fair value hedge 
ceases to exist, all changes in the fair value of the derivative are 
included in net income each period until the instrument matures. 
When the derivative transaction ceases to exist, a hedged asset or 
liability is no longer adjusted for changes in its fair value except as 
required under other relevant accounting standards. Derivatives that 
are not designated as hedges, as well as changes in the fair value of 
derivatives that do not effectively offset changes in the fair value of 
the underlying hedged item throughout the designated hedge period 
(collectively, “ineffectiveness”), are recorded in net income each 
period and are reported in other (income) and expense. When a 
cash flow hedging relationship is discontinued, the net gain or loss 
in accumulated other comprehensive income must generally remain 


===== PAGE 86 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
84
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) in the Consolidated 
Statement of Changes in Equity until the item that was hedged affects 
earnings. However, when it is probable that a forecasted transaction 
will not occur by the end of the originally specified time period or 
within an additional two-month period thereafter, the net gain or loss 
in accumulated other comprehensive income must be reclassified 
into earnings immediately. The company reports cash flows arising 
from derivative financial instruments designated as fair value or 
cash flow hedges consistent with the classification of cash flows 
from the underlying hedged items that these derivatives are hedging. 
Accordingly, the cash flows associated with derivatives designated 
as fair value or cash flow hedges are classified in cash flows from 
operating activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Cash flows from derivatives designated as net investment hedges 
and derivatives that do not qualify as hedges are reported in cash 
flows from investing activities. For currency swaps designated as 
hedges of foreign currency denominated debt (included in the 
company’s debt risk management program as addressed in note D, 
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100), cash flows directly 
associated with the settlement of the principal element of these 
swaps are reported in payments to settle debt in cash flows from 
financing activities in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Financial Instruments
In determining the fair value of its financial instruments, the company 
uses a variety of methods and assumptions that are based on market 
conditions and risks existing at each balance sheet date. Refer to 
note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 93 to 96 for further 
information. All methods of assessing fair value result in a general 
approximation of value, and such value may never actually be realized.
Fair Value Measurement 
Accounting guidance defines fair value as the price that would be 
received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly 
transaction between market participants at the measurement date. 
Under this guidance, the company is required to classify certain 
assets and liabilities based on the following fair value hierarchy:
•	
Level 1—Quoted prices in active markets that are  
unadjusted and accessible at the measurement date  
for identical, unrestricted assets or liabilities;
•	
Level 2—Quoted prices for identical assets and liabilities  
in markets that are not active, quoted prices for similar  
assets and liabilities in active markets or financial instruments  
for which significant inputs are observable, either directly  
or indirectly; and
•	
Level 3—Prices or valuations that require inputs that are  
both significant to the fair value measurement and 
unobservable, including the company’s own assumptions  
in determining fair value.
The guidance requires the use of observable market data if such 
data is available without undue cost and effort. 
	
When available, the company uses unadjusted quoted market 
prices to measure the fair value and classifies such items within 
Level 1. If quoted market prices are not available, fair value is based 
upon internally developed models that use current market-based 
or independently sourced market parameters such as interest rates 
and currency rates. Items valued using internally generated models 
are classified according to the lowest level input or value driver that 
is significant to the valuation. 
	
The determination of fair value considers various factors including 
interest rate yield curves and time value underlying the financial 
instruments. For derivatives and debt securities, the company uses 
a discounted cash flow analysis using discount rates commensurate 
with the duration of the instrument. 
	
In determining the fair value of financial instruments, the company 
considers certain market valuation adjustments to the “base valuations” 
calculated using the methodologies described below for several 
parameters that market participants would consider in determining 
fair value:
•	
Counterparty credit risk adjustments are applied to  
financial instru­ments, taking into account the actual credit risk 
of a counterparty as observed in the credit default swap 
market to determine the true fair value of such an instrument.
•	
Credit risk adjustments are applied to reflect the company’s 
own credit risk when valuing all liabilities measured at  
fair value. The methodology is consistent with that applied  
in developing counterparty credit risk adjustments, but 
incorporates the company’s own credit risk as observed  
in the credit default swap market.
As an example, the fair value of derivatives is derived by a discounted 
cash flow model using observable market inputs such as known 
notional value amounts, yield curves, spot and forward exchange 
rates as well as discount rates. These inputs relate to liquid, heavily 
traded currencies with active markets which are available for the 
full term of the derivative.
	
Certain financial assets are measured at fair value on a nonrecurring 
basis. These assets include equity method investments that are 
recognized at fair value at the end of the period to the extent that 
they are deemed to be other-than-temporarily impaired. Certain 
assets that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis can be 
subject to nonrecurring fair value measurements. These assets 
include public cost method investments that are deemed to be other-
than-temporarily impaired. In the event of an other-than-temporary 
impairment of a financial instrument, fair value is measured using a 
model described above.
	
Accounting guidance permits the measurement of eligible 
financial assets, financial liabilities and firm commitments at fair value, 
on an instrument-by-instrument basis, that are otherwise not permitted 
to be accounted for at fair value under other accounting standards. 
This election is irrevocable. The company does not apply the fair 
value option to any eligible assets or liabilities.


===== PAGE 87 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
85
Cash Equivalents
All highly liquid investments with maturities of three months or less at 
the date of purchase are considered to be cash equivalents.
Marketable Securities
Debt securities included in current assets represent securities that 
are expected to be realized in cash within one year of the balance 
sheet date. Long-term debt securities that are not expected to be 
realized in cash within one year and alliance equity securities are 
included in investments and sundry assets. Debt and marketable 
equity securities are considered available for sale and are reported 
at fair value with unrealized gains and losses, net of applicable taxes, 
recorded in other comprehensive income/(loss). The realized gains 
and losses for available-for-sale securities are included in other 
(income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
Realized gains and losses are calculated based on the specific 
identification method. 
	
In determining whether an other-than-temporary decline in market 
value has occurred, the company considers the duration that, and 
extent to which, the fair value of the investment is below its cost, the 
financial condition and near-term prospects of the issuer or underlying 
collateral of a security; and the company’s intent and ability to retain 
the security in order to allow for an anticipated recovery in fair value. 
Other-than-temporary declines in fair value from amortized cost for 
available-for-sale equity and debt securities that the company intends 
to sell or would more-likely-than-not be required to sell before the 
expected recovery of the amortized cost basis are charged to other 
(income) and expense in the period in which the loss occurs. For 
debt securities that the company has no intent to sell and believes 
that it more-likely-than-not will not be required to sell prior to recovery, 
only the credit loss component of the impairment is recognized in 
other (income) and expense, while the remaining loss is recognized 
in other comprehensive income/(loss). The credit loss component 
recognized in other (income) and expense is identified as the amount 
of the principal cash flows not expected to be received over the 
remaining term of the debt security as projected using the company’s 
cash flow projections. 
Inventories
Raw materials, work in process and finished goods are stated at the 
lower of average cost or market. Cash flows related to the sale of 
inventories are reflected in net cash from operating activities in the 
Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows. 
Allowance for Credit Losses
Receivables are recorded concurrent with billing and shipment of a 
product and/or delivery of a service to customers. A reasonable 
estimate of probable net losses on the value of customer receivables 
is recognized by establishing an allowance for credit losses.
Notes and Accounts Receivable—Trade
An allowance for uncollectible trade receivables is estimated based 
on a combination of write-off history, aging analysis and any specific, 
known troubled accounts.
Financing Receivables
Financing receivables include sales-type leases, direct financing 
leases and loans. Leases are accounted for in accordance with lease 
accounting standards. Loan receivables are financial assets recorded 
at amortized cost which approximates fair value. The company 
determines its allowances for credit losses on financing receivables 
based on two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan 
receivables (see note F, “Financing Receivables,” on pages 101 to 
104). The company further segments the portfolio via two classes: 
major markets and growth markets. 
	
When calculating the allowances, the company considers its 
ability to mitigate a potential loss by repossessing leased equipment 
and by considering the current fair market value of any other collateral. 
The value of the equipment is the net realizable value. The allowance 
for credit losses for capital leases, installment sales and customer 
loans includes an assessment of the entire balance of the capital 
lease or loan, including amounts not yet due. The methodologies that 
the company uses to calculate its receivables reserves, which are 
applied consistently to its different portfolios, are as follows: 
Individually Evaluated—The company reviews all financing 
receivables considered at risk on a quarterly basis. The review primarily 
consists of an analysis based upon current information available 
about the customer, such as financial statements, news reports, 
published credit ratings, current market-implied credit analysis, as 
well as the current economic environment, collateral net of 
repossession cost and prior collection history. For loans that are 
collateral dependent, impairment is measured using the fair value of 
the collateral when foreclosure is probable. Using this information, the 
company determines the expected cash flow for the receivable and 
calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the probability of loss. 
For those accounts in which the loss is probable, the company 
records a specific reserve. 


===== PAGE 88 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
86
Collectively Evaluated—The company records an unallocated 
reserve that is calculated by applying a reserve rate to its different 
portfolios, excluding accounts that have been specifically reserved. 
This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, probability of default, 
term, characteristics (lease/loan), and loss history. Factors that could 
result in actual receivable losses that are materially different from the 
estimated reserve include sharp changes in the economy, or a significant 
change in the economic health of a particular customer that represents 
a concentration in the company’s receivables portfolio. 
Other Credit Related Policies
Non-Accrual—Certain receivables for which the company has 
recorded a specific reserve may also be placed on non-accrual 
status. Non-accrual assets are those receivables (impaired loans or 
nonperforming leases) with specific reserves and other accounts for 
which it is likely that the company will be unable to collect all amounts 
due according to original terms of the lease or loan agreement. Income 
recognition is discontinued on these receivables. Cash collections 
are first applied as a reduction to principal outstanding. Any cash 
received in excess of principal payments outstanding is recognized 
as interest income. Receivables may be removed from non-accrual 
status, if appropriate, based upon changes in client circumstances.
Write Off—Receivable losses are charged against the allowance 
when management believes the uncollectibility of the receivable is 
confirmed. Subsequent recoveries, if any, are credited to the allowance.
Past Due—The company views receivables as past due when 
payment has not been received after 90 days, measured from the 
original billing date.
Impaired Loans—As stated above, the company evaluates all financing 
receivables considered at-risk, including loans, for impairment on a 
quarterly basis. The company considers any loan with an individually 
evaluated reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of 
impairment, loans will also be placed on non-accrual status as 
appropriate. Client loans are primarily for software and services and 
are unsecured. These loans are subjected to credit analysis to evaluate 
the associated risk and, when deemed necessary, actions are taken 
to mitigate risks in the loan agreements which include covenants to 
protect against credit deterioration during the life of the obligation.
Estimated Residual Values of Lease Assets
The recorded residual values of lease assets are estimated at the 
inception of the lease to be the expected fair value of the assets at 
the end of the lease term. The company periodically reassesses the 
realizable value of its lease residual values. Any anticipated increases 
in specific future residual values are not recognized before realization 
through remarketing efforts. Anticipated decreases in specific future 
residual values that are considered to be other-than-temporary are 
recognized immediately upon identification and are recorded as an 
adjustment to the residual value estimate. For sales-type and direct-
financing leases, this reduction lowers the recorded net investment 
and is recognized as a loss charged to financing income in the period 
in which the estimate is changed, as well as an adjustment to 
unearned income to reduce future-period financing income.
Common Stock
Common stock refers to the $.20 par value per share capital stock 
as designated in the company’s Certificate of Incorporation. Treasury 
stock is accounted for using the cost method. When treasury stock 
is reissued, the value is computed and recorded using a weighted-
average basis. 
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
Earnings per share (EPS) is computed using the two-class method. 
The two-class method determines EPS for each class of common 
stock and participating securities according to dividends and 
dividend equivalents and their respective participation rights in 
undistributed earnings. Basic EPS of common stock is computed by 
dividing net income by the weighted-average number of common 
shares outstanding for the period. Diluted EPS of common stock is 
computed on the basis of the weighted-average number of shares of 
common stock plus the effect of dilutive potential common shares 
outstanding during the period using the treasury stock method. Dilutive 
potential common shares include outstanding stock options, stock 
awards and convertible notes. See note P, “Earnings Per Share of 
Common Stock,” on page 117 for additional information. 
Note B.  
Accounting Changes
New Standards to be Implemented
In May 2011, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) 
issued amended guidance and disclosure requirements for fair 
value measurements. These amendments are not expected to have 
a material impact on the consolidated financial results. These 
changes were effective January 1, 2012 on a prospective basis.
Standards Implemented
In September 2011, the FASB issued additional disclosure requirements 
for entities which participate in multi-employer pension plans. The 
purpose of the new disclosures is to provide financial statement 
users with information about an employer’s level of participation in 
these plans and the financial health of significant plans. The new 
disclosures are effective for the full year 2011 financial statements. 
The company does not participate in any material multi-employer 
plans. There was no impact in the consolidated financial results as 
the changes relate only to additional disclosures.
	
In September 2011, the FASB issued amended guidance that 
simplified how entities test goodwill for impairment. After an 
assessment of certain qualitative factors, if it is determined to be 
more likely than not that the fair value of a reporting unit is less than 
its carrying amount, entities must perform the quantitative analysis 
of the goodwill impairment test. Otherwise, the quantitative test(s) 
become optional. The guidance was effective January 1, 2012 with 
early adoption permitted. The company elected to adopt this 
guidance for the 2011 goodwill impairment test performed in the 
fourth quarter. There was no impact in the consolidated financial 
results.


===== PAGE 89 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
87
	
In June 2011, the FASB issued amended disclosure requirements 
for the presentation of other comprehensive income (OCI) and 
accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI). OCI is comprised 
of costs, expenses, gains and losses that are included in comprehensive 
income but excluded from net income, and AOCI comprises the 
aggregated balances of OCI in equity. The amended guidance 
eliminated the option to present period changes (OCI) as part of 
the Statement of Changes in Equity. Under the amended guidance, 
all period changes (OCI) are to be presented either in a single 
continuous statement of comprehensive income, or in two separate 
but consecutive financial statements. Only summary totals are to be 
included in the AOCI section of the Statement of Changes in Equity. 
In December 2011, the FASB deferred the requirement to present 
reclassifications from AOCI on the face of the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings. The changes were effective January 1, 2012 with early 
adoption permitted. The company elected to early adopt the two- 
statement approach effective with its full year 2011 financial statements. 
There was no impact in the consolidated financial results as the 
amendments related only to changes in financial statement presentation. 
See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 110 and 112 for tax impacts 
related to individual items of OCI and a detailed presentation of the 
components of AOCI included in the Statement of Changes in Equity.
	
In December 2010, the FASB issued amended guidance to clarify 
the acquisition date that should be used for reporting pro-forma 
financial information for business combinations. If comparative 
financial statements are presented, the pro-forma revenue and 
earnings of the combined entity for the comparable prior reporting 
period should be reported as though the acquisition date for all 
business combinations that occurred during the current year had 
been completed as of the beginning of the comparable prior annual 
reporting period. The amendments in this guidance became effective 
prospectively for business combinations for which the acquisition 
date was on or after January 1, 2011. There was no impact in the 
consolidated financial results as the amendments relate only to 
additional disclosures. In addition, the company had no acquisitions 
which required pro-forma financial information.
	
In December 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the guidance 
on goodwill impairment testing. The amendments modify step 1 of 
the goodwill impairment test for reporting units with zero or negative 
carrying amounts. For those reporting units, an entity is required to 
perform step 2 of the goodwill impairment test if it is more likely than 
not that a goodwill impairment exists. In making that determination, 
an entity should consider whether there are any adverse qualitative 
factors indicating that impairment may exist. The amendments were 
effective January 1, 2011 and did not have an impact in the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.
	
In July 2010, the FASB issued amendments to the disclosure 
requirements about the credit quality of financing receivables and 
the allowance for credit losses. The purpose of the additional 
disclosures is to enable users of financial statements to better 
understand the nature of credit risk inherent in an entity’s portfolio 
of financing receivables and how that risk is analyzed. For end-of-
period balances, the new disclosures were required to be made in 
all interim and annual periods ending on or after December 15, 2010. 
For activity during a reporting period, the disclosures were required 
to be included in all interim and annual periods after January 1, 2011. 
In January 2011, the FASB temporarily deferred the disclosures 
regarding troubled debt restructurings which were included in the 
disclosure requirements of this amendment. In April 2011, the FASB 
issued additional guidance and clarifications to help creditors in 
determining whether a creditor has granted a concession, and 
whether a debtor is experiencing financial difficulties for purposes 
of determining whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled debt 
restructuring. The new guidance and the previously deferred disclosures 
became effective July 1, 2011 applied retrospectively to January 1, 2011. 
Prospective application was required for any new impairments 
identified as a result of this guidance. These changes did not have 
a material impact in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
In January 2010, the FASB issued additional disclosure 
requirements for fair value measurements. According to the guidance, 
the fair value hierarchy disclosures should be disaggregated by 
class of assets and liabilities. A class is often a subset of assets or 
liabilities within a line item in the statement of financial position. In 
addition, significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 of the fair value 
hierarchy are required to be disclosed. These additional requirements 
became effective January 1, 2010 for quarterly and annual reporting. 
These amendments did not have an impact in the consolidated 
financial results as this guidance relates only to additional disclosures. 
Certain disclosure requirements relating to fair value measurements 
using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) were deferred until 
January 1, 2011. These additional requirements did not have an 
impact in the consolidated financial results as they related only to 
additional disclosures. 
	
In October 2009, the FASB issued amended revenue recognition 
guidance for arrangements with multiple deliverables. The new 
guidance requires the use of management’s best estimate of selling 
price (BESP) for the deliverables in an arrangement when VSOE, 
vendor objective evidence (VOE) or TPE of the selling price is not 
available. In addition, excluding specific software revenue recognition 
guidance, the residual method of allocating arrangement consideration 
is no longer permitted, and an entity is required to allocate arrangement 
consideration using the relative selling price method. In accordance 
with the guidance, the company elected to early adopt its provisions 
as of January 1, 2010 on a prospective basis for all new or materially 
modified arrangements entered into on or after that date. The adoption 
of this guidance did not have a material impact in the Consolidated 
Financial Statements.
	
Also, in October 2009, the FASB issued guidance which 
amended the scope of existing software revenue recognition 
guidance. Tangible products containing software components and 
non-software components that function together to deliver the 
tangible product’s essential functionality are no longer within the 
scope of software revenue recognition guidance and are accounted 
for based on other applicable revenue recognition guidance. In 
addition, the amendments require that hardware components of a 
tangible product containing software components are always 
excluded from the software revenue recognition guidance. This 
guidance had to be adopted in the same period that the company 


===== PAGE 90 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
88
adopted the amended guidance for arrangements with multiple 
deliverables described in the preceding paragraph. Therefore, the 
company elected to early adopt this guidance as of January 1, 2010 
on a prospective basis for all new or materially modified arrangements 
entered into on or after that date. The adoption of this guidance did 
not have a material impact in the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
	
For transactions entered into prior to January 1, 2010, the company 
recognized revenue based on established revenue recognition 
guidance as it related to the elements within the arrangement. For 
the vast majority of the company’s arrangements involving multiple 
deliverables, the fee from the arrangement was allocated to each 
respective element based on its relative fair value, using VSOE. In 
the limited circumstances when the company was not able to 
determine VSOE for all of the elements of the arrangement, but was 
able to obtain VSOE for any undelivered elements, revenue was 
allocated using the residual method. Under the residual method, 
the amount of revenue allocated to delivered elements equaled 
the total arrangement consideration less the aggregate fair value 
of any undelivered elements, and no revenue was recognized until 
all elements without VSOE had been delivered. If VSOE of any 
undelivered items did not exist, revenue from the entire arrangement 
was initially deferred and recognized at the earlier of: (i) delivery of 
those elements for which VSOE did not exist or (ii) when VSOE was 
established. The residual method and recognition of revenue on a 
ratable basis were generally used in circumstances where VSOE, 
as applicable, was unavailable. 
	
In June 2009, the FASB issued amendments to the accounting 
rules for variable interest entities (VIEs). The new guidance eliminates 
the quantitative approach previously required for determining the 
primary beneficiary of a variable interest entity and requires ongoing 
qualitative reassessments of whether an enterprise is the primary 
beneficiary. The company adopted these amendments for the interim 
and annual reporting periods beginning on January 1, 2010. The 
adoption of these amendments did not have a material impact in 
the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
	
In September 2009, the FASB issued amended guidance 
concerning fair value measurements of investments in certain entities 
that calculate net asset value per share (or its equivalent). If fair value 
is not readily determinable, the amended guidance permits, as a 
practical expedient, a reporting entity to measure the fair value of 
an investment using the net asset value per share (or its equivalent) 
provided by the investee without further adjustment. In accordance 
with the guidance, the company adopted these amendments for the 
year ended December 31, 2009. There was no material impact in 
the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
	
In May 2009, the FASB issued guidelines on subsequent event 
accounting which sets forth: 1) the period after the balance sheet date 
during which management of a reporting entity should evaluate events 
or transactions that may occur for potential recognition or disclosure 
in the financial statements; 2) the circumstances under which an entity 
should recognize events or transactions occurring after the balance 
sheet date in its financial statements; and 3) the disclosures that an 
entity should make about events or transactions that occurred after 
the balance sheet date. These guidelines were effective for interim 
and annual periods ending after June 15, 2009, and the company 
adopted them in the quarter ended June 30, 2009. In February 2010, 
the guidance was amended to remove the requirement to disclose 
the date through which subsequent events were evaluated. There 
was no impact in the consolidated financial results. 
	
On January 1, 2009, the company adopted the revised FASB 
guidance regarding business combinations which was required to 
be applied to business combinations on a prospective basis. The 
revised guidance required that the acquisition method of accounting 
be applied to a broader set of business combinations, amended 
the definition of a business combination, provided a definition of a 
business, required an acquirer to recognize an acquired business 
at its fair value at the acquisition date, and required the assets and 
liabilities assumed in a business combination to be measured and 
recognized at their fair values as of the acquisition date (with limited 
exceptions). There was no impact upon adoption and the effects of 
this guidance depend on the nature and significance of business 
combinations occurring after the effective date.
	
In April 2009, the FASB issued an amendment to the revised 
business combination guidance regarding the accounting for assets 
acquired and liabilities assumed in a business combination that arise 
from contingencies. The requirements of this amended guidance carry 
forward without significant revision the guidance on contingencies 
which existed prior to January 1, 2009. Assets acquired and liabilities 
assumed in a business combination that arise from contingencies 
are recognized at fair value if fair value can be reasonably estimated. 
If fair value cannot be reasonably estimated, the asset or liability 
would generally be recognized in accordance with the Accounting 
Standards Codification (ASC) Topic 450 on contingencies. There 
was no impact upon adoption.


===== PAGE 91 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
89
Note C.  
Acquisitions/Divestitures
Acquisitions
2011
In 2011, the company completed five acquisitions of privately held 
companies at an aggregate cost of $1,849 million. 
	
These acquisitions were completed as follows: in the second 
quarter, TRIRIGA, Inc. (TRIRIGA); and in the fourth quarter, i2, 
Algorithmics, Inc. (Algorithmics), Q1 Labs and Curam Software Ltd. 
(Curam Software). TRIRIGA was integrated into the Software 
and Global Business Services (GBS) segments upon acquisition. 
All other acquisitions were integrated into the Software segment 
upon acquisition. All acquisitions reflected 100 percent ownership 
of the acquired companies.
The table below reflects the purchase price related to these acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2011.
2011 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Total 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   251
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
88
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,291
Completed technology
 7
320
Client relationships
 7
222
Patents/trademarks
1 to 7
17 
Total assets acquired
2,190
Current liabilities
(191)
Noncurrent liabilities
(150)
Total liabilities assumed
(341)
Total purchase price
$1,849
N/A—Not applicable
TRIRIGA is a provider of facility and real estate management software 
solutions, which help clients make strategic decisions regarding 
space usage, evaluate alternative real estate initiatives, generate 
higher returns from capital projects and assess environmental impact 
investments. The acquisition adds advanced real estate intelligence 
to the company’s smarter buildings initiative. i2 expands the company’s 
big data analytics software for smarter cities by helping both public 
and private entities in government, law enforcement, retail, insurance 
and other industries access and analyze information they need to 
address crime, fraud and security threats. Algorithmics provides 
software and services for improved business insights at financial 
and insurance institutions to assess risk and address regulatory 
challenges. Q1 Labs is a provider of security intelligence software 
and will accelerate efforts to help clients more intelligently secure 
their enterprises by applying analytics to correlate information from 
key security domains and creating security dashboards for their 
organizations. Curam Software is a provider of software and services 
which help governments improve the efficiency, effectiveness and 
accessibility of social programs for smarter cities. 
	
Purchase price consideration for all acquisitions as reflected in 
the table above, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions are reported 
in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of acquired cash 
and cash equivalents. The overall weighted-average life of the 
indentified intangible assets acquired is 6.9 years. These identified 
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over 
their useful lives. Goodwill of $1,291 million has been assigned to 
the Software ($1,277 million) and GBS ($14 million) segments. It is 
expected that approximately 25 percent of the goodwill will be 
deductible for tax purposes. 
	


===== PAGE 92 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
90
	
On January 9, 2012, the company announced it had completed 
the acquisition of Platform Computing, a privately held company 
headquartered in Toronto, Ontario, Canada. Platform Computing 
is a global leader in cluster and grid management software for 
distributed computing environments. At the date of issuance of the 
financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not complete 
for the Platform Computing acquisition.
	
On January 11, 2012, the company announced it had completed 
the acquisition of Green Hat, a privately held company jointly head-
quartered in London, England and Wilmington, Delaware. Green Hat 
helps customers improve the quality of software application by 
enabling developers to leverage cloud computing technologies to 
conduct testing on a software application prior to its delivery. At the 
date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase 
accounting was not complete for the Green Hat acquisition
	
On February 1, 2012, the company completed the acquisition of 
Emptoris Inc., a privately held company based in Burlington, 
Massachusetts. Emptoris is a leading provider of cloud and 
on-premise analytics software that brings more intelligence to 
procurement and supply chain operations with spend, supplier and 
contract management for Smarter Commerce. At the date of issuance 
of the financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not 
completed for the Emptoris acquisition.
	
On February 10, 2012, the company completed the acquisition 
of Worklight, a privately held company based in Israel. Worklight is 
a leading provider of mobile software for smartphones and tablets 
and will become an important part of the company’s mobility strategy. 
At the date of issuance of the financial statements, the initial purchase 
accounting was not completed for the Worklight acquisition.
	
On February 15, 2012, the company announced that it had 
completed the acquisition of DemandTec, a public company based 
in San Mateo, California. DemandTec delivers cloud-based analytics 
software that enables businesses to examine different customer 
buying scenarios, both online and in-store. At the date of issuance 
of the financial statements, the initial purchase accounting was not 
completed for the DemandTec acquisition.
2010
In 2010, the company completed 17 acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $6,538 million.
Netezza Corporation (Netezza)—On November 10, 2010, the 
company completed the acquisition of 100 percent of Netezza, for 
cash consideration of $1,847 million. Netezza will expand the company’s 
business analytics initiatives to help clients gain faster insights into 
their business information, with increased performance at a lower 
cost of ownership. Netezza was integrated into the Software segment 
upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on page 91, 
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. It is expected that 
none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The overall 
weighted average useful life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired is 6.9 years.
Sterling Commerce—On August 27, 2010, the company completed 
the acquisition of 100 percent of Sterling Commerce, a wholly owned 
subsidiary of AT&T, Inc., for cash consideration of $1,415 million. 
Sterling Commerce will expand the company’s ability to help clients 
accelerate their interactions with customers, partners and suppliers 
through dynamic business networks using either on-premise or cloud 
delivery models. Sterling Commerce was integrated into the Software 
segment upon acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on 
page 91, was entirely assigned to the Software segment. It is expected 
that none of the goodwill will be deductible for tax purposes. The 
overall weighted average useful life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired is 6.9 years. 
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed 
acquisitions of 10 privately held companies and one publicly held 
company: in the first quarter, Lombardi Software, Inc. (Lombardi), 
Intelliden Inc. and Initiate Systems, Inc.; in the second quarter, Cast 
Iron Systems; in the third quarter, BigFix, Inc., Coremetrics and 
Datacap; and in the fourth quarter, Unica Corporation (Unica), a 
publicly held company, PSS Systems, OpenPages, Inc. (OpenPages) 
and Clarity Systems. Global Technology Services (GTS) completed 
an acquisition in the first quarter: the core operating assets of Wilshire 
Credit Corporation (Wilshire). GBS also completed an acquisition in 
the first quarter: National Interest Security Company, LLC, a privately 
held company. Systems and Technology (STG) completed acquisitions 
of two privately held companies: in the third quarter, Storwize; and 
in the fourth quarter, BLADE Network Technologies (BLADE). All 
acquisitions were for 100 percent of the acquired companies.
	
Lombardi is a leading provider of business process management 
software and services, and became part of the company’s application 
integration software portfolio. Intelliden is a leading provider of 
intelligent network automation software and will extend the network 
management offerings. Initiate is a market leader in data integrity 
software for information sharing among healthcare and government 
organizations. Cast Iron Systems, a leading Software as a Service 
(SaaS) and cloud application integration provider, enhances the 
WebSphere business integration portfolio. BigFix, Inc. is a leading 
provider of high-performance enterprise systems and security 
management solutions that revolutionizes the way IT organizations 
manage and secure their computing infrastructure. Coremetrics, a 
leader in Web analytics software, will expand the company’s business 
analytics capabilities by enabling organizations to use cloud 
computing services to develop faster, more targeted marketing 
campaigns. Datacap will strengthen the company’s ability to help 
organizations digitize, manage and automate their information assets.


===== PAGE 93 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
91
The table below reflects the purchase price related to the 2010 acquisitions and the resulting purchase price allocations as of December 31, 2010.
2010 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization 
Life (in Years)
Netezza
Sterling 
Commerce
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   218
$   196
$   377
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
73
106
209
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
1,410
1,032
2,312
Completed technology
 3 to 7
202
218
493
Client relationships
2 to 7
52
244
293
In-process R&D
5
4
—
17
Patents/trademarks
1 to 7
16
14
27 
Total assets acquired
1,975
1,810
3,728
Current liabilities
(9)
(129)
(161)
Noncurrent liabilities
(120)
(266)
(291)
Total liabilities assumed
(128)
(395)
(452)
Total purchase price
$1,847 
$1,415 
$3,277 
N/A—Not applicable
Unica, a leading provider of software and services used to automate 
marketing processes, will expand the company’s ability to help 
organizations analyze and predict customer preferences and develop 
more targeted marketing campaigns. PSS Systems is a leading 
provider of legal information governance and information management 
software. OpenPages is a leading provider of software that helps 
companies more easily identify and manage risk and compliance 
activities across the enterprise through a single management system. 
Clarity Systems delivers financial governance software that enables 
organizations to automate the process of collecting, preparing, 
certifying and controlling financial statements for electronic filing. 
Wilshire’s mortgage servicing platform will continue the strategic 
focus on the mortgage services industry and strengthens the 
commitment to deliver mortgage business process outsourcing 
solutions. National Interest Security Company will strengthen the 
ability to deliver advanced analytics and IT solutions to the public 
sector. Storwize, a provider of in-line data compression appliance 
solutions, will help the company to make it more affordable for clients 
to analyze massive amounts of data in order to provide new insights 
and business outcomes. BLADE provides server and top-of-rack 
switches as well as software to virtualize and manage cloud 
computing and other workloads. 
	
Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions” as 
reflected in the table above, is paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions 
are reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of 
acquired cash and cash equivalents. For the “Other Acquisitions,” 
the overall weighted-average life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired is 6.4 years. These identified intangible assets will be 
amortized on a straight-line basis over their useful lives. Goodwill of 
$2,312 million has been assigned to the Software ($1,653 million), 
GTS ($32 million), GBS ($252 million) and STG ($375 million) segments. 
It is expected that approximately 10 percent of the goodwill will be 
deductible for tax purposes.
2009
In 2009, the company completed six acquisitions at an aggregate 
cost of $1,471 million.
SPSS, Inc. (SPSS)—On October 2, 2009, the company acquired 
100 percent of the outstanding common shares of SPSS for cash 
consideration of $1,177 million. SPSS is a leading global provider of 
predictive analytics software and solutions and this acquisition 
strengthened the company’s business analytics and optimization 
capabilities. SPSS was integrated into the Software segment upon 
acquisition, and goodwill, as reflected in the table on the next page, 
was entirely assigned to the Software segment. Substantially all of 
the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes. The overall weighted 
average useful life of the identified intangible assets acquired, 
excluding goodwill, is 7.0 years. 


===== PAGE 94 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
92
2009 Acquisitions
($ in millions)
Amortization Life 
(in Years)
SPSS
Other 
Acquisitions
Current assets
$   397
$  13
Fixed assets/noncurrent assets
20
1
Intangible assets
Goodwill
N/A
748
255
Completed technology
4 to 7
105
39
Client relationships
5 to 7
30
20
Other identifiable assets
1 to 7
36
1 
Total assets acquired
1,336
330
Current liabilities
(157)
(34)
Noncurrent liabilities
(2)
0
Total liabilities assumed
(160)
(35)
Total purchase price
$1,177 
$295 
N/A—Not applicable
Other Acquisitions—The Software segment also completed 
acquisitions of four privately held companies: in the second quarter, 
Outblaze Limited, a messaging software provider, and Exeros, Inc., 
a data discovery firm; in the third quarter, security provider Ounce 
Labs, Inc.; and in the fourth quarter, Guardium, Inc., a database 
security company. GTS completed an acquisition in the fourth quarter: 
RedPill Solutions PTE Limited, a privately held company focused on 
business analytics.
	
Purchase price consideration for the “Other Acquisitions,” as 
reflected in the table above, was paid primarily in cash. All acquisitions 
were reported in the Consolidated Statement of Cash Flows net of 
acquired cash and cash equivalents. For the “Other Acquisitions,” 
the overall weighted-average life of the identified intangible assets 
acquired was 6.5 years. With the exception of goodwill, these identified 
intangible assets will be amortized on a straight-line basis over their 
useful lives. Goodwill of $255 million was assigned to the Software 
($246 million) and GTS ($10 million) segments. Substantially all of 
the goodwill is not deductible for tax purposes.
Divestitures
2011
During the fourth quarter of 2011, the company completed the 
divestiture of the iCluster business to Rocket Software. iCluster, 
which was acquired in the Data Mirror acquisition in 2007, was 
part of the Software business. This transaction was not material 
to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
	
During the second quarter of 2011, the company completed 
two divestitures related to subsidiaries of IBM Japan. The impact 
of these transactions was not material to the Consolidated Financial 
Statements.
2010
On March 31, 2010, the company completed the sale of its activities 
associated with the sales and support of Dassault Systemes’ 
(Dassault) product lifecycle management (PLM) software, including 
customer contracts and related assets to Dassault. The company 
received net proceeds of $459 million and recognized a net gain 
of $591 million on the transaction in the first quarter of 2010. The 
gain was net of the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain 
transaction costs and the assets and liabilities sold. The gain was 
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings and the net proceeds were reflected in proceeds from 
disposition of marketable securities and other investments within 
cash flow from investing activities in the Consolidated Statement of 
Cash Flows. 


===== PAGE 95 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
93
2009
On October 1, 2009, the company completed the divestiture of its 
UniData and UniVerse software products and related tools to Rocket 
Software, a privately held global software development firm. The 
company recognized gains related to this transaction in the fourth 
quarter of 2009 and in the fourth quarter of 2010.
	
On March 16, 2009, the company completed the sale of certain 
processes, resources, assets and third-party contracts related to 
its core logistics operations to Geodis. The company received 
proceeds of $365 million and recognized a net gain of $298 million 
on the transaction in the first quarter of 2009. The gain was net of 
the fair value of certain contractual terms, certain transaction costs 
and related real estate charges. As part of this transaction, the 
company outsourced its logistics operations to Geodis which enables 
the company to leverage industry-leading skills and scale and 
improve the productivity of the company’s supply chain. 
Note D.  
Financial Instruments
Fair Value Measurements
Financial Assets and Liabilities Measured at Fair Value on a Recurring Basis
The following tables present the company’s financial assets and financial liabilities that are measured at fair value on a recurring basis at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$      —
$2,082
$—
$2,082
Commercial paper
—
1,760
—
1,760
Money market funds
1,886
—
—
1,886
U.S. government securities
—
2,750
—
2,750
Other securities
—
8
—
8
Total
1,886
6,600
—
8,486(5)
Debt securities—noncurrent (2)
1
7
—
8
Available-for-sale equity investments (2)
69
14
—
83
Derivative assets (3)
Interest rate contracts
—
783
—
783
Foreign exchange contracts
—
510
—
510
Equity contracts
—
7
—
7
Total
—
1,300
—
1,300 (6)
Total assets
$1,956
$7,921
$—
$9,877 (6)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (4)
Foreign exchange contracts
$      —
$   523
$—
$   523
Equity contracts
—
8
—
8
Total liabilities
$      —
$   531
$—
$   531 (6)
(1)	Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(3)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments in sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position at December 31, 2011 are $546 million and $754 million, respectively. 
(4)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2011 are $365 million and $166 million, respectively. 
(5)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
(6)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and 
liability positions would have been reduced by $324 million each.


===== PAGE 96 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
94
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets
Cash equivalents (1)
Time deposits and certificates of deposit
$     —
$2,473 
$—
$  2,473
Commercial paper
—
2,673
—
2,673
Money market funds
1,532
—
—
1,532
Canada government securities
—
1,054
—
1,054
U.S. government securities
—
44
—
44
U.S. government agency securities
—
22
—
22
Other securities
—
3
—
3
Total
1,532
6,269
—
7,801(6)
Debt securities—current (2)
Commercial paper
—
490
—
490
U.S. government securities
—
500
—
500
Other securities
—
1
—
1
Total
—
990
—
990 (6)
Debt securities—noncurrent (3)
1
6
—
7
Available-for-sale equity investments (3)
445
13
—
458
Derivative assets (4)
Interest rate contracts
—
548
—
548
Foreign exchange contracts
—
539
—
539
Equity contracts
—
12
—
12
Total
—
1,099
—
1,099 (7)
Total assets
$1,978 
$8,377 
$—
$10,355 (7)
Liabilities
Derivative liabilities (5)
Foreign exchange contracts
$     —
$1,003 
$—
$  1,003
Equity contracts
—
3
—
     3
Total liabilities
$     —
$1,006 
$—
$  1,006 (7)
(1)	 Included within cash and cash equivalents in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
(2)	 Reported as marketable securities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(3)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(4)	 The gross balances of derivative assets contained within prepaid expenses and other current assets, and investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position at December 31, 2010 are $511 million and $588 million, respectively. 
(5)	The gross balances of derivative liabilities contained within other accrued expenses and liabilities, and other liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
at December 31, 2010 are $871 million and $135 million, respectively.
(6)	Available-for-sale securities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
(7)	If derivative exposures covered by a qualifying master netting agreement had been netted in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, the total derivative asset and 
liability positions would have been reduced by $475 million each. 
There were no significant transfers between Levels 1 and 2 for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010. 


===== PAGE 97 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
95
Debt and Marketable Equity Securities
The company’s cash equivalents and current debt securities are considered available-for-sale and recorded at fair value which is not materially 
different from carrying value in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. The following tables summarize the company’s noncurrent 
debt and marketable equity securities which are also considered available-for-sale and re­cord­ed at fair value in the Consolidated Statement 
of Finan­cial Position.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
Other securities
$  7
$  1
$—
$  8
Total
$  7
$  1
$—
$  8
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$58
$27 
$ (2 )
$83
(1)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Adjusted 
Cost
Gross 
Unrealized 
Gains
Gross 
Unrealized 
Losses
Fair 
Value
Debt securities—noncurrent (1)
Other securities
$    6
$    1
$(0 )
$    7
Total
$    6
$    1
$(0 )
$    7
Available-for-sale equity investments (1)
$194
$264 
$(0 )
$458
(1)	Included within investments and sundry assets in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
Financial Assets and Liabilities Not Measured at Fair Value
Short-Term Receivables and Payables
Notes and other accounts receivable and other investments are 
financial assets with carrying values that approximate fair value. 
Accounts payable, other accrued expenses and short-term debt are 
financial liabilities with carrying values that approximate fair value.
Loans and Long-Term Receivables
Fair values are based on discounted future cash flows using current 
interest rates offered for similar loans to clients with similar credit 
ratings for the same remaining maturities. At December 31, 2011 and 
2010, the difference between the carrying amount and estimated fair 
value for loans and long-term receivables was immaterial. 
Long-Term Debt
Fair value of publicly traded long-term debt is based on quoted 
market prices for the identical liability when traded as an asset in 
an active market. For other long-term debt for which a quoted market 
price is not available, an expected present value technique that uses 
rates currently available to the company for debt with similar terms 
and remaining maturities is used to estimate fair value. The carrying 
amount of long-term debt is $22,857 million and $21,846 million 
and the estimated fair value is $27,383 million and $24,006 million 
at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.


===== PAGE 98 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
96
Based on an evaluation of available evidence as of December 31, 2011, 
the company believes that unrealized losses on debt and marketable 
equity securities are temporary and do not represent an other-than-
temporary impairment.
	
Sales of debt and marketable equity securities during the period 
were as follows:
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Proceeds
$405 
$16
$ 24
Gross realized gains (before taxes)
232
6
3
Gross realized losses (before taxes)
(0)
(0)
(40)
The after-tax net unrealized holding gains/(losses) on available-for-
sale debt and marketable equity securities that have been included 
in other comprehensive income/(loss) for the period and the after tax 
net (gains)/losses reclassified from accumulated other comprehensive 
income/(loss) to net income were as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
Net unrealized gains/(losses)  
arising during the period
$    (7)
$51
Net unrealized (gains)/losses  
reclassified to net income*      
(143)
(0)
*	 Includes writedowns of $0.3 million and $3.6 million in 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
The contractual maturities of substantially all available-for-sale debt 
securities are less than one year at December 31 , 2011.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The company operates in multiple functional currencies and is 
a significant lender and borrower in the global markets. In the normal 
course of business, the company is exposed to the impact of interest 
rate changes and foreign currency fluctuations, and to a lesser extent 
equity and commodity price changes and client credit risk. The 
company limits these risks by following established risk management 
policies and procedures, including the use of derivatives, and, where 
cost effective, financing with debt in the currencies in which assets 
are denominated. For interest rate exposures, derivatives are used 
to better align rate movements between the interest rates associated 
with the company’s lease and other financial assets and the interest 
rates associated with its financing debt. Derivatives are also used 
to manage the related cost of debt. For foreign currency exposures, 
derivatives are used to better manage the cash flow volatility arising 
from foreign exchange rate fluctuations.
	
As a result of the use of derivative instruments, the company is 
exposed to the risk that counterparties to derivative contracts will 
fail to meet their contractual obligations. To mitigate the counterparty 
credit risk, the company has a policy of only entering into contracts 
with carefully selected major financial institutions based upon their 
credit ratings and other factors. The company’s established policies 
and procedures for mitigating credit risk on principal transactions 
include reviewing and establishing limits for credit exposure and 
continually assessing the creditworthiness of counterparties. The 
right of set-off that exists under certain of these arrangements 
enables the legal entities of the company subject to the arrangement 
to net amounts due to and from the counterparty reducing the 
maximum loss from credit risk in the event of counterparty default. 
	
The company is also a party to collateral security arrangements 
with most of its major counterparties. These arrangements require 
the company to hold or post collateral (cash or U.S. Treasury securities) 
when the derivative fair values exceed contractually established 
thresholds. Posting thresholds can be fixed or can vary based on 
credit default swap pricing or credit ratings received from the major 
credit agencies. The aggregate fair value of all derivative instruments 
under these collateralized arrangements that were in a liability position 
at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $131 million and $363 million, 
respectively, for which no collateral was posted at December 31, 2011. 
The company posted collateral of $9 million at December 31, 2010. 
Full collateralization of these agreements would be required in the 
event that the company’s credit rating falls below investment grade 
or if its credit default swap spread exceeds 250 basis points, as 
applicable, pursuant to the terms of the collateral security arrangements. 
The aggregate fair value of derivative instruments in net asset 
positions as of December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $1,300 million and 
$1,099 million, respectively. This amount represents the maximum 
exposure to loss at the reporting date as a result of the counterparties 
failing to perform as contracted. This exposure was reduced by 
$324 million and $475 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, of liabilities included in master netting arrangements 
with those counterparties. Additionally, at December 31, 2011 and 
2010, this exposure was reduced by $466 million and $88 million 
of collateral, respectively, received by the company. 
	
The company does not offset derivative assets against liabilities 
in master netting arrangements nor does it offset receivables or 
payables recognized upon payment or receipt of cash collateral 
against the fair values of the related derivative instruments. No 
amount was recognized in other receivables at December 31, 2011 
for the right to reclaim cash collateral. At December 31, 2010, 
$9 million was recognized in other receivables for the right to reclaim 
cash collateral. The amount recognized in accounts payable for 
the obligation to return cash collateral totaled $466 million and 
$88 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The company 
restricts the use of cash collateral received to rehypothecation, and 
therefore reports it in prepaid expenses and other current assets 
in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. No amount 
was rehypothecated at December 31, 2011. At December 31, 2010, 
$9 million was rehypothecated. 


===== PAGE 99 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
97
	
The company may employ derivative instruments to hedge the 
volatility in stockholders’ equity resulting from changes in currency 
exchange rates of significant foreign subsidiaries of the company 
with respect to the U.S. dollar. These instruments, designated as 
net investment hedges, expose the company to liquidity risk as the 
derivatives have an immediate cash flow impact upon maturity which 
is not offset by a cash flow from the translation of the underlying 
hedged equity. The company monitors this cash loss potential on an 
ongoing basis, and may discontinue some of these hedging 
relationships by de-designating the derivative instrument in order to 
manage the liquidity risk. Although not designated as accounting 
hedges, the company may utilize derivatives to offset the changes 
in the fair value of the de-designated instruments from the date of 
de-designation until maturity.
	
In its hedging programs, the company uses forward contracts, 
futures contracts, interest-rate swaps and cross-currency swaps, 
depending upon the underlying exposure. The company is not a 
party to leveraged derivative instruments. 
	
A brief description of the major hedging programs, categorized 
by underlying risk, follows.
Interest Rate Risk
Fixed and Variable Rate Borrowings
The company issues debt in the global capital markets, principally 
to fund its financing lease and loan portfolio. Access to cost-effective 
financing can result in interest rate mismatches with the underlying 
assets. To manage these mismatches and to reduce overall interest 
cost, the company uses interest rate swaps to convert specific fixed-
rate debt issuances into variable-rate debt (i.e., fair value hedges) 
and to convert specific variable-rate debt issuances into fixed-rate 
debt (i.e., cash flow hedges). At December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
the total notional amount of the company’s interest rate swaps was 
$5.9 billion and $7.1 billion, respectively. The weighted-average 
remaining maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2011 and 
December 31, 2010 was approximately 5.5 and 5.7 years, respectively. 
Forecasted Debt Issuance
The company is exposed to interest rate volatility on future debt 
issuances. To manage this risk, the company may use forward-
starting interest rate swaps to lock in the rate on the interest payments 
related to the forecasted debt issuance. These swaps are accounted 
for as cash flow hedges. The company did not have any derivative 
instruments relating to this program outstanding at December 31, 
2011 and 2010.
	
At December 31, 2011 and 2010, net losses of approximately 
$5 million and $13 million (before taxes), respectively, were recorded 
in other comprehensive income/(loss) in connection with cash flow 
hedges of the company’s borrowings. Within these amounts $6 million 
and $8 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be reclassified 
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting 
economic impact against the underlying transactions.
Foreign Exchange Risk
Long-Term Investments in Foreign Subsidiaries  
(Net Investment)
A large portion of the company’s foreign currency denominated debt 
portfolio is designated as a hedge of net investment in foreign 
subsidiaries to reduce the volatility in stockholders’ equity caused 
by changes in foreign currency exchange rates in the functional 
currency of major foreign subsidiaries with respect to the U.S. 
dollar. The company also uses cross-currency swaps and foreign 
exchange forward contracts for this risk management purpose. At 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount of derivative 
instruments designated as net investment hedges was $5.0 billion 
and $1.9 billion, respectively. The weighted-average remaining 
maturity of these instruments at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was 
approximately 0.4 years for both periods.
	
In addition, at December 31, 2010, the company had liabilities of 
$221 million, representing the fair value of derivative instruments that 
were previously designated in qualifying net investment hedging 
relationships, but were de-designated prior to December 31, 2010; 
this amount matured in 2011. The notional amount of these 
instruments at December 31, 2010 was $1.6 billion, including original 
and offsetting transactions. No instruments were outstanding at 
December 31, 2011.
Anticipated Royalties and Cost Transactions
The company’s operations generate significant nonfunctional 
currency, third-party vendor payments and intercompany payments 
for royalties and goods and services among the company’s non-U.S. 
subsidiaries and with the parent company. In anticipation of these 
foreign currency cash flows and in view of the volatility of the currency 
markets, the company selectively employs foreign exchange forward 
contracts to manage its currency risk. These forward contracts are 
accounted for as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time 
over which the company is hedging its exposure to the variability in 
future cash flows is four years. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the 
total notional amount of forward contracts designated as cash flow 
hedges of forecasted royalty and cost transactions was $10.9 billion 
and $11.3 billion, respectively, with a weighted-average remaining 
maturity of 0.7 years and  0.8 years, respectively.
	
At December 31, 2011 and December 31, 2010, in connection 
with cash flow hedges of anticipated royalties and cost transactions, 
the company recorded net gains of $88 million and net losses 
of $147 million (before taxes), respectively, in other comprehensive 
income/(loss). Within these amounts $191 million of gains and 
$249 million of losses, respectively, are expected to be reclassified 
to net income within the next 12 months, providing an offsetting 
economic impact against the underlying anticipated transactions.


===== PAGE 100 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
98
Foreign Currency Denominated Borrowings
The company is exposed to exchange rate volatility on foreign 
currency denominated debt. To manage this risk, the company 
employs cross-currency swaps to convert fixed-rate foreign currency 
denominated debt to fixed-rate debt denominated in the functional 
currency of the borrowing entity. These swaps are accounted for 
as cash flow hedges. The maximum length of time over which 
the company hedges its exposure to the variability in future cash 
flows is approximately three years. At December 31, 2011, no 
instruments relating to this program remained outstanding. At 
December 31, 2010, the total notional amount of cross-currency 
swaps designated as cash flow hedges of foreign currency 
denominated debt was $0.2 billion.
	
At December 31, 2010, net losses of approximately $1 million 
(before taxes) were recorded in other comprehensive income/(loss) 
in connection with cash flow hedges of the company’s borrowings. 
No amount remains in accumulated other comprehensive income 
at December 31, 2011. 
Subsidiary Cash and Foreign Currency  
Asset/Liability Management
The company uses its Global Treasury Centers to manage the cash 
of its subsidiaries. These centers principally use currency swaps to 
convert cash flows in a cost-effective manner. In addition, the 
company uses foreign exchange forward contracts to economically 
hedge, on a net basis, the foreign currency exposure of a portion of 
the company’s nonfunctional currency assets and liabilities. The 
terms of these forward and swap contracts are generally less than 
one year. The changes in the fair values of these contracts and of 
the underlying hedged exposures are generally offsetting and are 
recorded in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated Statement 
of Earnings. At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount 
of derivative instruments in economic hedges of foreign currency 
exposure was $13.6 billion and $13.0 billion, respectively.
Equity Risk Management
The company is exposed to market price changes in certain broad 
market indices and in the company’s own stock primarily related to 
certain obligations to employees. Changes in the overall value of 
these employee compensation obligations are recorded in SG&A 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. Although not 
designated as accounting hedges, the company utilizes derivatives, 
including equity swaps and futures, to economically hedge the 
exposures related to its employee compensation obligations. The 
derivatives are linked to the total return on certain broad market 
indices or the total return on the company’s common stock. They 
are recorded at fair value with gains or losses also reported 
in SG&A expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. 
At December 31, 2011 and 2010, the total notional amount of derivative 
instruments in economic hedges of these compensation obligations 
was $1.0 billion for each year.
Other Risks
The company may hold warrants to purchase shares of common 
stock in connection with various investments that are deemed 
derivatives because they contain net share or net cash settlement 
provisions. The company records the changes in the fair value of 
these warrants in other (income) and expense in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The company did not have any warrants 
qualifying as derivatives outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010.
	
The company is exposed to a potential loss if a client fails to pay 
amounts due under contractual terms. The company utilizes credit 
default swaps to economically hedge its credit exposures. These 
derivatives have terms of one year or less. The swaps are recorded 
at fair value with gains and losses reported in other (income) and 
expense in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings. The company 
did not have any derivative instruments relating to this program 
outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 2010.


===== PAGE 101 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
99
The following tables provide a quantitative summary of the derivative and non-derivative instrument related risk management activity as of 
December 31, 2011 and 2010 as well as for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
Fair Values of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position
($ in millions)
Fair Value of Derivative Assets
Fair Value of Derivative Liabilities
At December 31:
Balance 
Sheet 
Classification
2011
2010
Balance 
Sheet 
Classification
2011
2010
Designated as hedging instruments
Interest rate contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets 
$     50
$     33
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
$      —
$     —
Investments and 
sundry assets
733
514
Other liabilities
—
—
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets
   407
224
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
273
498
Investments and 
sundry assets
—
22
Other 
liabilities
155
135
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$1,190 
$   794 
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   428
$   633
Not designated as hedging instruments
Foreign exchange contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets 
$     82
$   242
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
$     84
$   370
Investments and 
sundry assets
21
51
Other 
liabilities
11
—
Equity contracts
Prepaid expenses 
and other 
current assets
7
12
Other accrued 
expenses 
and liabilities
8
3
Fair value of 
derivative assets
$   110
$   305
Fair value of 
derivative liabilities
$   103
$   373
Total debt designated as hedging instruments
Short-term debt
N/A
N/A
$      —
$   823
Long-term debt
N/A
N/A
1,884
1,746
Total
$1,300 
$1,099 
$2,415 
$3,576 
N/A—Not applicable


===== PAGE 102 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
100
The Effect of Derivative Instruments in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings 
Line Item
Recognized 
on Derivatives(1)
Attributable to Risk 
Being Hedged(2)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Derivative instruments in fair value hedges
Interest rate contracts
Cost of financing
$271
$241
$(172)
$(117)
$  (70)
$344
Interest expense
205
160
(97)
(89)
(46)
193
Derivative instruments not designated  
as hedging instruments (1)
Foreign exchange contracts
Other (income) 
and expense
352
299
(128)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Equity contracts
SG&A expense
42
105
177
N/A
N/A
N/A
Warrants
Other (income) 
and expense
10
—
—
N/A
N/A
N/A
Total
$880
$805
$(219)
$(206)
$(116)
$537
($ in millions)
Gain/(Loss) Recognized in Earnings and Other Comprehensive Income
Effective Portion 
Recognized in OCI
Consolidated 
Statement of 
Earnings 
Line Item
Effective Portion 
Reclassified from AOCI
Ineffectiveness and 
Amounts Excluded from 
Effectiveness Testing(3)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Derivative instruments in cash flow hedges
Interest rate contracts
$    —
$   —
$    (0)
Interest expense
$    (8)
$   (8)
$  (13)
$  —
$—
$—
Foreign exchange contracts
(266)
371
(718)
Other (income) 
and expense
(247)
(54)
143
(3)
(4)
(3)
Cost of sales
(182)
(92)
(49)
—
—
—
SG&A expense
(74)
(49)
14
—
—
—
Instruments in net investment hedges(4)
 
Foreign exchange contracts
   45
178
(162)
Interest expense
0
0
—
(9)
(3)
1
Total
$(221)
$549
$(880)
$(511)
$(203)
$   94
$(12)
$ (7)
$ (2)
(1)	 The amount includes changes in clean fair values of the derivative instruments in fair value hedging relationships and the periodic accrual for coupon payments required under 
these derivative contracts.
(2)	The amount includes basis adjustments to the carrying value of the hedged item recorded during the period and amortization of basis adjustments recorded on de-designated 
hedging relationships during the period.
(3)	The amount of gain/(loss) recognized in income represents ineffectiveness on hedge relationships.
(4)	Instruments in net investment hedges include derivative and non-derivative instruments.
For the 12 months ending December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, there 
were no significant gains or losses recognized in earnings representing 
hedge ineffectiveness or excluded from the assessment of hedge 
effectiveness (for fair value hedges), or associated with an underlying 
exposure that did not or was not expected to occur (for cash flow 
hedges); nor are there any anticipated in the normal course of business.
	
Refer to note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” on pages 83 
and 84 for additional information on the company’s use of derivative 
financial instruments.
Note E.  
Inventories
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Finished goods
$   589
$   432
Work in process and raw materials
2,007
2,018
Total
$2,595
$2,450


===== PAGE 103 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
101
Note F.  
Financing Receivables
The following table presents financing receivables, net of allowances 
for credit losses, including residual values.
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Current
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  3,765
$  3,945
Commercial financing receivables
7,095
6,777
Client loan receivables
5,195
4,718
Installment payment receivables
846
816
Total
$16,901
$16,257 
Noncurrent
Net investment in sales-type  
and direct financing leases
$  5,406
$  5,384
Commercial financing receivables
34
43
Client loan receivables
4,925
4,734
Installment payment receivables
410
388
Total
$10,776
$10,548 
Net investment in sales-type and direct financing leases relates 
principally to the company’s systems products and are for terms ranging 
generally from two to six years. Net investment in sales-type and 
direct financing leases includes unguaranteed residual values 
of $745 million and $871 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, and is reflected net of unearned income of $733 million 
and $816 million, and net of the allowance for credit losses of 
$118 million and $126 million at those dates, respectively. 
Scheduled maturities of minimum lease payments outstanding 
at December 31, 2011, expressed as a percentage of the total, are 
approximately: 2012, 44 percent; 2013, 28 percent; 2014, 18 percent; 
2015, 7 percent; and 2016 and beyond, 3 percent.
	
Commercial financing receivables, net of allowance for credit 
losses of $53 million and $58 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, relate primarily to inventory and accounts receivable 
financing for dealers and remarketers of IBM and non-IBM products. 
Payment terms for inventory and accounts receivable financing 
generally range from 30 to 90 days.
	
Client loan receivables, net of allowance for credit losses 
of $126 million and $160 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, 
respectively, are loans that are provided by Global Financing primarily 
to clients to finance the purchase of software and services. Separate 
contractual relationships on these financing arrangements are for 
terms ranging generally from one to seven years. 
	
Installment payment receivables, net of allowance for credit 
losses of $51 million and $56 million at December 31, 2011 and 
2010, respectively, are loans that are provided primarily to clients to 
finance hardware, software and services ranging generally from one 
to three years.
	
Client loan receivables and installment payment receivables 
financing contracts are priced independently at competitive market 
rates. The company has a history of enforcing the terms of these 
separate financing agreements.
	
The company utilizes certain of its financing receivables as 
collateral for non-recourse borrowings. Financing receivables pledged 
as collateral for borrowings were $324 million and $302 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. These borrowings are 
included in note J, “Borrowings,” on pages 106 to 108.
	
The company did not have any financing receivables held for 
sale as of December 31, 2011 and 2010. 
Financing Receivables by Portfolio Segment
The following table presents financing receivables on a gross basis 
excluding the allowance for credit losses and residual value, by 
portfolio segment and by class, excluding current commercial 
financing receivables and other miscellaneous financing receivables. 
The company determines its allowance for credit losses based on 
two portfolio segments: lease receivables and loan receivables 
and further segments the portfolio via two classes: major markets 
and growth markets. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  6,510
$1,921
$  8,430
Loan receivables
9,077
2,552
11,629
Ending balance
$15,587
$4,472
$20,060
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$15,321
$4,370
$19,692
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     266
$   102
$     368
Allowance for credit losses
Beginning balance at            
January 1, 2011
Lease receivables
$       84
$     42
$     126
Loan receivables
150
76
226
Total
$     234
$   119
$     353
Write-offs
(68)
(16)
(84)
Provision
39
5
44
Other
(1)
(4)
(5)
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2011
$     203
$   104
$     307
Lease receivables
$       79
$     40
$     118
Loan receivables
$     125
$     64
$     189
Collectively evaluated for impairment
$       82
$     15
$       96
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     122
$     89
$     211


===== PAGE 104 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
102
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Total
Financing receivables
Lease receivables
$  6,562
$1,983 
$  8,545
Loan receivables
9,087
1,993
11,080
Ending balance
$15,650 
$3,975 
$19,625 
Collectively evaluated for impairment
  $15,199
$3,794 
$18,993 
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     451
$   181
$     632
Allowance for credit losses
Lease receivables*
$       84
$     42
$     126
Loan receivables*
150
76
226
Ending balance at  
December 31, 2010
$     234
$   119
$     353
Collectively evaluated for impairment
  $       60
$     11
$       71
Individually evaluated for impairment
$     174
$   108
$     282
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
When determining the allowances, financing receivables are evaluated 
either on an individual or a collective basis. For individually evaluated 
receivables, the company determines the expected cash flow for the 
receivable and calculates an estimate of the potential loss and the 
probability of loss. For those accounts in which the loss is probable, 
the company records a specific reserve. In addition, the company 
records an unallocated reserve that is determined by applying a 
reserve rate to its different portfolios, excluding accounts that have 
been specifically reserved. This reserve rate is based upon credit rating, 
probability of default, term, characteristics (lease/loan) and loss history.
Financing Receivables on Non-Accrual Status
The following table presents the recorded investment in financing 
receivables which are on non-accrual status. 
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Major markets
$  46
$  69
Growth markets
20
33
Total lease receivables
$  66
$101 
Major markets
$  75
$141 
Growth markets
24
123
Total loan receivables
$  99
$264 
Total receivables
$165
$366 
Impaired Loans
The company considers any loan with an individually evaluated 
reserve as an impaired loan. Depending on the level of impairment, 
loans will also be placed on a non-accrual status. The following table 
presents impaired client loan receivables. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$110
$  70
Growth markets
62
53
Total
$172
$123
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Recorded 
Investment
Related 
Allowance
Major markets
$196
$119
Growth markets
132
68
Total
$328
$187
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Average 
Recorded 
Investment
Interest 
Income 
Recognized
Interest 
Income 
Recognized 
on Cash 
Basis
Major markets
$142
$2
$0
Growth markets
90
0
0
Total
$232
$3
$0
Credit Quality Indicators
The company’s credit quality indicators which are based on rating 
agency data, publicly available information and information provided 
by customers, are reviewed periodically based on the relative level 
of risk. The resulting indicators are a numerical rating system that 
maps to Moody’s Investors Service credit ratings as shown on the 
following page. Moody’s does not provide credit ratings to the 
company on its customers.
	
The tables present the gross recorded investment for each class 
of receivables, by credit quality indicator. Receivables with a credit 
quality indicator ranging from Aaa to Baa3 are considered investment 
grade. All others are considered non-investment grade.


===== PAGE 105 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
103
Lease Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   697
$   139
A1 – A3
1,459
306
Baa1 – Baa3
2,334
654
Ba1 – Ba2
1,118
457
Ba3 – B1
534
252
B2 – B3
260
97
Caa – D
108
15
Total
$6,510
$1,921
Loan Receivables 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   971
$   185
A1 – A3
2,034
407
Baa1 – Baa3
3,255
869
Ba1 – Ba2
1,559
607
Ba3 – B1
744
335
B2 – B3
362
129
Caa – D
151
20
Total
$9,077
$2,552
Lease Receivables*
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$   794
$   173
A1 – A3
1,463
182
Baa1 – Baa3
2,494
837
Ba1 – Ba2
899
403
Ba3 – B1
518
242
B2 – B3
230
93
Caa – D
164
54
Total
$6,562 
$1,983 
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
Loan Receivables* 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Major 
Markets
Growth 
Markets
Credit rating
Aaa – Aa3
$1,100
$   173
A1 – A3
2,026
183
Baa1 – Baa3
3,453
841
Ba1 – Ba2
1,245
405
Ba3 – B1
718
243
B2 – B3
318
94
Caa – D
227
54
Total
$9,087
$1,993 
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
At December 31, 2011, the industries which made up Global Financing’s 
receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (39 percent), Government 
(15 percent), Manufacturing (13 percent), Retail (9 percent), Services 
(7 percent), Communications (6 percent) and Other (11 percent). 
	
At December 31, 2010, the industries which made up Global 
Financing’s receivables portfolio consisted of: Financial (36 percent), 
Government (16 percent), Manufacturing (14 percent), Retail 
(9 percent), Services (8 percent), Communications (5 percent) and 
Other (12 percent). 


===== PAGE 106 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
104
Troubled Debt Restructurings
In 2011, the company adopted new FASB guidance that helps 
creditors determine whether a restructuring constitutes a troubled 
debt restructuring. The company assessed all restructurings 
that occurred on or after January 1, 2011 and determined that there 
were no troubled debt restructurings for the 12 months ended 
December 31, 2011.
Note G.  
Property, Plant and Equipment
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Land and land improvements
$     786
$     777
Buildings and building improvements
9,531
9,414
Plant, laboratory and office equipment
26,843
26,676
Plant and other property—gross
37,160
36,867
Less: Accumulated depreciation
24,703
24,435
Plant and other property—net
12,457
12,432
Rental machines
2,964
3,422
Less: Accumulated depreciation
1,538
1,758
Rental machines—net
1,426
1,665
Total—net
$13,883
$14,096 
Note H.  
Investments and Sundry Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Deferred transition and setup costs  
and other deferred arrangements*
$1,784
$1,853
Derivatives—noncurrent **
753
588
Alliance investments
Equity method
131
122
Non-equity method
127
531
Prepaid software
233
268
Long-term deposits
307
350
Other receivables
208
560
Employee benefit-related
493
   409 
Prepaid income taxes
261
434
Other assets
598
663
Total
$4,895
$5,778 
*	 Deferred transition and setup costs and other deferred arrangements are related to 
Global Services client arrangements. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on pages 76 to 86 for additional information. 
**	See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 through 100 for the fair value of all 
derivatives reported in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Past Due Financing Receivables
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$  6 
$  6,504
$  6,510
$  6 
Growth markets
9
1,911
1,921
6
Total lease receivables
$16 
$  8,415
$  8,430
$12 
Major markets
$23 
$  9,054
$  9,077
$  7
Growth markets
22
2,530
2,552
19
Total loan receivables
$46 
$11,584
$11,629
$26 
Total
$62
$19,998
$20,060
$38
*	 Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Total 
Past Due 
> 90 Days*
Current
Total 
Financing 
Receivables
Recorded 
Investment 
> 90 Days 
and Accruing
Major markets
$10 
$  6,552
$  6,562
$  5
Growth markets
13 
1,970
1,983
5
Total lease receivables
$22
$  8,523
$  8,545
$10 
Major markets
$11
$  9,076
$  9,087
$  4
Growth markets
32
1,961
1,993
17
Total loan receivables
$43
$11,037
$11,080
$21
Total
$65
$19,560
$19,625
$31
*	 Does not include accounts that are fully reserved. 


===== PAGE 107 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
105
Note I.  
Intangible Assets Including Goodwill
Intangible Assets
The following table details the company’s intangible asset balances 
by major asset class.
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2011:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,478
$   (678)
$   799
Client relationships
1,751
(715)
1,035
Completed technology
2,156
(745)
1,411
In-process R&D
22
(1)
21
Patents/trademarks
207
(88)
119
Other*
29
(22)
7
Total
$5,642
$(2,250)
$3,392
($ in millions)
At December 31, 2010:
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Net 
Carrying 
Amount
Intangible asset class
Capitalized software
$1,558 
$   (726)
$   831
Client relationships
1,709
(647)
1,062
Completed technology
2,111
(688)
1,422
In-process R&D
21
(0)
21
Patents/trademarks
211
(71)
140
Other*
39
(28)
11
Total
$5,649 
$(2,161)
$3,488 
*	 Other intangibles are primarily acquired proprietary and nonproprietary business 
processes, methodologies and systems.
The net carrying amount of intangible assets decreased $96 million 
during the year ended December 31, 2011, primarily due to amortization, 
partially offset by intangible asset additions. No impairment of 
intangible assets was recorded in any of the periods presented. 
	
Total amortization was $1,226 million and $1,174 million for the 
years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The aggregate 
intangible amortization expense for acquired intangibles (excluding 
capitalized software) was $634 million and $517 million for the years 
ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. In addition, in 2011 
the company retired $1,133 million of fully amortized intangible assets, 
impacting both the gross carrying amount and accumulated 
amortization for this amount.  
	
The amortization expense for each of the five succeeding years 
relating to intangible assets currently recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Financial Position is estimated to be the following at 
December 31, 2011:
($ in millions)
Capitalized 
Software
Acquired 
Intangibles
Total
2012
$480
$634
$1,113
2013
250
590
840
2014
70
446
516
2015
—
340
340
2016
—
303
303


===== PAGE 108 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
106
Goodwill
The changes in the goodwill balances by reportable segment, for the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, are as follows:
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2011
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2011
Global Business Services
$  4,329 
$     14
$ (0)
$(10)
$  (20)
$  4,313
Global Technology Services
2,704
—
(1)
(2)
(55)
2,646
Software
16,963
1,277
10
(2)
(127)
18,121
Systems and Technology
1,139
—
(6)
—
(0)
1,133
Total
$25,136
$1,291
$  2
$(13)
$(203)
$26,213
($ in millions)
Segment
Balance 
January 1, 
2010
Goodwill 
Additions
Purchase 
Price 
Adjustments
Divestitures
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
and Other 
Adjustments
Balance 
December 31, 
2010
Global Business Services
$  4,042
$   252
$   0
$—
$   35
$  4,329
Global Technology Services
2,777
32
(1)
—
(104)
2,704
Software
12,605
4,095
(52)
—
315
16,963
Systems and Technology
766
375
(1)
—
(1)
1,139
Total
$20,190 
$4,754 
$(54)
$—
$ 245 
$25,136 
Purchase price adjustments recorded in the 2011 and 2010 were related 
to acquisitions that were completed on or prior to December 31, 2010 
or 2009, respectively, and were still subject to the measurement 
period that ends at the earlier of 12 months from the acquisition date 
or when information becomes available. There were no goodwill 
impairment losses recorded in 2011 or 2010, and the company has 
no accumulated impairment losses.
Note J.  
Borrowings
Short-Term Debt
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Commercial paper
$2,300
$1,144 
Short-term loans
1,859
1,617
Long-term debt—current maturities
4,306
4,017
Total
$8,463
$6,778 
The weighted-average interest rates for commercial paper at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010 were 0.1 percent and 0.2 percent, 
respectively. The weighted-average interest rates for short-term 
loans was 1.2 percent and 1.1 percent at December 31, 2011 and 
2010, respectively. 


===== PAGE 109 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
107
Long-Term Debt
Pre-Swap Borrowing
($ in millions)
At December 31:
Maturities
2011
2010
U.S. dollar notes and debentures (average interest rate at December 31, 2011):
3.72%
2012 – 2013
$  8,615*
$  6,326
1.02%
2014 – 2015
  2,414*
  5,019
4.94%
2016 –2020
8,600
6,359
2.90%
2021
500
—
7.00%
2025
600
600
6.22%
2027
469
469
6.50%
2028
313
313
5.875%
2032
600
600
8.00%
2038
187
187
5.60%
2039
1,545
1,545
7.00%
2045
27
27
7.125%
2096
322
322
24,192
21 ,766
Other currencies (average interest rate at December 31, 2011, in parentheses):
Euros (6.6%)
2012 – 2016
1,037
1 ,897
Japanese yen (0.8%)
2013 – 2014
1,123
1,162
Swiss francs (3.8%)
2012 – 2020
173
540
Other (5.1%)
2012 – 2014
177
240
26,702
25,606
Less: net unamortized discount
533
531
Add: fair value adjustment**
994
788
27,161
25,863
Less: current maturities
4,306
4,017
Total
$22,857
$21,846 
*	 $1.6 billion in debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC, which is an indirect, 100 percent owned finance subsidiary of the company, is included in 2012-2015. 
Debt securities issued by IBM International Group Capital LLC are fully and unconditionally guaranteed by the company.
**	The portion of the company’s fixed rate debt obligations that is hedged is reflected in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as an amount equal to the sum of the 
debt’s carrying value plus a fair value adjustment representing changes in the fair value of the hedged debt obligations attributable to movements in benchmark interest rates. 
Post-Swap Borrowing (Long-Term Debt, Including Current Portion)
(in millions)
2011
2010
For the year ended December 31:
Amount
Average Rate
Amount
Average Rate
Fixed-rate debt 
$18,547
4.38%
$14,446
5.29%
Floating-rate debt* 
8,614
1.54%
11,417
1.23%
Total
$27,161
$25,863
*	 Includes $5,898 million in 2011 and $7,078 million in 2010 of notional interest rate swaps that effectively convert the fixed-rate long-term debt into floating-rate debt. (See note D, 
“Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100.) 


===== PAGE 110 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
108
Pre-swap annual contractual maturities of long-term debt outstanding 
at December 31, 2011, are as follows: 
($ in millions)
Total
2012
$  4,311
2013
5,495
2014
3,763
2015
197
2016
3,009
2017 and beyond
9,926
Total
$26,702
Interest on Debt
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Cost of financing
$553 
$555
$   706
Interest expense
402
365
404
Net investment derivative activity 
9
3
(1)
Interest capitalized
9
5
13
Total interest paid and accrued
$973 
$928 
$1,122 
Refer to the related discussion on page 137 in note T, “Seg­ment 
Infor­mation,” for total interest expense of the Global Financing 
segment. See note D, “Financial Instruments,” on pages 96 to 100 
for a discussion of the use of currency and interest rate swaps in 
the company’s debt risk management program. 
Lines of Credit
In 2011 the company renewed its five-year, $10 billion Credit Agreement 
(the “Credit Agreement”), which now expires on November 10, 2016. 
The total expense recorded by the company related to this facility 
was $5.0 million in 2011, $6.2 million in 2010 and $6.3 million in 2009. 
The Credit Agreement permits the company and its Subsidiary 
Borrowers to borrow up to $10 billion on a revolving basis. Borrowings 
of the Subsidiary Borrowers will be unconditionally backed by the 
company. The company may also, upon the agreement of either 
existing lenders, or of the additional banks not currently party to 
the Credit Agreement, increase the commitments under the Credit 
Agreement up to an additional $2.0 billion. Subject to certain terms 
of the Credit Agreement, the company and Subsidiary Borrowers 
may borrow, prepay and reborrow amounts under the Credit 
Agreement at any time during the Credit Agreement. Interest rates 
on borrowings under the Credit Agreement will be based on prevailing 
market interest rates, as further described in the Credit Agreement. 
The Credit Agreement contains customary representations and 
warranties, covenants, events of default, and indemnification 
provisions. The company believes that circumstances that might give 
rise to breach of these covenants or an event of default, as specified 
in the Credit Agreement, are remote. As of December 31, 2011, there 
were no borrowings by the company, or its subsidiaries, under the 
Credit Agreement.
	
The company also has other committed lines of credit in some 
of the geographies which are not significant in the aggregate. Interest 
rates and other terms of borrowing under these lines of credit vary 
from country to country, depending on local market conditions.
Note K.  
Other Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Income tax reserves
$3,989
$3,486 
Executive compensation accruals
1,388
1,302
Disability benefits
835
739
Derivatives liabilities
166
135
Special actions
347
399
Workforce reductions
366
406
Deferred taxes
549
378
Environmental accruals
249
249
Noncurrent warranty accruals
163
130
Asset retirement obligations
166
161
Other
777
841
Total
$8,996
$8,226 
In response to changing business needs, the company periodically 
takes workforce reduction actions to improve productivity, cost 
competitiveness and to rebalance skills. The noncurrent contractually 
obligated future payments associated with these activities are 
reflected in the workforce reductions caption in the previous table.
	
In addition, the company executed certain special actions as 
follows: (1) the second quarter of 2005 associated with Global 
Services, primarily in Europe, (2) the fourth quarter of 2002 associated 
with the acquisition of the PricewaterhouseCoopers consulting 
business, (3) the second quarter of 2002 associated with the 
Microelectronics Division and the rebalancing of the company’s 
workforce and leased space resources, (4) the 2002 actions 
associated with the hard disk drive business for reductions in 
workforce, manufacturing capacity and space, (5) the actions taken 
in 1999, and (6) the actions that were executed prior to 1994.


===== PAGE 111 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
109
The table below provides a roll forward of the current and noncurrent liabilities associated with these special actions. The current liabilities 
presented in the table are included in other accrued expenses and liabilities in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position. 
(in millions)
Liability 
as of 
January 1, 
2011
Payments
Other 
Adjustments*
Liability 
as of 
December 31, 
2011
Current
Workforce
$  45
$(46)
$ 34
$  33
Space
8
(8)
4
4
Total current
$  53
$(53)
$ 38
$  38
Noncurrent
Workforce
$395 
$   0
$(51)
$344 
Space
4
0
(1)
3
Total noncurrent
$399 
$   0
$(52)
$347 
*	 The other adjustments column in the table above principally includes the reclassification of noncurrent to current, foreign currency translation adjustments and interest accretion.
The workforce accruals primarily relate to terminated employees 
who are no longer working for the company who were granted annual 
payments to supplement their incomes in certain countries. Depending 
on the individual country’s legal requirements, these required 
payments will continue until the former employee begins receiving 
pension benefits or passes away. The space accruals are for ongoing 
obligations to pay rent for vacant space that could not be sublet or 
space that was sublet at rates lower than the committed lease 
arrangement. The length of these obligations varies by lease with 
the longest extending through 2014.
	
The company employs extensive internal environmental protection 
programs that primarily are preventive in nature. The company also 
participates in environmental assessments and cleanups at a number 
of locations, including operating facilities, previously owned facilities 
and Superfund sites. The company’s maximum exposure for all 
environmental liabilities cannot be estimated and no amounts have 
been recorded for non-ARO environmental liabilities that are not 
probable or estimable. The total amounts accrued for non-ARO 
environmental liabilities, including amounts classified as current in 
the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position, that do not reflect 
actual or anticipated insurance recoveries, were $262 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. Estimated environmental 
costs are not expected to materially affect the consolidated financial 
position or consolidated results of the company’s operations in future 
periods. However, estimates of future costs are subject to change 
due to protracted cleanup periods and changing environmental 
remediation regulations.
	
As of December 31, 2011, the company was unable to estimate 
the range of settlement dates and the related probabilities for certain 
asbestos remediation AROs. These conditional AROs are primarily 
related to the encapsulated structural fireproofing that is not subject 
to abatement unless the buildings are demolished and non-
encapsulated asbestos that the company would remediate only if it 
performed major renovations of certain existing buildings. Because 
these conditional obligations have indeterminate settlement dates, 
the company could not develop a reasonable estimate of their fair 
values. The company will continue to assess its ability to estimate 
fair values at each future reporting date. The related liability will be 
recognized once sufficient additional information becomes available. 
The total amounts accrued for ARO liabilities, including amounts 
classified as current in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position were $187 million and $176 million at December 31, 2011 
and 2010, respectively.


===== PAGE 112 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
110
Note L.  
Equity Activity
The authorized capital stock of IBM consists of 4,687,500,000 shares 
of common stock with a $.20 per share par value, of which 
1,163,182,565 shares were outstanding at December 31, 2011 and 
150,000,000 shares of preferred stock with a $.01 per share par 
value, none of which were outstanding at December 31, 2011. 
Stock Repurchases
The Board of Directors authorizes the company to repurchase IBM 
common stock. The company repurchased 88,683,716 common 
shares at a cost of $15,034 million, 117,721,650 common shares at 
a cost of $15,419 million and 68,650,727 common shares at a cost 
of $7,534 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively. These amounts 
reflect transactions executed through December 31 of each year. 
Actual cash disbursements for repurchased shares may differ due to 
varying settlement dates for these transactions. At December 31, 2011, 
$8,660 million of Board common stock repurchase authorization 
was still available. The company plans to purchase shares on the open 
market or in private transactions from time to time, depending on 
market conditions.
Other Stock Transactions
The company issued the following shares of common stock as part 
of its stock-based compensation plans and employee stock purchase 
plan: 20,669,785 shares in 2011, 34,783,386 shares in 2010 and 
30,034,808 shares in 2009.The company issued 4,920,198 treasury 
shares in 2011, 7,929,318 treasury shares in 2010 and 6,408,265 treasury 
shares in 2009, as a result of exercises of stock options by employees 
of certain acquired businesses and by non-U.S. employees. Also, 
as part of the company’s stock-based compensation plans, 1,717,246 
common shares at a cost of $289 million, 2,334,932 common shares 
at a cost of $297 million and 1,550,846 common shares at a cost of 
$161 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, were remitted by 
employees to the company in order to satisfy minimum statutory tax 
withholding requirements. These amounts are included in the 
treasury stock balance in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position and the Consolidated Statement of Changes in Equity.


===== PAGE 113 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
111
Taxes Related to Items of Other Comprehensive Income
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2011:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$   (693)
$    (18)
$   (711)
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$     (14)
$       5
$       (9)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(231)
88
(143)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
4
(1)
3
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$   (241)
$     91
$   (150)
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$   (266)
$   105
$   (162)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
511
(182)
329
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    245
$    (77)
$    167
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits)
$     (28)
$       7
$     (22)
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(5,463)
1,897
(3,566)
Curtailments and settlements
11
(3)
7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(157)
62
(94)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,847
(619)
1,227
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(3,790)
$1,343
$(2,448)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$(4,479)
$1,339
$(3,142)
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2010:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$    712
$    (69)
$    643
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$      70
$    (24)
$      46
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
0
(0)
(0)
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
8
(3)
5
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$      78
$    (27)
$      51
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$    371
$  (120)
$    251
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
203
(68)
134
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$    573
$  (188)
$    385
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits)
$      28
$      (8)
$      20
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
(2,728)
1,016
(1,712)
Curtailments and settlements
10
(3)
7
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(183)
67
(116)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,249
(441)
808
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$(1,624)
$   632
$   (992)
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$   (260)
$   348
$      87


===== PAGE 114 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
112
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31, 2009:
Before Tax 
Amount
Tax (Expense)/ 
Benefit
Net of Tax 
Amount
Other comprehensive income:
Foreign currency translation adjustments
$1,675
$   57
$1,732
Net changes related to available-for-sale securities
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$   118
$  (47)
$     72
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
64
(24)
39
Subsequent changes in previously impaired securities arising during the period
—
—
—
Total net changes related to available-for-sale securities
$   182
$  (71)
$   111
Unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
Unrealized gains/(losses) arising during the period
$  (718)
$ 224
$  (493)
Reclassification of (gains)/losses to net income
(94)
32
(63)
Total unrealized gains/(losses) on cash flow hedges
$  (812)
$ 256
$  (556)
Retirement-related benefit plans
Prior service costs/(credits)
$   375
$(146)
$   229
Net (losses)/gains arising during the period
1,433
(439)
994
Curtailments and settlements
(125)
33
(93)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost
(162)
55
(107)
Amortization of net gains/(losses)
1,105
(402)
704
Total retirement-related benefit plans
$2,626
$(898)
$1,727
Other comprehensive income/(loss)
$3,671
$(656)
$3,015
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Income/(Loss) (net of tax)
($ in millions)
Net Unrealized 
Gains/(Losses) 
on Cash Flow 
Hedges
Foreign 
Currency 
Translation 
Adjustments*
Net Change 
Retirement- 
Related 
Benefit 
Plans
Net Unrealized 
Gains/Losses 
on Available- 
For-Sale 
Securities
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Income/(Loss)
December 31, 2009
$(481)
$1,836 
$(20,297)
$ 113 
$(18,830)
Change for period
385
643
(992)
51
87
December 31, 2010
(96)
2,478
(21,289)
164
$(18,743)
Change for period
167
(711)
(2,448)
(150)
(3,142)
December 31, 2011
$   71
$1,767
$(23,737)
$   13 
$(21,885)
*	 Foreign currency translation adjustments are presented gross except for any associated hedges which are presented net of tax. 
Note M.  
Contingencies and Commitments
Contingencies
As a company with a substantial employee population and with 
clients in more than 170 countries, IBM is involved, either as plaintiff 
or defendant, in a variety of ongoing claims, demands, suits, 
investigations, tax matters and proceedings that arise from time to 
time in the ordinary course of its business. The company is a leader 
in the information technology industry and, as such, has been and 
will continue to be subject to claims challenging its IP rights and 
associated products and offerings, including claims of copyright and 
patent infringement and violations of trade secrets and other IP rights. 
In addition, the company enforces its own IP against infringement, 
through license negotiations, lawsuits or otherwise. Also, as is typical 
for companies of IBM’s scope and scale, the company is party to 
actions and proceedings in various jurisdictions involving a wide 
range of labor and employment issues (including matters related 
to contested employment decisions, country-specific labor and 
employment laws, and the company’s pension, retirement and other 
benefit plans), as well as actions with respect to contracts, product 
liability, securities, foreign operations, competition law and environmental 
matters. These actions may be commenced by a number of different 
parties, including competitors, clients, current or former employees, 
government and regulatory agencies, stockholders and representatives 
of the locations in which the company does business. Some of the 
actions to which the company is party may involve particularly 
complex technical issues, and some actions may raise novel 
questions under the laws of the various jurisdictions in which these 
matters arise. 
	
The company records a provision with respect to a claim, suit, 
investigation or proceeding when it is probable that a liability has 
been incurred and the amount of the loss can be reasonably 
estimated. Any recorded liabilities, including any changes to such 


===== PAGE 115 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
113
distribution of AIX and Dynix and contribution of code to Linux. The 
company has asserted counterclaims, including breach of contract, 
violation of the Lanham Act, unfair competition, intentional torts, 
unfair and deceptive trade practices, breach of the General Public 
License that governs open source distributions, promissory estoppel 
and copyright infringement. Motions for summary judgment were 
heard in March 2007, and the court has not yet issued its decision. 
On September 14, 2007, plaintiff filed for bankruptcy protection, and 
all proceedings in this case were stayed. On August 25, 2009, the 
U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware approved the 
appointment of a Chapter 11 Trustee of SCO. The court in another 
suit, the SCO Group, Inc. v. Novell, Inc., held a trial in March 2010. 
The jury found that Novell is the owner of UNIX and UnixWare 
copyrights; the judge subsequently ruled that SCO is obligated to 
recognize Novell’s waiver of SCO’s claims against IBM and Sequent 
for breach of UNIX license agreements. On August 30, 2011, the 
Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals affirmed the district court’s ruling 
and denied SCO’s appeal of this matter. In November 2011, SCO 
filed a motion in Federal Court in Utah seeking to reopen the SCO 
v. IBM case.
	
Complaints against IBM were filed with the European Commission 
(EC) by Platform Solutions, Inc. in 2007, T3 Technologies, Inc. in 2009 
and TurboHercules SAS in 2010. Each complaint alleged that IBM 
violated European Competition law, primarily by refusing to license 
its patents and trade secrets to the complainants and by refusing 
to license its software for use on computer systems made and/or 
sold by complainants. Each complaint has been withdrawn, and in 
September 2011, the EC closed these investigations. IBM had been 
notified that the U.S. Department of Justice (DOJ) was investigating 
possible antitrust violations by IBM based on the company’s refusal 
to license certain patents and trade secrets and its refusal to license 
its software for use on systems that IBM believes infringe its 
intellectual property rights. In October 2011, the DOJ notified IBM 
that this investigation has been closed. 
	
The company was a defendant in an action filed on April 2, 2009 
in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Texas 
by ACQIS LLC (Acqis), which alleged that certain IBM products 
infringe certain patents relating generally to modular computing 
devices. Acqis sought damages and injunctive relief. The trial took 
place in February 2011, and in late February, the jury found in favor 
of Acqis and awarded damages in the amount of $9 million. Both 
parties submitted post-trial motions. In late December 2011, the 
parties entered into a settlement agreement resolving all claims 
between them. 
	
The company was a defendant in an action filed on February 5, 2010 
in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Virginia 
by TecSec, Inc., which alleged that certain IBM products infringe certain 
patents relating generally to encryption. TecSec sought damages 
and injunctive relief. The case was set for trial in March 2011. In late 
February 2011, the court granted IBM’s motion for summary judgment 
of non-infringement, and final judgment has been entered in favor 
of IBM. TecSec filed an appeal, and in mid-January 2012, the Court 
of Appeals for the Federal Circuit affirmed judgment in favor of IBM. 
	
On May 13, 2010, IBM and the State of Indiana (acting on behalf 
of the Indiana Family and Social Services Administration) sued one 
another in a dispute over a 2006 contract regarding the modernization 
liabilities for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 
were not material to the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
	
In accordance with the relevant accounting guidance, the 
company provides disclosures of matters for which the likelihood of 
material loss is at least reasonably possible. In addition, the company 
also discloses matters based on its consideration of other matters 
and qualitative factors, including the experience of other companies 
in the industry, and investor, customer and employee relations 
considerations. 
	
With respect to certain of the claims, suits, investigations and 
proceedings discussed herein, the company believes at this time 
that the likelihood of any material loss is remote, given, for example, 
the procedural status, court rulings, and/or the strength of the 
company’s defenses in those matters. With respect to the remaining 
claims, suits, investigations and proceedings discussed in this Note, 
the company is unable to provide estimates of reasonably possible 
losses or range of losses, including losses in excess of amounts 
accrued, if any, for the following reasons. Claims, suits, investigations 
and proceedings are inherently uncertain, and it is not possible to 
predict the ultimate outcome of these matters. It is the company’s 
experience that damage amounts claimed in litigation against it are 
unreliable and unrelated to possible outcomes, and as such are not 
meaningful indicators of the company’s potential liability. Further, 
the company is unable to provide such an estimate due to a number 
of other factors with respect to these claims, suits, investigations 
and proceedings, including considerations of the procedural status 
of the matter in question, the presence of complex or novel legal 
theories, and/or the ongoing discovery and development of 
information important to the matters. The company reviews claims, 
suits, investigations and proceedings at least quarterly, and decisions 
are made with respect to recording or adjusting provisions and 
disclosing reasonably possible losses or range of losses (individually 
or in the aggregate), to reflect the impact and status of settlement 
discussions, discovery, procedural and substantive rulings, reviews 
by counsel and other information pertinent to a particular matter. 
	
Whether any losses, damages or remedies finally determined in 
any claim, suit, investigation or proceeding could reasonably have a 
material effect on the company’s business, financial condition, results 
of operations or cash flows will depend on a number of variables, 
including: the timing and amount of such losses or damages; the 
structure and type of any such remedies; the significance of 
the impact any such losses, damages or remedies may have in 
the Consolidated Financial Statements; and the unique facts and 
circumstances of the particular matter that may give rise to additional 
factors. While the company will continue to defend itself vigorously, 
it is possible that the company’s business, financial condition, results 
of operations or cash flows could be affected in any particular period 
by the resolution of one or more of these matters. 
	
The following is a summary of the more significant legal matters 
involving the company. 
	
The company is a defendant in an action filed on March 6, 2003 
in state court in Salt Lake City, Utah by the SCO Group (SCO v. IBM). 
The company removed the case to Federal Court in Utah. Plaintiff 
is an alleged successor in interest to some of AT&T’s UNIX IP rights, 
and alleges copyright infringement, unfair competition, interference 
with contract and breach of contract with regard to the company’s 


===== PAGE 116 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
114
alleged in the SEC’s complaint, (ii) prejudgment interest on that 
amount of $2.7 million, and (iii) a civil penalty of $2 million. The 
settlement is subject to court approval. 
	
The company is a defendant in numerous actions filed after 
January 1, 2008 in the Supreme Court for the State of New York, 
county of Broome, on behalf of hundreds of plaintiffs. The complaints 
allege numerous and different causes of action, including for negligence 
and recklessness, private nuisance and trespass. Plaintiffs in these 
cases seek medical monitoring and claim damages in unspecified 
amounts for a variety of personal injuries and property damages 
allegedly arising out of the presence of groundwater contamination 
and vapor intrusion of groundwater contaminants into certain structures 
in which plaintiffs reside or resided, or conducted business, allegedly 
resulting from the release of chemicals into the environment by 
the company at its former manufacturing and development facility 
in Endicott. These complaints also seek punitive damages in an 
unspecified amount. The first trial in these cases is scheduled to 
begin in October 2012. 
	
The company is party to, or otherwise involved in, proceedings 
brought by U.S. federal or state environmental agencies under the 
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability 
Act (CERCLA), known as “Superfund,” or laws similar to CERCLA. 
Such statutes require potentially responsible parties to participate 
in remediation activities regardless of fault or ownership of sites. The 
company is also conducting environmental investigations, assessments 
or remediations at or in the vicinity of several current or former 
operating sites globally pursuant to permits, administrative orders 
or agreements with country, state or local environmental agencies, 
and is involved in lawsuits and claims concerning certain current or 
former operating sites. 
	
The company is also subject to ongoing tax examinations and 
governmental assessments in various jurisdictions. Along with many 
other U.S. companies doing business in Brazil, the company is 
involved in various challenges with Brazilian authorities regarding 
non-income tax assessments and non-income tax litigation matters. 
These matters include claims for taxes on the importation of computer 
software. In November 2008, the company won a significant case in 
the Superior Chamber of the federal administrative tax court in Brazil, 
and in late July 2009, the company received written confirmation 
regarding this decision. The total potential amount related to the 
remaining matters for all applicable years is approximately $600 million. 
The company believes it will prevail on these matters and that this 
amount is not a meaningful indicator of liability. 
Commitments
The company’s extended lines of credit to third-party entities 
include unused amounts of $4,040 million and $3,415 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. A portion of these amounts 
was available to the company’s business partners to support their 
working capital needs. In addition, the company has committed to 
provide future financing to its clients in connection with client purchase 
agreements for approximately $2,567 million and $2,825 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.
of social service program processing in Indiana. The State terminated 
the contract, claiming that IBM was in breach, and the State is seeking 
damages. IBM believes the State’s claims against it are without merit 
and is seeking payment of termination amounts specified in the 
contract. Trial began in late February 2012 in Marion County, Indiana 
Superior Court.
	
The company was named as a co-defendant in numerous 
purported class actions filed on and after March 18, 2011 in federal 
and state courts in California in connection with an information 
technology outsourcing agreement between Health Net, Inc. and 
IBM. The matters were consolidated in the United States District 
Court for the Eastern District of California, and plaintiffs filed a 
consolidated complaint on July 15, 2011. The consolidated complaint 
alleges that the company violated the California Confidentiality of 
Medical Information Act in connection with hard drives that are 
unaccounted for at one of Health Net’s data centers in California; 
plaintiffs have been notified by Health Net that certain of their personal 
information is believed to be contained on those hard drives. Plaintiffs 
seek damages, as well as injunctive and declaratory relief. IBM has 
also received a request for information regarding this matter from the 
California Attorney General. On January 12, 2012, the court granted 
IBM’s motion to dismiss the complaint for lack of standing, and on 
February 22, the case against IBM was dismissed. 
	
IBM United Kingdom Limited (IBM UK) initiated legal proceedings 
in May 2010 before the High Court in London against the IBM UK 
Pensions Trust (the UK Trust) and two representative beneficiaries 
of the UK Trust membership. IBM UK is seeking a declaration that 
it acted lawfully both in notifying the Trustee of the UK Trust that it 
was closing its UK defined benefit plans to future accruals for most 
participants and in implementing the company’s new retirement policy. 
The trial in the High Court is scheduled to begin in February 2013. 
In addition, IBM UK is a defendant in approximately 275 individual 
actions brought since early 2010 by participants of the defined benefits 
plans who left IBM UK. These actions, which allege constructive 
dismissal and age discrimination, are pending before the Employment 
Tribunal in Southampton UK and are currently stayed pending 
resolution of the above-referenced High Court proceedings. In a 
separate but related proceeding, in March 2011, the Trustee of the 
IBM UK Trust was granted leave to initiate a claim before the High 
Court in London against IBM UK and one member of the UK Trust 
membership, seeking an order modifying certain documents and 
terms relating to retirement provisions in IBM UK’s largest defined 
benefit plan dating back to 1983. The trial of these proceedings is 
scheduled to begin in May 2012. 
	
In March 2011, the company announced that it has agreed to 
settle a civil enforcement action with the SEC relating to activities 
by employees of IBM Korea, LG IBM, IBM (China) Investment Company 
Limited and IBM Global Services (China) Co., Ltd., during the period 
from 1998 through 2009, allegedly in violation of the Foreign Corrupt 
Practices Act of 1977. As part of the settlement, IBM has consented 
to the entry of a judgment relating to the books and records and 
internal control provisions of the securities laws. IBM has also 
agreed to pay a total of $10 million, categorized by the SEC as follows: 
(i) $5.3 million, representing profits gained as a result of the conduct 


===== PAGE 117 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
115
	
The company has applied the guidance requiring a guarantor to 
disclose certain types of guarantees, even if the likelihood of requiring 
the guarantor’s performance is remote. The following is a description 
of arrangements in which the company is the guarantor.
	
The company is a party to a variety of agreements pursuant to 
which it may be obligated to indemnify the other party with respect 
to certain matters. Typically, these obligations arise in the context of 
contracts entered into by the company, under which the company 
customarily agrees to hold the other party harmless against losses 
arising from a breach of representations and covenants related to 
such matters as title to assets sold, certain IP rights, specified 
environmental matters, third-party performance of nonfinancial 
contractual obligations and certain income taxes. In each of these 
circumstances, payment by the company is conditioned on the other 
party making a claim pursuant to the procedures specified in the 
particular contract, the procedures of which typically allow the 
company to challenge the other party’s claims. While typically 
indemnification provisions do not include a contractual maximum 
on the company’s payment, the company’s obligations under these 
agreements may be limited in terms of time and/or nature of claim, 
and in some instances, the company may have recourse against 
third parties for certain payments made by the company.
	
It is not possible to predict the maximum potential amount of 
future payments under these or similar agreements due to the 
conditional nature of the company’s obligations and the unique facts 
and circumstances involved in each particular agreement. Historically, 
payments made by the company under these agreements have not 
had a material effect on the company’s business, financial condition 
or results of operations.
	
In addition, the company guarantees certain loans and financial 
commitments. The maximum potential future payment under 
these financial guarantees was $42 million and $48 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The fair value of the 
guarantees recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial 
Position is not material.
Note N.  
Taxes
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Income before income taxes
U.S. operations
$  9,716
$  9,140
$  9,524
Non-U.S. operations
11,287
10,583 
8,614 
Total income before income taxes
$21,003 
$19,723 
$18,138 
The provision for income taxes by geographic operations is as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
U.S. operations
$2,141
$2,000 
$2,427 
Non-U.S. operations
3,007
2,890
2,286
Total provision for income taxes
$5,148
$4,890 
$4,713 
The components of the provision for income taxes by taxing jurisdiction 
are as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
U.S. federal
Current
$   268
$   190
$   473
Deferred
909
1,015
1,341
1,177
1,205
1,814
U.S. state and local
Current
429
279
120
Deferred
81
210
185
510
489
305
Non-U.S.
Current
3,239
3,127
2,347
Deferred
222
69
247
3,461
3,196
2,594
Total provision for income taxes
5,148
4,890
4,713
Provision for social security,  
real estate, personal property  
and other taxes
4,289
4,018
3,986
Total taxes included in net income
$9,437
$8,908 
$8,699 
A reconciliation of the statutory U.S. federal tax rate to the company’s 
effective tax rate is as follows: 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Statutory rate
35%
35%
35%
Foreign tax differential
(10)
(10)
(9)
State and local
2
2
1
Other
(2)
(2)
(1)
Effective rate
25%
25%
26%
The significant components reflected within the tax rate reconciliation 
above labeled “Foreign tax differential” include the effects of foreign 
subsidiaries’ earnings taxed at rates other than the U.S. statutory 
rate, foreign export incentives, U.S. tax impacts of non-U.S. earnings 
repatriation and any net impacts of intercompany transactions. These 
items also reflect audit settlements or changes in the amount of 
unrecognized tax benefits associated with each of these items.
	
In the second quarter of 2011, the company reached agreement 
with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) related to the valuation of 
certain intellectual property within the 2004-2005 and 2006-2007 
audit periods. The agreement resolved all open matters for the period 
2004 though 2007 with the IRS. As a result, the company recorded 
a benefit to the provision for income taxes of $173 million.
	
In the fourth quarter of 2011, the IRS commenced its audit of the 
company’s U.S. tax returns for the years 2008 through 2010.


===== PAGE 118 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
116
	
The effect of tax law changes on deferred tax assets and liabilities 
did not have a material impact on the company’s effective tax rate.
	
The significant components of deferred tax assets and liabilities 
that are recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position 
were as follows: 
Deferred Tax Assets
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Retirement benefits
$  5,169
$  4,131
Share-based and other compensation
1,598
1,570
Domestic tax loss/credit carryforwards
914
948
Deferred income
834
1,080
Foreign tax loss/credit carryforwards
752
758
Bad debt, inventory and warranty reserves
608
564
Depreciation
474
470
Capitalized research and development
70
291
Other
1,409
1,486
Gross deferred tax assets
11,828
11,298
Less: valuation allowance
912
795
Net deferred tax assets
$10,916
$10,503 
Deferred Tax Liabilities
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
Leases
$2,149
$1,950 
Depreciation
1,421
1,223
Goodwill and intangible assets
796
909
Retirement benefits
551
338
Software development costs
466
638
Other
1,121
1,114
Gross deferred tax liabilities
$6,504
$6,172 
For income tax return purposes, the company has foreign and 
domestic loss carryforwards, the tax effect of which is $791 million, 
as well as domestic and foreign credit carryforwards of $875 million. 
Substantially all of these carryforwards are available for at least two 
years or are available for 10 years or more.
	
The valuation allowance at December 31, 2011 principally applies 
to certain foreign, state and local loss carryforwards that, in the 
opinion of management, are more likely than not to expire unutilized. 
However, to the extent that tax benefits related to these carryforwards 
are realized in the future, the reduction in the valuation allowance 
will reduce income tax expense.
	
The amount of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2011 
increased by $282 million in 2011 to $5,575 million. A reconciliation 
of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits 
is as follows:
($ in millions)
2011
2010
2009
Balance at January 1
$5,293
$4,790 
$3,898 
Additions based on tax positions 
related to the current year
672
1,054
554
Additions for tax positions  
of prior years
379
1,768
634
Reductions for tax positions  
of prior years (including impacts 
due to a lapse in statute)
(538)
(1,659)
(277)
Settlements
(231)
(660)
(19)
Balance at December 31
$5,575
$5,293 
$4,790 
The additions to unrecognized tax benefits related to the current 
and prior years are primarily attributable to non-U.S. issues, certain 
tax incentives and credits, acquisition-related matters and state 
issues. The settlements and reductions to unrecognized tax benefits 
for tax positions of prior years are primarily related to non-U.S. audits 
and to the conclusion of the IRS examination of the company’s 
income tax returns for 2004 through 2007, related to the valuation 
of certain intellectual property, as well as impacts due to lapses in 
statutes of limitation.
	
In April 2010, the company appealed the determination of a non-
U.S. taxing authority with respect to certain foreign tax losses. The 
tax benefit of these losses, approximately $1,475 million, had been 
included in unrecognized tax benefits within 2010 additions for tax 
positions of prior years. The tax benefit of these losses total $1,557 
million as of December 31, 2011. The increase was driven by currency 
and has been included in the 2011 additions for tax positions of prior 
years. In April 2011, the company received notification that the appeal 
had been denied. In June 2011, the company filed a lawsuit chal-
lenging this decision. No final determination has been reached on 
this matter.
	
The liability at December 31, 2011 of $5,575 million can be reduced 
by $485 million of offsetting tax benefits associated with the correlative 
effects of potential transfer pricing adjustments, state income taxes 
and timing adjustments. The net amount of $5,090 million, if recognized, 
would favorably affect the company’s effective tax rate. The net 
amounts at December 31, 2010 and 2009 were $4,849 million and 
$4,213 million, respectively.
	
Interest and penalties related to income tax liabilities are included 
in income tax expense. During the year ended December 31, 2011, the 
company recognized $129 million in interest expense and penalties; in 
2010, the company recognized a $15 million benefit in interest expense 
and penalties, and in 2009, the company recognized $193 million 
in interest expense and penalties. The company has $461 million for 
the payment of interest and penalties accrued at December 31, 2011 
and had $374 million accrued at December 31, 2010.


===== PAGE 119 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
117
	
Within the next 12 months, the company believes it is reasonably 
possible that the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits associated 
with certain positions may be reduced. The company expects that 
certain foreign and state issues may be concluded in the next 
12 months. The company estimates that the unrecognized tax benefits 
at December 31, 2011 could be reduced by $138 million. 
	
With limited exception, the company is no longer subject to U.S. 
federal, state and local or non-U.S. income tax audits by taxing 
authorities for years through 2007. The years subsequent to 2007 
contain matters that could be subject to differing interpretations of 
applicable tax laws and regulations as it relates to the amount and/
or timing of income, deductions and tax credits. Although the 
outcome of tax audits is always uncertain, the company believes 
that adequate amounts of tax and interest have been provided for 
any adjustments that are expected to result for these years.
	
The company has not provided deferred taxes on $37.9 billion 
of undistributed earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries at December 31, 2011, 
as it is the company’s policy to indefinitely reinvest these earnings 
in non-U.S. operations. However, the company periodically repatriates 
a portion of these earnings to the extent that it does not incur an 
additional U.S. tax liability. Quantification of the deferred tax liability, 
if any, associated with indefinitely reinvested earnings is not practicable.
Note O.  
Research, Development and Engineering
RD&E expense was $6,258 million in 2011, $6,026 million in 2010 
and $5,820 million in 2009.
	
The company incurred expense of $5,990 million, $5,720 million 
and $5,523 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively, for scientific 
research and the application of scientific advances to the development 
of new and improved products and their uses, as well as services 
and their application. Within these amounts, software-related expense 
was $3,097 million, $3,028 million and $2,991 million in 2011, 2010 
and 2009, respectively. 
	
Expense for product-related engineering was $267 million, 
$306 million and $297 million in 2011, 2010 and 2009, respectively.
Note P.  
Earnings Per Share of Common Stock
The following table presents the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share of common stock. 
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Weighted-average number of shares on which earnings per share calculations are based:
Basic
1,196,951,006
1,268,789,202
1,327,157,410
Add—incremental shares under stock-based compensation plans
14,241,131
16,189,053
12,258,864
Add—incremental shares associated with contingently issuable shares
2,575,848
2,377,133
1,936,480
Assuming dilution
1,213,767,985
1,287,355,388
1,341,352,754
Net income on which basic earnings per share is calculated
$15,855
$14,833 
$13,425 
Less—net income applicable to contingently issuable shares
0
0
—
Net income on which diluted earnings per share is calculated
$15,855
$14,833 
$13,425 
Earnings/(loss) per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$  13.06
$  11.52
$  10.01
Basic
$  13.25
$  11.69
$  10.12
Stock options to purchase 612,272 common shares in 2009 were outstanding, but were not included in the computation of diluted earnings 
per share because the exercise price of the options was greater than the average market price of the common shares for the applicable full 
year, and therefore, the effect would have been antidilutive.


===== PAGE 120 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
118
($ in millions)
2012
2013
2014
2015
2016
Beyond 2016
Operating lease commitments
Gross minimum rental commitments  
(including vacant space below)
$1,562
$1,324
$1,000
$689
$443
$613
Vacant space
$     29
$     10
$       9
$    7
$    3
$    1
Sublease income commitments
$     29
$     14
$       9
$    5
$    4
$    8
Capital lease commitments
$     19
$     28
$     13
$  14
$    7
$    5
Note Q.  
Rental Expense and Lease Commitments
Rental expense, including amounts charged to inventories and 
fixed assets, and excluding amounts previously reserved, was 
$1,836 million in 2011, $1,727 million in 2010 and $1,677 million in 2009. 
Rental expense in agreements with rent holidays and scheduled rent 
increases is recorded on a straight-line basis over the lease term. 
Note R.  
Stock-Based Compensation
Stock-based compensation cost is measured at grant date, based 
on the fair value of the award, and is recognized over the employee 
requisite service period. See note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on page 82 for additional information.
	
The following table presents total stock-based compensation 
cost included in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Cost
$ 120
$   94
$   94
Selling, general and administrative
514
488
417
Research, development  
and engineering
62
48
47
Other (income) and expense*
—
  (1)
—
Pre-tax stock-based  
compensation cost
697
629
558
Income tax benefits
(246)
(240)
(221)
Total stock-based  
compensation cost
$ 450
$ 389
$ 337
*	 Reflects the one-time effects of the sale of the Product Lifecycle Management activities. 
Total unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested awards 
at December 31, 2011 and 2010 was $1,169 million and $1,044 million, 
respectively, and is expected to be recognized over a weighted-
average period of approximately three years.
	
There was no significant capitalized stock-based compensation 
cost at December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
Contingent rentals are included in the determination of rental 
expense as accruable. The table below depicts gross minimum 
rental commitments under noncancelable leases, amounts related 
to vacant space associated with infrastructure reductions and 
special actions taken through 1994, and in 1999, 2002 and 2005 
(previously reserved), sublease income commitments and capital 
lease commitments. These amounts reflect activities primarily 
related to office space, as well as manufacturing facilities.
Incentive Awards
Stock-based incentive awards are provided to employees under 
the terms of the company’s long-term performance plans (the 
“Plans”). The Plans are administered by the Executive Compen­sation 
and Management Resources Com­mittee of the Board of Directors 
(the “Committee”). Awards available under the Plans principally 
include stock options, restricted stock units, performance share 
units or any combination thereof.
	
The amount of shares originally authorized to be issued under 
the company’s existing Plans was 274.1 million at December 31, 2011. 
In addition, certain incentive awards granted under previous plans, 
if and when those awards were canceled, could be reissued under 
the company’s existing Plans. As such, 66.2 million additional awards 
were considered authorized to be issued under the company’s existing 
Plans as of December 31, 2011. There were 124.8 million unused shares 
available to be granted under the Plans as of December 31, 2011.
	
Under the company’s long-standing practices and policies, all 
awards are approved prior to or on the date of grant. The exercise 
price of at-the-money stock options is the average of the high and 
low market price on the date of grant. The options approval process 
specifies the individual receiving the grant, the number of options or 
the value of the award, the exercise price or formula for determining the 
exercise price and the date of grant. All awards for senior management 
are approved by the Committee. All awards for employees other than 
senior management are approved by senior management pursuant to 
a series of delegations that were approved by the Committee, and the 
grants made pursuant to these delegations are reviewed periodically 
with the Committee. Awards that are given as part of annual total 
compensation for senior management and other employees are 
made on specific cycle dates scheduled in advance. With respect 
to awards given in connection with promotions or new hires, the 
company’s policy requires approval of such awards prior to the grant 
date, which is typically the date of the promotion or the date of hire.


===== PAGE 121 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
119
Stock Options
Stock options are awards which allow the employee to purchase 
shares of the company’s stock at a fixed price. Stock options are 
granted at an exercise price equal to the company stock price on 
the date of grant. These awards, which generally vest 25 percent 
per year, are fully vested four years from the date of grant and have 
a contractual term of 10 years.
	
The company estimates the fair value of stock options at the date 
of grant using the Black-Scholes valuation model. Key inputs and 
assumptions used to estimate the fair value of stock options include 
the grant price of the award, the expected option term, volatility of 
the company’s stock, the risk-free rate and the company’s dividend 
yield. Estimates of fair value are not intended to predict actual future 
events or the value ultimately realized by employees who receive equity 
awards, and subsequent events are not indicative of the reasonableness 
of the original estimates of fair value made by the company.
	
During the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the 
company did not grant stock options.
The following table summarizes option activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
2011
2010
2009
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Balance at January 1
$  94
39,197,728
$  98
73,210,457
$102 
119,307,170
Options exercised
98
(18,144,309)
101
(33,078,316)
98
(28,100,192)
Options canceled/expired 
107
(391,097)
108
(934,413)
127
(17,996,521)
Balance at December 31
$  90
20,662,322
$  94
39,197,728
$  98
73,210,457
Exercisable at December 31
$  90
20,662,322
$  94
39,197,728
$  98
72,217,126
The shares under option at December 31, 2011 were in the following exercise price ranges:
Options Outstanding and Exercisable
Exercise Price Range
Weighted 
Average 
Exercise Price
Number of 
Shares 
Under Option
Aggregate 
Intrinsic 
Value
Weighted Average 
Remaining 
Contractual Life 
(in Years)
$61– $85
$  78
8,079,175
$   857,827,574
1.3
$86 – $105
97
11,061,890
957,308,722
2.6
$106 and over
106
1,521,257
118,474,466
2.0
$  90
20,662,322
$1,933,610,763
2.1
In connection with various acquisition transactions, there was an 
additional 1.0 million stock-based awards, consisting of stock options 
and restricted stock units, outstanding at December 31, 2011, as a 
result of the company’s assumption of stock-based awards previously 
granted by the acquired entities. The weighted-average exercise 
price of these awards was $59 per share.
Exercises of Employee Stock Options
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended 
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $1,269 million, $1,072 million 
and $639 million, respectively. The total cash received from employees 
as a result of employee stock option exercises for the years ended 
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was approximately $1,786 million, 
$3,347 million and $2,744 million, respectively. In connection with 
these exercises, the tax benefits realized by the company for the 
years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were $412 million, 
$351 million and $243 million, respectively.
	
The company settles employee stock option exercises primarily 
with newly issued common shares and, occasionally, with treasury 
shares. Total treasury shares held at December 31, 2011 and 2010 
were approximately 1,019 million and 934 million shares, respectively.


===== PAGE 122 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
120
Stock Awards
In lieu of stock options, the company currently grants its employees stock awards. These awards are made in the form of Restricted Stock 
Units (RSUs), including Retention Restricted Stock Units (RRSUs) or Performance Share Units (PSUs). 
	
The tables below summarize RSU and PSU activity under the Plans during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009.
RSUs
2011
2010
2009
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$110 
11,196,446
$102 
13,405,654
$100 
12,397,515
RSUs granted
154
5,196,802
122
3,459,303
105
4,432,449
RSUs released
106
(3,508,700)
98
(5,102,951)
99
(2,748,613)
RSUs canceled/forfeited
122
(665,947)
105
(565,560)
101
(675,697)
Balance at December 31
$129
12,218,601
$110 
11,196,446
$102 
13,405,654
PSUs
2011
2010
2009
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Weighted 
Average 
Grant Price
Number 
of Units
Balance at January 1
$111
3,649,288
$107 
3,476,737
$102 
3,078,694
PSUs granted at target
154
1,055,687
117
1,239,468
101
1,568,129
Additional shares earned above target*
118
230,524
103
463,913
83
396,794
PSUs released
118
(1,189,765)
103
(1,486,484)
83
(1,440,099)
PSUs canceled/forfeited
118
(58,743)
108
(44,346)
111
(126,781)
Balance at December 31**
$122
3,686,991
$111 
3,649,288
$107 
3,476,737
*	 Represents additional shares issued to employees after vesting of PSUs because final performance metrics exceeded specified targets.
**	Represents the number of shares expected to be issued based on achievement of grant date performance targets. The actual number of shares issued depends on the company’s 
performance against specified targets over the vesting period.
unrecognized compensation cost related to non-vested RSUs. The 
company received no cash from employees as a result of employee 
vesting and release of RSUs for the years ended December 31, 2011, 
2010 and 2009. In the second quarter of 2011, the company granted 
equity awards valued at approximately $1 thousand each to about 
400,000 non-executive employees. These awards were made under 
the Plans and vest in December 2015. 
	
PSUs are stock awards where the number of shares ultimately 
received by the employee depends on the company’s performance 
against specified targets and typically vest over a three-year period. 
The fair value of each PSU is determined on the grant date, based 
on the company’s stock price, and assumes that performance 
targets will be achieved. Over the performance period, the number 
of shares of stock that will be issued is adjusted upward or downward 
based upon the probability of achievement of performance targets. 
The ultimate number of shares issued and the related compensation 
cost recognized as expense will be based on a comparison of the 
final performance metrics to the specified targets. The fair value of 
PSUs granted at target during the years ended December 31, 2011, 
2010 and 2009 was $165 million, $145 million and $159 million, 
respectively. Total fair value of PSUs vested and released during 
the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $141 million, 
$153 million and $120 million, respectively.
RSUs are stock awards granted to employees that entitle the holder 
to shares of common stock as the award vests, typically over a 
one- to five-year period. The fair value of the awards is determined 
and fixed on the grant date based on the company’s stock price. 
RSUs granted to employees prior to January 1, 2008 are considered 
participating securities as they receive non-forfeitable dividend 
equivalents at the same rate as common stock. Any unvested awards 
that contain these rights are included in computing earnings per 
share pursuant to the two-class method. For RSUs awarded on or 
after January 1, 2008, dividend equivalents are not paid. The fair 
value of such RSUs is determined and fixed on the grant date based 
on the company’s stock price adjusted for the exclusion of dividend 
equivalents.
	
The remaining weighted-average contractual term of RSUs at 
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 is the same as the period over 
which the remaining cost of the awards will be recognized, which 
is approximately three years. The fair value of RSUs granted during 
the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 was $803 million, 
$421 million and $467 million, respectively. The total fair value of RSUs 
vested and released during the years ended December 31, 2011, 
2010 and 2009 was $373 million, $503 million and $272 million, 
respectively. As of December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, there was 
$1,021 million, $865 million and $892 million, respectively, of 


===== PAGE 123 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
121
	
In connection with vesting and release of RSUs and PSUs, 
the tax benefits realized by the company for the years ended 
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 were $283 million, $293 million 
and $156 million, respectively. 
IBM Employees Stock Purchase Plan
The company maintains a non-compensatory Employees Stock 
Pur­chase Plan (ESPP). The ESPP enables eligible participants to 
purchase full or fractional shares of IBM common stock at a 5 percent 
discount off the average market price on the day of purchase through 
payroll deductions of up to 10 percent of eligible compensation. Eligible 
compensation includes any compensation received by the employee 
during the year. The ESPP provides for offering periods during which 
shares may be purchased and continues as long as shares remain 
available under the ESPP, unless terminated earlier at the discretion 
of the Board of Directors. Individual ESPP participants are restricted 
from purchasing more than $25,000 of common stock in one 
calendar year or 1,000 shares in an offering period. 
	
Employees purchased 1.9 million, 2.4 million and 3.2 million shares 
under the ESPP during the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 
and 2009, respectively. Cash dividends declared and paid by the 
company on its common stock also include cash dividends on the 
company stock purchased through the ESPP. Dividends are paid 
on full and fractional shares and can be reinvested in the ESPP. The 
company stock purchased through the ESPP is considered outstanding 
and is included in the weighted-average outstanding shares for 
purposes of computing basic and diluted earnings per share.
	
Approximately 5.4 million, 7.2 million and 9.6 million shares were 
available for purchase under the ESPP at December 31, 2011, 2010 
and 2009, respectively. 
Note S.  
Retirement-Related Benefits
Description of Plans
IBM sponsors defined benefit pension plans and defined contribution 
plans that cover substantially all regular employees, a supplemental 
retention plan that covers certain U.S. executives and nonpension 
postretirement benefit plans primarily consisting of retiree medical 
and dental benefits for eligible retirees and dependents. 
U.S. Plans
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
IBM Personal Pension Plan 
IBM provides U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees hired 
prior to January 1, 2005 with noncontributory defined benefit pension 
benefits via the IBM Personal Pension Plan. Prior to 2008, the IBM 
Personal Pension Plan consisted of a tax qualified (qualified) plan 
and a non-tax qualified (nonqualified) plan. Effective January 1, 2008, 
the nonqualified plan was renamed the Excess Personal Pension 
Plan (Excess PPP) and the qualified plan is now referred to as the 
Qualified PPP. The combined plan is now referred to as the PPP. 
The Qualified PPP is funded by company contributions to an 
irrevocable trust fund, which is held for the sole benefit of participants 
and beneficiaries. The Excess PPP, which is unfunded, provides 
benefits in excess of IRS limitations for qualified plans.
	
Benefits provided to the PPP participants are calculated using 
benefit formulas that vary based on the participant. The first method 
uses a five-year, final pay formula that determines benefits based 
on salary, years of service, mortality and other participant-specific 
factors. The second method is a cash balance formula that calculates 
benefits using a percentage of employees’ annual salary, as well as 
an interest crediting rate.
	
Benefit accruals under the IBM Personal Pension Plan ceased 
December 31, 2007 for all participants. 
U.S. Supplemental Executive Retention Plan
The company also sponsors a nonqualified U.S. Supplemental 
Executive Reten­tion Plan (Retention Plan). The Retention Plan, which 
is unfunded, provides benefits to eligible U.S. executives based on 
average earnings, years of service and age at termination of employment.
	
Benefit accruals under the Retention Plan ceased December 31, 
2007 for all participants. 
Defined Contribution Plans
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan 
U.S. regular, full-time and part-time employees are eligible to 
participate in the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, which is a qualified defined 
contribution plan under section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
Effective January 1, 2008, under the IBM 401(k) Plus Plan, eligible 
employees receive a dollar-for-dollar match of their contributions 
up to 6 percent of eligible compensation for those hired prior to 
January 1, 2005, and up to 5 percent of eligible compensation for 
those hired on or after January 1, 2005. In addition, eligible employees 
receive automatic contributions from the company equal to 1, 2 or 
4 percent of eligible compensation based on their eligibility to 
participate in the PPP as of December 31, 2007. Employees receive 
automatic contributions and matching contributions after the 
completion of one year of service. Further, through June 30, 2009, 
IBM contributed transition credits to eligible participants’ 401(k) Plus 
Plan accounts. The amount of the transition credits was based on a 
participant’s age and service as of June 30, 1999. 
	
The company’s matching contributions vest immediately and 
participants are always fully vested in their own contributions. All 
contributions, including the company match, are made in cash and 
invested in accordance with participants’ investment elections. There 
are no minimum amounts that must be invested in company stock, 
and there are no restrictions on transferring amounts out of company 
stock to another investment choice, other than excessive trading 
rules applicable to such investments.


===== PAGE 124 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
122
IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan
Effective January 1, 2008, the company replaced the IBM Exec­utive 
Deferred Compensation Plan, an unfunded, nonqualified, defined 
contribution plan, with the IBM Excess 401(k) Plus Plan (Excess 
401(k)), an unfunded, nonqualified defined contribution plan. Employees 
who are eligible to participate in the 401(k) Plus Plan and whose 
eligible compensation is expected to exceed the IRS compensation 
limit for qualified plans are eligible to participate in the Excess 401(k). 
The purpose of the Excess 401(k) is to provide benefits that would be 
provided under the qualified IBM 401(k) Plus Plan if the compensation 
limits did not apply.
	
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k) are record-keeping 
(notional) accounts and are not held in trust for the participants. 
Participants in the Excess 401(k) may invest their notional accounts 
in investments which mirror the primary investment options available 
under the 401(k) Plus Plan. Participants in the Excess 401(k) are 
also eligible to receive company match and automatic contributions 
on eligible compensation deferred into the Excess 401(k) and on 
compensation earned in excess of the Internal Revenue Code 
pay limit once they have completed one year of service. Through 
June 30, 2009, eligible participants also received transition credits. 
Amounts deferred into the Excess 401(k), including company 
contributions are recorded as liabilities in the Consolidated Statement 
of Financial Position. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan
U.S. Nonpension Postretirement Plan 
The company sponsors a defined benefit nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan that provides medical and dental benefits to eligible U.S. 
retirees and eligible dependents, as well as life insurance for eligible 
U.S. retirees. Effective July 1, 1999, the company established a Future 
Health Account (FHA) for employees who were more than five years 
from retirement eligibility. Employees who were within five years of 
retirement eligibility are covered under the company’s prior retiree 
health benefits arrangements. Under either the FHA or the prior 
retiree health benefit arrangements, there is a maximum cost to the 
company for retiree health benefits. 
	
Since January 1, 2004, new hires, as of that date or later, are not 
eligible for company subsidized nonpension postretirement benefits.
Non-U.S. Plans
Most subsidiaries and branches outside the United States sponsor 
defined benefit and/or defined contribution plans that cover 
substantially all regular employees. The company deposits funds 
under various fiduciary-type arrangements, purchases annuities 
under group contracts or provides reserves for these plans. Benefits 
under the defined benefit plans are typically based either on years 
of service and the employee’s compensation (generally during a 
fixed number of years immediately before retirement) or on annual 
credits. The range of assumptions that are used for the non-U.S. 
defined benefit plans reflect the different economic environments 
within the various countries.
	
In addition, certain of the company’s non-U.S. subsidiaries sponsor 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans that provide medical and 
dental benefits to eligible non-U.S. retirees and eligible dependents, 
as well as life insurance for certain eligible non-U.S. retirees. However, 
most non-U.S. retirees are covered by local government-sponsored 
and -administered programs.
Plan Financial Information
Summary of Financial Information
The following table presents a summary of the total retirement-related benefits net periodic (income)/cost recorded in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. 
($ in millions)
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
Total
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Defined benefit pension plans
$(774)
$ (949)
$(919)
$   734
$   541
$   521
$    (40)
$  (408)
$  (398)
Retention Plan
15
14
13
—
—
—
15
14
13
Total defined benefit  
pension plans (income)/cost
$(759)
$(935)
$(906)
$   734
$   541
$   521
$    (25)
$  (394)
$  (384)
IBM 401(k) Plus Plan  
and Non-U.S. plans
$ 875
$ 882
$ 946
$   608
$   527
$   478
$1,483 
$1,409 
$1,424 
Excess 401(k)
30
20
26
—
—
—
30
20
26
Total defined contribution plans cost
$ 905
$ 902
$ 972
$   608
$   527
$   478
$1,513 
$1,430 
$1,450 
Nonpension postretirement  
benefit plans cost
$ 269
$ 281
$ 292
$     76
$     66
$     58
$   345
$   347
$   350
Total retirement-related  
benefits net periodic cost
$ 415
$ 248
$ 358
$1,418 
$1,134 
$1,057 
$1,832 
$1,382 
$1,415 


===== PAGE 125 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
123
The following table presents a summary of the total projected benefit obligation (PBO) for defined benefit pension plans, accumulated 
postretirement benefit obligation (APBO) for nonpension postretirement benefit plans (benefit obligations), fair value of plan assets and the 
associated funded status recorded in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Benefit Obligations
Fair Value of Plan Assets
Funded Status*
At December 31:
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans 
Qualified PPP
$        —
$49,663 
$        —
$ 50,259
$        —
$      596
Underfunded plans
Qualified PPP
52,318
—
51,218
—
(1,100)
—
Excess PPP
1,462
1,360
—
—
(1,462)
(1,360)
Retention Plan
305
271
—
—
(305)
(271)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plan
5,273
5,123
38
35
(5,235)
(5,088)
Total underfunded U.S. plans
$59,358 
$  6,753
$51,256 
$        35
$  (8,102)
$  (6,718)
Non-U.S. Plans
Overfunded plans 
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$13,169 
$22,625 
$16,011 
$25,096 
$   2,843
$   2,471
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
7
8
7
9
0
1
Total overfunded non-U.S. plans
$13,175 
$22,633 
$16,018 
$25,105 
$   2,843
$   2,472
Underfunded plans
Qualified defined benefit pension plans
$24,659 
$14,507 
$19,351 
$10,626 
$  (5,308)
$  (3,881)
Nonqualified defined benefit pension plans
5,033
5,452
—
—
(5,033)
(5,452)
Nonpension postretirement benefit plans
894 
864 
105 
111 
(789)
(753)
Total underfunded non-U.S. plans
$30,587 
$20,823 
$19,456 
$10,737 
$(11,131)
$(10,086)
Total overfunded plans
$13,175 
$72,296 
$16,018 
$75,364 
$   2,843
$   3,068
Total underfunded plans
$89,944 
$27,576 
$70,712 
$10,772 
$(19,232)
$(16,804)
*	 Funded status is recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position as follows: Asset amounts as prepaid pension assets; (Liability) amounts as compensation and 
benefits (current liability) and retirement and nonpension postretirement benefit obligations (noncurrent liability).
At December 31, 2011, the company’s qualified defined benefit pension plans worldwide were 96 percent funded compared to the benefit 
obligations, with the U.S. qualified PPP 98 percent funded. Overall, including nonqualifed plans, the company’s defined benefit pension plans 
were 89 percent funded.


===== PAGE 126 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
124
Defined Benefit Pension and Nonpension  
Postretirement Benefit Plan Financial Information
The following tables through page 126 represent financial information 
for the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding defined 
contribution plans. The defined benefit pension plans under U.S. 
Plans consists of the Qualified PPP, the Excess PPP and the Retention 
The tables below present the components of net periodic (income)/cost of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans recognized in 
Consoli­dated Statement of Earnings, excluding defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Service cost
$      —
$       —
$       —
$    505
$    508
$    585
Interest cost
2,456
2,601
2,682
1,843
1,841
1,898
Expected return on plan assets
(4,043)
(4,017)
(4,009)
(2,521)
(2,461)
(2,534)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
(0)
(0)
(0)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
10
10
10
(162)
(174)
(126)
Recognized actuarial losses
818
471
411
957
712
624
Curtailments and settlements
—
1
—
1
27
(126)
Multi-employer plans/other costs
—
—
—
111
89
200
Total net periodic (income)/cost
$   (759)
$   (935)
$   (906)
$    734
$    541
$    521
($ in millions)
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Service cost
$  33
$  33
$  41
$ 11 
$  9
$ 10
Interest cost
236
262
289
67
59
51
Expected return on plan assets
—
—
—
(10)
(9)
(8)
Amortization of transition assets
—
—
—
0
0
0
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
—
(14)
(39)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Recognized actuarial losses
—
—
—
13
12
11
Total net periodic cost
$269 
$281 
$292 
$ 76 
$66 
$ 58
Plan. The defined benefit pension plans and the nonpension 
postretirement benefit plans under Non-U.S. Plans consists of all 
plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries. The nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan under U.S. Plan consists of only the U.S. 
Non­pension Postretirement Benefit Plan.


===== PAGE 127 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
125
The following table presents the changes in benefit obligations and plan assets of the company’s retirement-related benefit plans, excluding 
defined contribution plans.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2011
2010
2011
2010*
2011
2010
2011
2010
Change in benefit obligation 
Benefit obligation at January 1
$51,293
$48,354 
$42,584
$41,308 
$ 5,123
$ 5,100
$ 872
$ 767
Service cost
—
—
505
508
33
33
11
9
Interest cost
2,456
2,601
1,843
1,841
236
262
67
59
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
53
57
228
235
—
—
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
(0)
—
(48)
(75)
(0)
—
(1)
1
Actuarial losses/(gains)
3,551
3,573
812
1,656
244
123
47
32
Benefits paid from trust
(3,121)
(3,145)
(1,995)
(1,957)
(623)
(641)
(7)
(7)
Direct benefit payments
(95)
(92)
(462)
(457)
(32)
(5)
(27)
(25)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(423)
(225)
—
—
(60)
37
Medicare/Government subsidies
—
—
—
—
65
16
—
—
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
1
(8)
(73)
—
—
—
0
Benefit obligation at December 31
$54,085
$51,293 
$42,861
$42,584 
$ 5,273
$ 5,123
$ 901
$ 872
Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets at January 1
$50,259
$47,269 
$35,722
$34,305 
$      35
$      33
$ 120
$ 104
Actual return on plan assets
4,080
6,135
1,052
2,983
0
0
13
17
Employer contributions
—
—
728
801
397
408
0
0
Acquisitions/divestitures, net
—
—
(27)
(10)
—
(0)
(0)
(0)
Plan participants’ contributions
—
—
53
57
228
235
—
—
Benefits paid from trust
(3,121)
(3,145)
(1,995)
(1,957)
(623)
(641)
(7)
(7)
Foreign exchange impact
—
—
(537)
(396)
—
—
(15)
6
Amendments/curtailments/settlements/other
—
—
367**
(61)
—
—
—
—
Fair value of plan assets at December 31
$51,218
$50,259 
$35,362
$35,722 
$      38
$      35
$ 112
$ 120
Funded status at December 31
$ (2,866)
$ (1,034)
$ (7,499)
$ (6,861)
$(5,235)
$(5,088)
$(789)
$(752)
Accumulated benefit obligation+
$54,085
$51,293 
$42,063
$41,630
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
*	 Excludes a defined benefit pension plan in Brazil due to restrictions on the use of plan assets imposed by governmental regulations.
**	Includes the reinstatement of certain plan assets in Brazil due to a 2011 government ruling allowing certain previously restricted plan assets to be returned to IBM. Beginning June 
2011, the assets will be returned to IBM monthly over a three year period, with approximately $200 million expected to be returned during 2012. The remaining surplus in Brazil at 
December 31, 2011 remains excluded from total plan assets due to continued restrictions imposed by the government on the use of those plan assets.
+	 Represents the benefit obligation assuming no future participant compensation increases.
N/A—Not applicable
The following table presents the net funded status recognized in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
Prepaid pension assets
$        0
$     596
$  2,843
$ 2,471
$        0
$        0
$     0
$     1
Current liabilities—compensation and benefits
(96)
(94)
(304)
(289)
(437)
(421)
(22)
(22)
Noncurrent liabilities—retirement and nonpension 
postretirement benefit obligations
(2,770)
(1,536)
(10,038)
(9,044)
(4,798)
(4,667)
(768)
(731)
Funded status—net
$(2,866)
$(1,034)
$ (7,499)
$(6,861)
$(5,235)
$(5,088)
$(789)
$(752)
The table on page 126 presents the pre-tax net loss and prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized in other 
comprehensive income/(loss) and the changes in the pre-tax net loss, prior service costs/(credits) and transition (assets)/liabilities recognized 
in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.


===== PAGE 128 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
126
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
2011
2010
Net loss at January 1
$15,865
$14,880 
$17,580
$17,172 
$492
$397 
$180
$167 
Current period loss/(gain)
3,514
1,456
1,696
1,130
241
96
45
24
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
(11)
(10)
—
—
—
—
Amortization of net loss included  
in net periodic (income)/cost
(818)
(471)
(957)
(712)
—
—
(13)
(12)
Net loss at December 31
$18,561
$15,865 
$18,309
$17,580 
$734
$492 
$211
$180 
Prior service costs/(credits) at January 1
$     149
$     159
$    (958)
$ (1,104)
$   —
$ (14)
$ (14)
$ (19)
Current period prior service costs/(credits)
—
—
28
(28)
—
—
(0)
(0)
Curtailments and settlements
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
Amortization of prior service (costs)/credits  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
(10)
(10)
162
174
—
14
4
5
Prior service costs/(credits) at December 31
$     139
$     149
$    (768)
$    (958)
$   —
$   —
$ (10)
$ (14)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at January 1
$       —
$        —
$        (0)
$        (1)
$   —
$   —
$    1
$    1
Amortization of transition assets/(liabilities)  
included in net periodic (income)/cost
—
—
0
0
—
—
(0)
(0)
Transition (assets)/liabilities at December 31
$        —
$        —
$        (0)
$        (0)
$   —
$   —
$    0
$    1
Total loss recognized in accumulated other 
comprehensive income/(loss)*
$18,701
$16,014 
$17,541
$16,621 
$734
$492
$202
$167 
*	 See note L, “Equity Activity,” on pages 110 to 112 for the total change in the accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) and the Consolidated Statement of Comprehensive 
Income for the components of net periodic (income)/cost, including the related tax effects, recognized in other comprehensive income/(loss) for the retirement-related benefit plans.
The following table presents the pre-tax estimated net loss, estimated prior service costs/(credits) and estimated transition (assets)/ 
liabilities of the retirement-related benefit plans that will be amortized from accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) into net periodic 
(income)/cost in 2012.
($ in millions)
Defined Benefit  
Pension Plans
Nonpension Postretirement 
Benefit Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Net loss
$1,343 
$1,047 
$24
$16
Prior service costs/(credits)
9
(157)
—
(4)
Transition (assets)/liabilities
—
(0)
—
0
During the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009, the 
company paid $16 million, $22 million and $140 million, respectively, 
for mandatory pension insolvency insurance coverage premiums 
in certain non-U.S. countries (Germany, Canada, Luxembourg and 
the U.K.). Premiums were significantly higher in 2009 due to the 
increased level of insolvencies experienced by other companies as 
a result of the economic crisis in that period.
	
No significant amendments of retirement-related benefit plans 
occurred during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010 that 
had a material effect in the Consolidated Statement of Earnings.
	
In 2009, the company approved changes to the United Kingdom 
Pension Plan which included ending benefit accruals under this plan 
effective April 2011. As a result of this action, the company recorded 
a curtailment gain of $124 million which was included in 2009 net 
periodic (income)/cost and reduced the PBO by $85 million. 
Assumptions Used to Determine Plan Financial Information
Underlying both the measurement of benefit obligations and net 
periodic (income)/cost are actuarial valuations. These valuations 
use participant-specific information such as salary, age and years 
of service, as well as certain assumptions, the most significant of 
which include estimates of discount rates, expected return on plan 
assets, rate of compensation increases, interest crediting rates and 
mortality rates. The company evaluates these assumptions, at a 
minimum, annually, and makes changes as necessary.


===== PAGE 129 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
127
The table below presents the assumptions used to measure the net periodic (income)/cost and the year-end benefit obligations for retirement-
related benefit plans.
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
U.S. Plans
Non-U.S. Plans
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic (income)/cost for the year ended December 31:
Discount rate
5.00%
5.60%
5.75%
4.33%
4.84%
4.89%
Expected long-term returns  
on plan assets
8.00%
8.00%
8.00%
6.41%
6.56%
6.73%
Rate of compensation increase*
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.37%
2.92%
3.09%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31:
Discount rate
4.20%
5.00%
5.60%
4.28%
4.33%
4.84%
Rate of compensation increase*
N/A
N/A
N/A
2.43%
2.37%
2.92%
*	 Rate of compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all participants.
N/A—Not applicable
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
2011
2010
2009
2011
2010
2009
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure net 
periodic cost for the year ended December 31:
Discount rate
4.80%
5.40%
5.75%
7.75%
7.92%
7.36%
Expected long-term returns  
on plan assets
N/A
N/A
N/A
9.07%
9.16%
9.19%
Weighted-average assumptions used to measure  
benefit obligations at December 31:
Discount rate
3.90%
4.80%
5.40%
7.37%
7.75%
7.92%
N/A—Not applicable
Discount Rate
The discount rate assumptions used for retirement-related benefit 
plans accounting reflect the yields available on high-quality, fixed 
income debt instruments at the measurement date. For the U.S. and 
certain non-U.S. countries, a portfolio of high-quality corporate bonds 
is used to construct a yield curve. The cash flows from the company’s 
expected benefit obligation payments are then matched to the yield 
curve to derive the discount rates. In other non-U.S. countries, where 
the markets for high-quality long-term bonds are not generally as 
well developed, a portfolio of long-term government bonds is used 
as a base, to which a credit spread is added to simulate corporate 
bond yields at these maturities in the jurisdiction of each plan, as 
the benchmark for developing the respective discount rates.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plans, the changes in the 
discount rate assumptions impacted the net periodic (income)/cost 
and the PBO. The changes in the discount rate assumptions resulted 
in a decrease in 2011 net periodic income of $171 million, a decrease 
in 2010 net periodic income of $40 million and a decrease in 2009 
net periodic income of $70 million. The changes in the discount rate 
assumptions resulted in an increase in the PBO of $4,216 million and 
$2,943 million at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. 
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the changes in 
the discount rate assumptions had no material impact on net periodic 
cost for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009 and 
resulted in an increase in the APBO of $359 million and $240 million 
at December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively.


===== PAGE 130 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
128
Expected Long-Term Returns on Plan Assets
Expected returns on plan assets, a component of net periodic 
(income)/cost, represent the expected long-term returns on plan 
assets based on the calculated market-related value of plan assets. 
Expected long-term returns on plan assets take into account long-
term expectations for future returns and the investment policies and 
strategies as described on page 129. These rates of return are 
developed by the company, calculated using an arithmetic average 
and are tested for reasonableness against historical returns. The 
use of expected long-term returns on plan assets may result in 
recognized pension income that is greater or less than the actual 
returns of those plan assets in any given year. Over time, however, 
the expected long-term returns are designed to approximate the 
actual long-term returns, and therefore result in a pattern of income 
and cost recognition that more closely matches the pattern of the 
services provided by the employees. Differences between actual 
and expected returns are recognized as a component of net loss or 
gain in accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss), which is 
amortized as a component of net periodic (income)/cost over the 
service lives or life expectancy of the plan participants, depending 
on the plan, provided such amounts exceed certain thresholds 
provided by accounting standards. The market-related value of plan 
assets recognizes changes in the fair value of plan assets systematically 
over a five-year period in the expected return on plan assets line in 
net periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the U.S. defined benefit pension plan, the Qualified PPP, the 
expected long-term rate of return on plan assets of 8.00 percent 
remained constant for the years ended December 31, 2011, 2010 
and 2009 and, consequently, had no incremental impact on net 
periodic (income)/cost.
	
For the nonpension postretirement benefit plans, the company 
maintains a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely 
payments are made. As a result, for the years ended December 31, 2011, 
2010 and 2009, the expected long-term return on plan assets and 
the actual return on those assets were not material.
Rate of Compensation Increases and Mortality Rate
The rate of compensation increases is determined by the com­pany, 
based upon its long-term plans for such increases. The rate of 
compensation increase is not applicable to the U.S. defined benefit 
pension plans as benefit accruals ceased December 31, 2007 for all 
participants. Mortality rate assumptions are based on life expectancy 
and death rates for different types of participants. Mortality rates are 
periodically updated based on actual experience.
Interest Crediting Rate
Benefits for certain participants in the PPP are calculated using a 
cash balance formula. An assumption underlying this formula is an 
interest crediting rate, which impacts both net periodic (income)/
cost and the PBO. This assumption provides a basis for projecting 
the expected interest rate that participants will earn on the benefits 
that they are expected to receive in the following year and is based 
on the average from August to October of the one-year U.S. Treasury 
Constant Maturity yield plus one percent.
	
For the PPP, the change in the interest crediting rate to 1.3 percent 
for the year ended December 31, 2011, from 1.4 percent for the year 
ended December 31, 2010, resulted in an increase in 2011 net periodic 
income of $4 million. The change in the interest crediting rate to 
1.4 percent for the year ended December 31, 2010, from 2.8 percent 
for the year ended December 31, 2009, resulted in an increase in 
2010 net periodic income of $62 million. The change in the interest 
crediting rate to 2.8 percent for the year ended December 31, 2009, 
from 5.2 percent for the year ended December 31, 2008, resulted in 
an increase in 2009 net periodic income of $151 million.
Healthcare Cost Trend Rate
For nonpension postretirement benefit plan accounting, the company 
reviews external data and its own historical trends for healthcare 
costs to determine the healthcare cost trend rates. However, the 
healthcare cost trend rate has an insignificant effect on plan costs 
and obligations as a result of the terms of the plan which limit the 
company’s obligation to the participants. The company assumes 
that the healthcare cost trend rate for 2012 will be 7.5 percent. In 
addition, the company assumes that the same trend rate will decrease 
to 5 percent over the next five years. A one percentage point increase 
or decrease in the assumed healthcare cost trend rate would not 
have had a material effect on 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic cost 
or the benefit obligations as of December 31, 2011 and 2010.
Healthcare Legislation
The expected effects of the U.S. healthcare reform legislation enacted 
in March 2010 were incorporated into the remeasurements of the 
U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan at December 31, 2011 
and 2010. The impact was insignificant as a result of the terms of 
the plan which limit the company’s obligation to the participants.


===== PAGE 131 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
129
	
Market liquidity risks are tightly controlled, with only a modest 
percentage of the Qualified PPP portfolio invested in private 
market assets consisting of private equities and private real estate 
investments, which are less liquid than publicly traded securities. As 
of December 31, 2011, the Qualified PPP portfolio had $2,663 million 
in commitments for future investments in private markets to be made 
over a number of years. These commitments are expected to be 
funded from plan assets.
	
Derivatives are used on a limited basis as an effective means to 
achieve investment objectives and/or as a component of the plan’s 
risk management strategy. The primary reasons for the use of 
derivatives are fixed income management, including duration, interest 
rate management and credit exposure, cash equitization and to 
manage currency and commodity strategies.
	
Outside the U.S., the investment objectives are similar to those 
described above, subject to local regulations. The weighted average 
target allocation for the non-U.S. plans is 37 percent equity securities, 
51 percent fixed income securities, 3 percent real estate and 
9 percent other investments, which is consistent with the allocation 
decisions made by the company’s management. The table on page 
130 details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types 
of investments for non-U.S. plans. In some countries, a higher 
percentage allocation to fixed income securities is required. In others, 
the responsibility for managing the investments typically lies with a 
board that may include up to 50 percent of members elected by 
employees and retirees. This can result in slight differences compared 
with the strategies previously described. Generally, these non-U.S. 
plans do not invest in illiquid assets and their use of derivatives is 
usually limited to currency hedging, adjusting portfolio durations 
and reducing specific market risks. The target allocation for equity 
securities decreased from 47 percent to 37 percent in the current 
year, offset by an increase in the target allocation for fixed income 
securities and other investments.
	
The company’s defined benefit pension plans include 
investments in certain European government securities. At 
December 31, 2011, the U.S. plan held approximately $1 billion 
and the non-U.S. plans held approximately $11 billion in European 
sovereign debt investments, respectively. Investments in government 
debt securities in Italy, Spain and Ireland were de minimis in the U.S. 
plan and represented less than 1 percent of total non-U.S. plan assets. 
The plans hold no direct investments in government debt securities 
of Greece and Portugal.
	
The company’s nonpension postretirement benefit plans are 
underfunded or unfunded. For some plans, the company maintains 
a nominal, highly liquid trust fund balance to ensure timely benefit 
payments. 
Plan Assets
Retirement-related benefit plan assets are recognized and measured 
at fair value as described in note A, “Significant Accounting Policies,” 
on page 84. Because of the inherent uncertainty of valuations, these 
fair value measurements may not necessarily reflect the amounts 
the company could realize in current market transactions.
Investment Policies and Strategies
The investment objectives of the Qualified PPP portfolio are designed 
to generate returns that will enable the plan to meet its future 
obligations. The precise amount for which these obligations will 
be settled depends on future events, including the retirement 
dates and life expectancy of the plans’ participants. The obligations 
are estimated using actuarial assumptions, based on the current 
economic environment and other pertinent factors described on 
pages 126 to 128. The Qualified PPP portfolio’s investment strategy 
balances the requirement to generate returns, using potentially higher 
yielding assets such as equity securities, with the need to control 
risk in the portfolio with less volatile assets, such as fixed-income 
securities. Risks include, among others, inflation, volatility in equity 
values and changes in interest rates that could cause the plan to 
become underfunded, thereby increasing its dependence on 
contributions from the company. To mitigate any potential concen-
tration risk, careful consideration is given to balancing the portfolio 
among industry sectors, companies and geographies, taking into 
account interest rate sensitivity, dependence on economic growth, 
currency and other factors that affect investment returns. As a result, 
the Qualified PPP portfolio’s target allocation is 43 percent equity 
securities, 46 percent fixed income securities, 6 percent real estate 
and 5 percent other investments, which is consistent with the 
allocation decisions made by the company’s management and is 
similar to the prior year target allocation. The table on page 130 
details the actual equity, fixed income, real estate and other types 
of investments in the Qualified PPP portfolio. 
	
The assets are managed by professional investment firms and 
investment professionals who are employees of the company. They 
are bound by investment mandates determined by the company’s 
management and are measured against specific benchmarks. Among 
these managers, consideration is given, but not limited to, balancing 
security concentration, issuer concentration, investment style and 
reliance on particular active and passive investment strategies. 


===== PAGE 132 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
130
Defined Benefit Pension Plan assets
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2011. 
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$13,618
$       11
$       —
$13,629
$6,426
$       —
$   —
$  6,427
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
32
1,877
—
1,909
240
7,751
—
7,991
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
15,105
29
15,134
—
8,479
96
8,575
Corporate bonds (e)
—
7,387
12
7,398
—
1,409
39
1,447
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
838
45
883
—
36
—
36
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(f)
262
715
246
1,223
72
7,136
—
7,209
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
988
—
988
Cash and short-term investments (g)
286
2,390
—
2,675
145
361
—
506
Hedge funds
—
1,140
713
1,853
—
417
—
417
Private equity (h)
0
—
4,098
4,098
—
—
262
262
Private real estate (h)
—
—
2,790
2,790
—
—
580
580
Derivatives (i)
10
(15)
—
(6)
(2)
866
—
864
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(j)
—
—
—
—
9
114
—
123
Subtotal
14,207
29,446
7,932
51,586
6,890
27,557
977
35,425
Other (k)
—
—
—
(368)
—
—
—
(62)
Fair value of plan assets
$14,207
$29,446
$7,932
$51,218
$6,890
$27,557
$977
$35,362
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $132 million, representing 0.3 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $35 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	The U.S. Plan includes IBM corporate bonds of $13 million, representing 0.03 percent of the U.S. Plan assets.
(f)	 Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(g)	Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(h)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(i)	 Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(j)	 Invests in both equity and fixed income securities. 
(k)	Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $38 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. 
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $112 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South 
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities and corporate bonds, categorized as Level 2 in the fair 
value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 133 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
131
The following table presents the company’s defined benefit pension plans’ asset classes and their associated fair value at December 31, 2010. 
The U.S. Plan consists of the Qualified PPP and the Non-U.S. Plans consist of all plans sponsored by the company’s subsidiaries.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan
Non-U.S. Plans
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Equity
Equity securities (a)
$16,407 
$       54
$      —
$16,460 
$7,903 
$        —
$   —
$  7,903
Equity commingled/mutual funds (b)(c)
27
1,829
—
1,856
276
9,252
—
9,527
Fixed income
Government and related (d)
—
12,743
—
12,743
—
7,574
—
7,574
Corporate bonds
—
6,721
—
6,721
—
1,252
11
1,263
Mortgage and asset-backed securities
—
1,147
56
1,202
—
45
—
45
Fixed income commingled/mutual funds (b)(e)
252
662
221
1,136
75
6,993
—
7,068
Insurance contracts
—
—
—
—
—
1,095
—
1,095
Cash and short-term investments (f)
244
2,000
—
2,244
147
254
—
401
Hedge funds
—
953
624
1,577
—
—
—
—
Private equity (g)
—
—
4,251
4,251
—
—
176
176
Private real estate (g)
—
—
2,634
2,634
—
—
533
533
Derivatives (h)
31
9
—
40
11
131
—
142
Other commingled/mutual funds (b)(i)
—
—
—
—
—
28
—
28
Subtotal
16,960
26,117
7,786
50,863
8,411
26,623
720
35,755
Other (j)
—
—
—
(603)
—
—
—
(33)
Fair value of plan assets
$16,960 
$26,117 
$7,786 
$50,259 
$8,411 
$26,623 
$720 
$35,722 
(a)	Represents U.S. and international securities. The U.S. Plan includes IBM common stock of $122 million, representing 0.2 percent of the U.S. Plan assets. Non-U.S. Plans include 
IBM common stock of $32 million, representing 0.1 percent of the non-U.S. Plans assets.
(b)	Commingled funds represent pooled institutional investments.
(c)	Invests in predominantly equity securities.
(d)	Includes debt issued by national, state and local governments and agencies.
(e)	Invests in predominantly fixed income securities.
(f)	 Includes cash and cash equivalents and short-term marketable securities.
(g)	Includes limited partnerships and venture capital partnerships.
(h)	Primarily includes interest rate derivatives and, to a lesser extent, forwards, exchange traded and other over-the-counter derivatives. 
(i)	 Invests in both equity and fixed income securities. 
(j)	 Represents net unsettled transactions, relating primarily to purchases and sales of plan assets.
The U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $35 million were invested in cash, categorized as Level 1 in the fair value hierarchy. 
The non-U.S. nonpension postretirement benefit plan assets of $120 million, primarily in Brazil, and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and South 
Africa, were invested primarily in government and related fixed income securities, categorized as Level 2 in the fair value hierarchy.


===== PAGE 134 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
132
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2011 
and 2010 for the U.S. Plan.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2011
$—
$—
$ 56
$221
$624
$4,251
$2,634
$7,786
Return on assets held at end of year
(0)
0
(1)
25
(35)
348
131
468
Return on assets sold during the year
0
(0)
(0)
—
5
(30)
39
14
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
12
5
(16)
—
(7)
(471)
(14)
(492)
Transfers, net
17
7
6
—
127*
—
—
157
Balance at December 31, 2011
$29
$12
$ 45
$246
$713
$4,098
$2,790
$7,932
*	 Due to an increase in the redemption term during 2011, the asset was transferred from Level 2 to Level 3.
($ in millions)
Equity 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Mortgage 
and Asset-
Backed 
Securities
Fixed Income 
Commingled/ 
Mutual Funds
Hedge 
Funds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2010
$   26
$37
$192 
$587 
$3,877 
$2,247 
$6,964 
Return on assets held at end of year
24
3
30
45
829
123
1,054
Return on assets sold during the year
(0)
0
—
3
(153)
16
(133)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
139
11
—
(11)
(302)
248
85
Transfers, net
(188)*
4
—
—
—
—
(184)
Balance at December 31, 2010
$    —
$56
$221 
$624 
$4,251 
$2,634 
$7,786 
*	 During the year ended December 31, 2010, the fund hired an independent administrator responsible for valuing the fund. As a result of this action the asset was transferred from 
Level 3 to Level 2.
The following tables present the reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of Level 3 assets for the years ended December 31, 2011 
and 2010 for the non-U.S. Plans.
($ in millions)
Government 
and Related
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2011
$  —
$ 11
$176
$533
$720
Return on assets held at end of year
3
2
30
11
46
Return on assets sold during the year
(0)
(0)
(2)
(3)
(5)
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
100
28
65
44
237
Transfers, net
—
—
(0)
0
0
Foreign exchange impact
(7)
(2)
(7)
(6)
(22)
Balance at December 31, 2011
$  96
$39 
$262
$580
$977
($ in millions)
Corporate 
Bonds
Private 
Equity
Private 
Real Estate
Total
Balance at January 1, 2010
$ —
$  93
$492 
$585 
Return on assets held at end of year
(0)
14
41
55
Return on assets sold during the year
—
3
(3)
0
Purchases, sales and settlements, net
4
69
9
82
Transfers, net
7
(0)
—
7
Foreign exchange impact
0
(3)
(6)
(8)
Balance at December 31, 2010
$11 
$176 
$533 
$720 


===== PAGE 135 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
133
Valuation Techniques
The following is a description of the valuation techniques used to 
measure plan assets at fair value. There were no changes in valuation 
techniques during 2011 and 2010.
	
Equity securities are valued at the closing price reported on the 
stock exchange on which the individual securities are traded. IBM 
common stock is valued at the closing price reported on the New 
York Stock Exchange. Equity commingled/mutual funds are typically 
valued using the net asset value (NAV) provided by the administrator 
of the fund and reviewed by the company. The NAV is based on the 
value of the underlying assets owned by the fund, minus liabilities 
and divided by the number of shares or units outstanding. These 
assets are classified as Level 1, Level 2 or Level 3 depending on 
availability of quoted market prices.
	
The fair value of fixed income securities is typically estimated 
using pricing models, quoted prices of securities with similar 
characteristics or discounted cash flows and are generally classified 
as Level 2. If available, they are valued using the closing price reported 
on the major market on which the individual securities are traded.
	
Cash includes money market accounts that are valued at their 
cost plus interest on a daily basis, which approximates fair value. 
Short-term investments represent securities with original maturities 
of one year or less. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2. 
	
Private equity and private real estate partnership valuations 
require significant judgment due to the absence of quoted market 
prices, the inherent lack of liquidity and the long-term nature of such 
assets. These assets are initially valued at cost and are reviewed 
periodically utilizing available and relevant market data to determine 
if the carrying value of these assets should be adjusted. These 
investments are classified as Level 3. The valuation methodology is 
applied consistently from period to period.
	
Exchange traded derivatives are valued at the closing price 
reported on the exchange on which the individual securities are 
traded, while forward contracts are valued using a mid-close price. 
Over-the-counter derivatives are typically valued using pricing 
models. The models require a variety of inputs, including, for example, 
yield curves, credit curves, measures of volatility and foreign exchange 
rates. These assets are classified as Level 1 or Level 2 depending 
on availability of quoted market prices.
Expected Contributions
Defined Benefit Pension Plans
It is the company’s general practice to fund amounts for pensions 
sufficient to meet the minimum requirements set forth in applicable 
employee benefits laws and local tax laws. From time to time, the 
company contributes additional amounts as it deems appropriate.
	
The company contributed $728 million and $801 million in cash 
to non-U.S. defined benefit pension plans and $70 million and 
$64 million in cash to non-U.S. multi-employer plans during the 
years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The cash 
contributions to multi-employer plans represent the annual cost 
included in net periodic (income)/cost recognized in the Consolidated 
Statement of Earnings. The company has no liability for participants 
in multi-employer plans other than its own employees. As a result, 
the company’s participation in multi-employer plans has no material 
impact on the company’s financial statements.
	
In 2012, the company is not legally required to make any 
contributions to the U.S. defined benefit pension plans. However, 
depending on market conditions, or other factors, the company 
may elect to make discretionary contributions to the Qualified PPP 
during the year. 
	
The Pension Protection Act of 2006 (the Act), enacted into law 
in 2006, is a comprehensive reform package that, among other 
provisions, increases pension funding requirements for certain U.S. 
defined benefit plans, provides guidelines for measuring pension 
plan assets and pension obligations for funding purposes and raises 
tax deduction limits for contributions to retirement-related benefit 
plans. The additional funding requirements by the Act apply to plan 
years beginning after December 31, 2007. The Act was updated by 
the Worker, Retiree and Employer Recovery Act of 2008, which 
revised the funding requirements in the Act by clarifying that pension 
plans may smooth the value of pension plans over 24 months. At 
December 31, 2011, no mandatory contribution is required for 2012.
	
In 2012, the company estimates contributions to its non-U.S. 
defined benefit and multi-employer plans to be approximately 
$800 million, which will be mainly contributed to defined benefit 
pension plans in Japan, Switzerland and the U.K. This amount 
represents the legally mandated minimum contributions. Financial 
market performance in 2012 could increase the legally mandated 
minimum contribution in certain countries which require monthly or 
daily remeasurement of the funded status. The company could also 
elect to contribute more than the legally mandated amount based 
on market conditions or other factors. 
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plans
The company contributed $362 million and $363 million to the 
nonpension postretirement benefit plans during the years ended 
December 31, 2011 and 2010. These contribution amounts exclude 
the Medicare-related subsidy discussed on page 134.


===== PAGE 136 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
134
subsidy of $96 million to the plan in order to reduce contributions 
required by the participants. The company received total subsidies 
of $36 million and $45 million for prescription drug-related coverage 
during the years ended December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively, 
which were utilized to reduce the company contributions to the U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan. 
	
The company has included the impact of its portion of the subsidy 
in the determination of net periodic cost and APBO for the U.S. 
nonpension postretirement benefit plan at and for the years ended 
December 31, 2011, 2010 and 2009. The impact of the subsidy 
resulted in a reduction in APBO of $93 million and $107 million at 
December 31, 2011 and 2010, respectively. The impact of the subsidy 
resulted in a reduction in 2011, 2010 and 2009 net periodic cost of 
$37 million, $19 million and $28 million, respectively.
The 2012 expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement 
benefit plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets 
represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current 
liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Medicare Prescription Drug Act
In connection with the Medicare Prescription Drug Improvement 
and Modernization Act of 2003, the company is expected to continue 
to receive a federal subsidy of approximately $196 million to subsidize 
the prescription drug coverage provided by the U.S. nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan, which is expected to extend until 2015. 
Approx­imately $100 million of the subsidy will be used by the company 
to reduce its obligation and cost related to the U.S. nonpension 
postretirement benefit plan. The company will contribute the remaining 
Expected Benefit Payments
Defined Benefit Pension Plan Expected Payments
The following table presents the total expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants. These payments have been 
estimated based on the same assumptions used to measure the plans’ PBO at December 31, 2011 and include benefits attributable to 
estimated future compensation increases, where applicable.
($ in millions)
Qualified 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Nonqualified 
U.S. Plans 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2012
$  3,273
$  98
$  2,015
$  348
$  5,735
2013
3,313
102
1,996
354
5,765
2014
3,353
105
2,000
358
5,816
2015
3,420
108
2,024
368
5,920
2016
3,401
110
2,068
377
5,957
2017–2021
17,261
579
10,767
2,110
30,718
The 2012 expected benefit payments to defined benefit pension plan participants not covered by the respective plan assets (underfunded 
plans) represent a component of compensation and benefits, within current liabilities, in the Consolidated Statement of Financial Position.
Nonpension Postretirement Benefit Plan Expected Payments
The following table reflects the total expected benefit payments to nonpension postretirement benefit plan participants, as well 
as the expected receipt of the company’s share of the Medicare subsidy described below. These payments have been estimated based on 
the same assumptions used to measure the plan’s APBO at December 31, 2011.
($ in millions)
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Less: IBM 
Share of 
Expected 
Medicare 
Subsidy
Net Expected 
U.S. Plan 
Payments
Qualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Nonqualified 
Non-U.S. Plans 
Payments
Total 
Expected 
Benefit 
Payments
2012
$  492
$(26)
$  466
$  7
$  32
$  505
2013
509
(26)
483
8
36
527
2014
448
(25)
423
9
39
471
2015
432
(23)
409
10
42
461
2016
425
—
425
10
45
480
2017–2021
2,003
—
2,003
63
282
2,348


===== PAGE 137 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
135
Other Plan Information
The following table presents information for defined benefit pension plans with accumulated benefit obligations (ABO) in excess of plan 
assets. For a more detailed presentation of the funded status of the company’s defined benefit pension plans, see the table on page 125.
($ in millions)
2011
2010
At December 31:
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Benefit 
Obligation
Plan 
Assets
Plans with PBO in excess of plan assets
$83,777 
$70,570
$21,589
$10,627
Plans with ABO in excess of plan assets
83,184
70,512
21,166
10,576
Plans with assets in excess of PBO
13,169
16,011
72,288
75,355
Note T.  
Segment Information
The company’s major operations consist of five business segments: 
Global Tech­nol­ogy Services, Global Business Services, Software, 
Systems and Technology and Global Financing. The segments 
represent components of the company for which separate financial 
information is available that is utilized on a regular basis by the chief 
executive officer in determining how to allocate resources and 
evaluate performance. The segments are determined based on 
several factors, including client base, homogeneity of products, 
technology, delivery channels and similar economic characteristics.
	
Information about each segment’s business and the products and 
services that generate each segment’s revenue is located in the 
“Description of Business” section on pages 22 to 24, and in “Segment 
Details,” on pages 26 through 31 in the Management Discussion.
	
Segment revenue and pre-tax income include transactions 
between the segments that are intended to reflect an arm’s-length, 
market-based transfer price. Systems and software that is used by 
Global Technology Services in outsourcing engagements is primarily 
sourced internally from Systems and Technology and Software. For 
providing IT services that are used internally, Global Technology 
Services and Global Business Services recover cost, as well as a 
reasonable fee, that is intended to reflect the arm’s-length value of 
providing the services. The Global Services segments enter into 
arm’s-length leases and loans at prices equivalent to market rates 
with Global Financing to facilitate the acquisition of equipment used 
in services engagements. All internal transaction prices are reviewed 
annually, and reset if appropriate.
	
The company utilizes globally integrated support organizations 
to realize economies of scale and efficient use of resources. As a 
result, a considerable amount of expense is shared by all of the 
segments. This shared expense includes sales coverage, certain 
marketing functions and support functions such as Accounting, 
Treasury, Procurement, Legal, Human Re­sources and Billing and 
Collections. Where practical, shared expenses are allocated based 
on measurable drivers of expense, e.g., head count. When a clear 
and measurable driver cannot be identified, shared expenses are 
allocated on a financial basis that is consistent with the company’s 
management system; e.g., advertising expense is allocated based 
on the gross profits of the segments. A portion of the shared expenses, 
which are recorded in net income, are not allocated to the segments. 
These expenses are associated with the elimination of internal 
transactions and other miscellaneous items.


===== PAGE 138 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
136
The following tables reflect the results of operations of the company’s segments consistent with the management and measurement system 
utilized within the company. Performance measurement is based on pre-tax income. These results are used, in part, by senior management, 
both in evaluating the performance of, and in allocating resources to, each of the segments. Effective January 1, 2011, the company transitioned 
its management and measurement system to reflect operating earnings in an effort to provide better transparency into the operating results 
of the business. As a result, certain acquisition-related charges and non-operating retirement-related costs are not reflected in the segment 
results. See the “Operating (non-GAAP) Earnings” section on page 18 for additional information regarding this change. Prior year segment 
pre-tax income and pre-tax margin have been reclassified to conform to the new management and measurement system. 
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2011
External revenue
$40,879 
$19,284 
$24,944 
$ 18,985
$2,102 
$106,194 
Internal revenue
1,242
797
3,276
838
2,092
8,246
Total revenue
$42,121 
$20,081 
$28,219 
$19,823 
$4,195 
$114,440 
Pre-tax income 
$  6,284
$  3,006
$  9,970
$  1,633
$2,011 
$  22,904
Revenue year-to-year change
6.6%
5.6%
10.9%
5.6%
2.8%
7.1%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change
14.3%
18.1%
5.3%
12.2%
2.8%
9.5%
Pre-tax income margin
14.9%
15.0%
35.3%
8.2%
47.9%
20.0%
2010
External revenue
$38,201 
$18,223 
$22,485 
$ 17,973
$2,238 
$  99,120
Internal revenue
1,313
798
2,950
804
1,842
7,707
Total revenue
$39,514 
$19,021 
$25,436 
$18,777 
$4,080 
$106,827 
Pre-tax income* 
$  5,499
$  2,546
$  9,466
$  1,456
$1,956 
$  20,923
Revenue year-to-year change
2.0%
2.6%
5.7%
9.8%
0.1%
4.2%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change*
0.3%
1.8%
13.8%
12.1%
13.5%
8.3%
Pre-tax income margin*
13.9%
13.4%
37.2%
7.8%
48.0%
19.6%
2009
External revenue
$37,347 
$17,653 
$21,396 
$ 16,190
$2,302 
$  94,889
Internal revenue
1,386
887
2,677
911
1,774
7,635
Total revenue
$38,734 
$18,540 
$24,073 
$17,102 
$4,076 
$102,524 
Pre-tax income* 
$  5,482
$  2,501
$  8,319
$  1,298
$1,724 
$  19,323
Revenue year-to-year change
(5.1)%
(10.3)%
(3.1)%
(15.2)%
(8.4)%
(7.6)%
Pre-tax income year-to-year change*
23.0%
(3.4)%
13.9%
(8.8)%
7.1%
11.2%
Pre-tax income margin*
14.2%
13.5%
34.6%
7.6%
42.3%
18.8%
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.


===== PAGE 139 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
137
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Revenue
Total reportable segments
$114,440
$106,827 
$102,524 
Other revenue and adjustments
722
750
869
Elimination of internal transactions
(8,246)
(7,707)
(7,635)
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$106,916
$  99,870
$  95,758
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010*
2009*
Pre-tax income
Total reportable segments
$22,904
$20,923 
$19,323 
Amortization of acquired  
intangible assets
(629)
(512)
(489)
Acquisition-related charges
(46)
(46)
(9)
Non-operating retirement- 
related (costs)/income
72
414
509
Elimination of internal transactions
(1,243)
(957)
(744)
Unallocated corporate amounts**
(56)
(98)
(453)
Total IBM consolidated  
pre-tax income
$21,003
$19,723 
$18,138 
*	 Reclassified to conform with 2011 presentation.
**	The 2009 amount included a provision related to a joint venture investment, while 
the 2010 amount included an adjustment of that provision as the venture was divested. 
The 2009 and 2010 amounts included gains related to the divestiture of the printing 
business.
Immaterial Items
Investment in Equity Alliances  
and Equity Alliances Gains/(Losses)
The investments in equity alliances and the resulting gains and 
(losses) from these investments that are attributable to the segments 
did not have a material effect on the financial position or the financial 
results of the segments. 
Segment Assets and Other Items
Global Technology Services assets are primarily accounts receivable, 
plant, property and equipment including the assets associated with 
the outsourcing business, goodwill, acquired intangible assets, 
deferred services arrangement transition costs and maintenance parts 
inventory. Global Business Services assets are primarily goodwill 
and accounts receivable. Software assets are mainly goodwill, 
acquired intangible assets and accounts receivable. Systems and 
Technology assets are primarily plant, property and equipment, 
manufacturing inventory and accounts receivable. Global Financing 
assets are primarily financing receivables and fixed assets under 
operating leases.
	
To ensure the efficient use of the company’s space and equipment, 
several segments may share plant, property and equipment assets. 
Where assets are shared, landlord ownership of the assets is 
assigned to one segment and is not allocated to each user segment. 
This is consistent with the company’s management system and is 
reflected accordingly in the table on page 138. In those cases, there 
will not be a precise correlation between segment pre-tax income 
and segment assets.
	
Similarly, the depreciation amounts reported by each segment 
are based on the assigned landlord ownership and may not be 
consistent with the amounts that are included in the segments’ pre-
tax income. The amounts that are included in pre-tax income reflect 
occupancy charges from the landlord segment and are not specifically 
identified by the management reporting system. Capital expenditures 
that are reported by each segment also are consistent with the 
landlord ownership basis of asset assignment.
	
Global Financing amounts for interest income and interest 
expense reflect the interest income and interest expense associated 
with the Global Financing business, including the intercompany 
financing activities discussed on page 24, as well as the income from 
investment in cash and marketable securities. The explanation of the 
difference between cost of financing and interest expense for segment 
presentation versus presentation in the Consolidated Statement of 
Earnings is included on page 66 of the Management Discussion.


===== PAGE 140 =====
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
138
Management System Segment View
($ in millions)
Global Services Segments
For the year ended December 31:
Global 
Technology 
Services
Global 
Business 
Services
Software
Systems and 
Technology
Global 
Financing
Total 
Segments
2011
Assets
$15,475
$8,078
$23,926
$7,649
$36,427
$91,557
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,713
83
1,062
737
1,145
4,739
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,838
56
469
1,032
930
4,325
Interest income
—
—
—
—
2,139
2,139
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
538
538
2010
Assets
$15,560 
$8,007 
$22,625 
$7,287 
$35,813 
$89,292 
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,632
75
992
784
1,417
4,900
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,511
52
463
1,163
1,246
4,434
Interest income
—
—
—
—
2,116
2,116
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
548
548
2009
Assets
$16,422 
$6,885 
$16,894 
$6,907 
$34,605 
$81,714 
Depreciation/amortization of intangibles*
1,680
87
906
814
1,694
5,181
Capital expenditures/investments in intangibles
1,512
45
471
658
1,460
4,145
Interest income
—
—
—
—
2,265
2,265
Interest expense
—
—
—
—
674
674
*	 Segment pre-tax income does not include the amortization of intangible assets.


===== PAGE 141 =====
139
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Reconciliations of IBM as Reported
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Assets
Total reportable segments
$  91,557
$  89,292
$  81,714
Elimination of internal transactions
(5,407)
(5,515)
(5,481)
Unallocated amounts
Cash and marketable securities
10,575
10,113
12,688
Notes and accounts receivable
3,526
3,762
3,928
Deferred tax assets
4,865
4,494
5,545
Plant, other property  
and equipment
2,918
3,067
2,971
Pension assets
2,837
3,060
2,994
Other
5,562
5,178
4,665
Total IBM consolidated assets
$116,433
$113,452 
$109,022 
Major Clients
No single client represented 10 percent or more of the company’s 
total revenue in 2011, 2010 or 2009.
Geographic Information 
The following provides information for those countries that are 
10 percent or more of the specific category.
Revenue*
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
United States
$  37,041
$35,581 
$34,150 
Japan
10,968
10,701
10,222
Other countries
58,906
53,589
51,386
Total IBM consolidated revenue
$106,916
$99,870 
$95,758 
*	 Revenues are attributed to countries based on the location of the client. 
Net Plant, Property and Equipment
($ in millions)
At December 31:
2011
2010
2009
United States
$  6,271
$  6,134
$  6,313
Other countries
6,186
6,298
6,142
Total
$12,457
$12,432 
$12,455 
Revenue by Classes of  
Similar Products or Services
The following table presents external revenue for similar classes of 
products or services within the company’s reportable segments. 
Within Global Technology Services and Global Business Services, 
client solutions often include IBM software and systems and other 
suppliers’ products if the client solution requires it. Within Software, 
product license charges and ongoing subscription and support are 
reported as Software, and software as a service, consulting, 
education, training and other product-related services are reported 
as Services. Within Systems and Technology, Microelectronics 
original equipment manufacturer (OEM) revenue is primarily from 
the sale of semiconductors. Microelectronics Services revenue 
includes circuit and component design services and technology 
and manufacturing consulting services. See “Description of the 
Business,” beginning on page 20 for additional information. 
($ in millions)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
Global Technology Services
Services
$31,746
$29,367 
$28,762 
Maintenance
7,515
7,250
6,956
Systems
1,478
1,409
1,279
Software
140
175
351
Global Business Services
Services
$18,956
$17,858 
$17,213 
Software
211
236
231
Systems
118
129
208
Software
Software
$22,921
$20,882 
$20,094 
Services
2,022
1,603
1,302
Systems and Technology
Servers
$12,362
$11,619 
$10,627 
Storage
3,619
3,420
3,177
Microelectronics OEM
1,975
1,938
1,550
Retail Store Solutions
753
674
551
Microelectronics Services
277
321
285
Global Financing
Financing
$  1,612
$  1,580
$  1,715
Used equipment sales
490
659
588
Note U.  
Subsequent Events
On January 31, 2012, the company announced that the Board of 
Directors approved a quarterly dividend of $0.75 per common share. 
The dividend is payable March 10, 2012 to shareholders of record 
on February 10, 2012.
	
On February 1, 2012, the company issued $2.5 billion in fixed rate 
bonds as follows: $1.5 billion in 3-year bonds with a 0.55 percent 
coupon, and $1.0 billion in 5-year bonds with a 1.25 percent coupon.
	
On February 3, 2012, the company issued C$500 million in 
Canadian 5-year fixed rate bonds with a 2.20 percent coupon.


===== PAGE 142 =====
140
Five-Year Comparison of Selected Financial Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts)
For the year ended December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
Revenue
$106,916
$  99,870
$  95,758
$103,630 
$98,786 
Net income
$  15,855
$  14,833
$  13,425
$  12,334
$10,418*
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings**
$  16,318
$  15,023
$  13,452
$  12,293
$10,864 
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    13.06
$    11.52
$    10.01
$      8.89
$    7.15
Basic
$    13.25
$    11.69
$    10.12
$      9.02
$    7.27
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)**
$    13.44
$    11.67
$    10.03
$      8.86
$    7.46
Cash dividends paid on common stock
$    3,473 
$    3,177
$    2,860
$    2,585
$  2,147
Per share of common stock
2.90
2.50
2.15
1.90
1.50
Investment in property, plant and equipment
$    4,108 
$    4,185
$    3,447
$    4,171
$  4,630
Return on IBM stockholders’ equity
71.2%
66.8%
80.4%
48.7%
42.6%
At December 31:
2011
2010
2009
2008
2007
Total assets
$116,433 
$113,452 
$109,022 
$109,524 
$120,431 
Net investment in property, plant and equipment
13,883
14,096
14,165
14,305
15,081
Working capital
8,805
7,554
12,933
6,568
8,867
Total debt
31,320
28,624
26,099
33,926
35,274
Total equity
20,236
23,172
22,755
13,584
28,615
*	 On December 31, 2002, the company sold its hard disk drive (HDD) business to Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi). The HDD business was accounted for as a discontinued operation under 
generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (GAAP) and therefore, the HDD results of operations and cash flows have been removed from the company’s results 
of continuing operations and cash flow for 2007. There was no activity in 2008, 2009, 2010 or 2011. The 2007 discontinued net loss was less than $0.5 millon and had no impact 
on earnings per share of common stock.
**	Refer to page 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for the years 2007 through 2010. 
Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for 2011.


===== PAGE 143 =====
141
Selected Quarterly Data
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2011
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full 
Year
Revenue
$24,607 
$26,666 
$26,157 
$29,486
$106,916
Gross profit
$10,858 
$12,385 
$12,173 
$14,722
$  50,138
Net income
$  2,863
$  3,664
$  3,839
$  5,490
$  15,855
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  2,990
$  3,777
$  3,954
$  5,597
$  16,318
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    2.31
$    3.00
$    3.19
$    4.62
$    13.06**
Basic
$    2.34
$    3.04
$    3.23
$    4.68
$    13.25**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.41
$    3.09
$    3.28
$    4.71
$    13.44**
Dividends per share of common stock
$    0.65
$    0.75
$    0.75
$    0.75
$      2.90
Stock prices+
High
$166.05 
$172.87 
$185.21 
$194.56 
Low
147.05
162.33
157.54
173.29
($ in millions except per share amounts and stock prices)
2010
First 
Quarter
Second 
Quarter
Third 
Quarter
Fourth 
Quarter
Full 
Year
Revenue
$22,857 
$23,724 
$24,271 
$29,019 
$99,870 
Gross profit
$  9,976
$10,809 
$11,001 
$14,227 
$46,014 
Net income
$  2,601
$  3,386
$  3,589
$  5,257
$14,833 
Operating (non-GAAP) earnings*
$  2,638
$  3,402
$  3,628
$  5,354
$15,023 
Earnings per share of common stock
Assuming dilution
$    1.97
$    2.61
$    2.82
$    4.18
$  11.52**
Basic
$    2.00
$    2.65
$    2.86
$    4.24
$  11.69**
Diluted operating (non-GAAP)*
$    2.00
$    2.62
$    2.85
$    4.25
$  11.67**
Dividends per share of common stock
$    0.55
$    0.65
$    0.65
$    0.65
$    2.50
Stock prices+
High
$134.14
$132.68 
$135.48 
$146.92 
Low
121.88
122.10
121.86
135.25
*	 Refer to pages 61 and 62 of the company’s first-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on April 26, 2011, pages 72 and 73 of the company’s second-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on July 26, 2011, 
page 73 of the company’s third-quarter 2011 Form 10-Q filed on October 25, 2011 and page 43 under the heading “GAAP Reconciliation,” for the reconciliation of non-GAAP 
information for the quarterly data for 2011 and 2010. Also see “GAAP Reconciliation,” on page 38 for the reconciliation of non-GAAP financial information for full-year 2011 and 2010.
**	Earnings Per Share (EPS) in each quarter is computed using the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during that quarter while EPS for the full year is computed using 
the weighted-average number of shares outstanding during the year. Thus, the sum of the four quarters’ EPS does not equal the full-year EPS.
+	 The stock prices reflect the high and low prices for IBM’s common stock on the New York Stock Exchange composite tape for the last two years.


===== PAGE 144 =====
142
Performance Graphs
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Comparison of One-, Five- and Ten-Year Cumulative Total Return for IBM,  
S&P 500 Stock Index and S&P Information Technology Index
The following graphs compare the one-, five- and ten-year cumulative 
total returns for IBM common stock with the comparable cumulative 
return of certain Standard & Poor’s (S&P) indices. Due to the fact 
that IBM is a company included in the S&P 500 Stock Index, the 
SEC’s rules require the use of that index for the required five-year 
graph. Under those rules, the second index used for comparison 
may be a published industry or line-of-business index. The S&P 
Information Technology Index is such an index. IBM is also included 
in this index.
	
Each graph assumes $100 invested on December 31 (of the initial 
year shown in the graph) in IBM common stock and $100 invested 
on the same date in each of the S&P indices. The comparisons 
assume that all dividends are reinvested.
One-Year
2010
2011
• IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$127.42
• S & P 500 Index
100.00
102.11
• S & P Information Technology Index
100.00
102.41
Five-Year
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
• IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$112.84 
$89.41 
$141.81 
$162.07 
$206.50 
• S & P 500 Index
100.00
105.49
66.46
84.05
96.71
98.75
• S & P Information Technology Index
100.00
116.31
66.13
106.95
117.85
120.69
100
10
11
105
110
115
120
125
130
06
07
08
09
10
11
210
170
190
150
130
110
90
70
50
One-Year
(U.S. Dollar)
Five-Year
(U.S. Dollar)


===== PAGE 145 =====
143
Performance Graphs
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Ten-Year
(U.S. Dollar)
01
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
11
200
50
75
100
125
150
175
Ten-Year
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
• IBM Common Stock
$100.00
$64.53 
$  77.76 
$  83.35 
$  70.15 
$  84.02 
$  94.81 
$75.12 
$119.15 
$136.17 
$173.51 
• S & P 500 Index
100.00
77.90
100.24
111.15
116.61
135.03
142.45
89.75
113.50
130.59
133.35
• S & P Information 
Technology Index
100.00
62.59
92.14
94.50
95.44
103.47
120.35
68.43
110.66
121.94
124.88


===== PAGE 146 =====
144
Board of Directors and Senior Leadership
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
Alain J.P. Belda
Managing Director 
Warburg Pincus LLC
William R. Brody
President 
Salk Institute for Biological Studies
Kenneth I. Chenault
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
American Express Company
Michael L. Eskew
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
United Parcel Service, Inc.
David N. Farr
Chairman and Chief Executive Officer 
Emerson Electric Co.
Rodney C. Adkins
Senior Vice President  
Systems and Technology Group
Colleen F. Arnold
Senior Vice President 
Application Management Services
James P. Bramante
Senior Vice President 
Growth Markets
Michelle H. Browdy
Vice President, Assistant  
General Counsel and Secretary
Erich Clementi
Senior Vice President 
Global Technology Services
Michael E. Daniels
Senior Vice President  
and Group Executive 
Services
Robert F. Del Bene
Vice President and Treasurer
Bruno V. Di Leo Allen 
Senior Vice President  
Sales and Distribution
Shirley Ann Jackson
President 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
Andrew N. Liveris
Chairman, President and 
Chief Executive Officer 
The Dow Chemical Company
W. James McNerney, Jr.
Chairman, President and  
Chief Executive Officer 
The Boeing Company
James W. Owens
Retired Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
Caterpillar Inc.
Jon C. Iwata
Senior Vice President 
Marketing and Communications
James J. Kavanaugh
Vice President and Controller
John E. Kelly III
Senior Vice President and Director 
Research
Robert J. LeBlanc
Senior Vice President 
Middleware Software Group
Mark Loughridge
Senior Vice President and  
Chief Financial Officer 
Finance and Enterprise Transformation
J. Randall MacDonald
Senior Vice President 
Human Resources
Steven A. Mills
Senior Vice President  
and Group Executive 
Software and Systems
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman of the Board 
IBM
Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer 
IBM
Joan E. Spero
Adjunct Senior Research Scholar 
Columbia University School of 
International and Public Affairs
Sidney Taurel
Senior Advisor 
Capital Royalty L.P.
Lorenzo H. Zambrano
Chairman and  
Chief Executive Officer 
CEMEX, S.A.B. de C.V.
Samuel J. Palmisano
Chairman of the Board
Michael D. Rhodin
Senior Vice President 
Software Solutions Group
Virginia M. Rometty
President and Chief Executive Officer
Linda S. Sanford
Senior Vice President 
Enterprise Transformation
Timothy S. Shaughnessy
Senior Vice President 
GTS Services Delivery
Bridget A. van Kralingen
Senior Vice President 
Global Business Services
Robert C. Weber
Senior Vice President 
Legal and Regulatory Affairs,  
and General Counsel
Board of Directors
Senior Leadership


===== PAGE 147 =====
Stockholder Information
International Business Machines Corporation and Subsidiary Companies
IBM Stockholder Services
Stockholders with questions about their accounts should contact:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,  
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and  
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Stockholders can also reach Computershare Trust Company, N.A.  
via e-mail at: ibm@computershare.com
Hearing-impaired stockholders with access to a telecommunications 
device (TDD) can communicate directly with Computershare  
Trust Company, N.A., by calling (800) 490-1493. Stockholders  
residing outside the United States, Canada and Puerto Rico  
should call (781) 575-2694.
IBM on the Internet
Topics featured in this Annual Report can be found via the IBM home 
page on the Internet (http://www.ibm.com). Financial results, news on IBM  
products, services and other activities can also be found via that address.
IBM files reports with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), 
including the annual report on Form 10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, 
current reports on Form 8-K and any other filings required by the SEC.
IBM’s website (http://www.ibm.com) contains a significant amount of  
information about IBM, including the company’s annual report on Form 
10-K, quarterly reports on Form 10-Q, current reports on Form 8-K,  
and all amendments to those reports as soon as reasonably practicable 
after such material is electronically filed with or furnished to the SEC  
(http://www.ibm.com/investor). These materials are available free of 
charge on or through our website.
The public may read and copy any materials the company files with the 
SEC at the SEC’s Public Reference Room at 100 F Street, NE, Washington, 
DC 20549. The public may obtain information on the operation of the 
Public Reference Room by calling the SEC at 1-800-SEC-0330. The SEC 
maintains an Internet site (http://www.sec.gov) that contains reports, 
proxy and information statements, and other information regarding issuers 
that file electronically with the SEC.
IBM Investor Services Program
The Investor Services Program brochure outlines a number of services 
provided for IBM stockholders and potential IBM investors, including  
the reinvestment of dividends, direct purchase and the deposit of IBM  
stock certificates for safe­keeping. Call (888) IBM-6700 for a copy of  
the brochure. Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and 
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
Investors with other requests may write to: IBM Stockholder Relations, 
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
IBM Stock
IBM common stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange,  
the Chicago Stock Exchange, and outside the United States.
Stockholder Communications
Stockholders in the United States and Canada can get quarterly  
financial results, a summary of the Annual Meeting remarks,  
and voting results from the meeting by calling (800) IBM-7800. 
Stockholders residing outside the United States, Canada and  
Puerto Rico should call (402) 573-9861.
Annual Meeting
The IBM Annual Meeting of Stockholders will be held on Tuesday,       
April 24, 2012, at 10 a.m. in the Charleston Area Convention Center,  
North Charleston, South Carolina.
Literature for IBM Stockholders
The literature mentioned below on IBM is available without charge from:
Computershare Trust Company, N.A., P.O. Box 43078,  
Providence, Rhode Island 02940-3078 (888) IBM-6700
Investors residing outside the United States, Canada and  
Puerto Rico should call (781) 575-2727.
The company’s annual report on Form 10-K and the quarterly reports  
on Form 10-Q provide additional information on IBM’s business. The  
10-K report is released by the end of February; 10-Q reports are released  
by early May, August and November.
An audio recording of the 2011 Annual Report will be available for  
sight-impaired stockholders in June 2012.
The IBM Corporate Responsibility Report highlights IBM’s values  
and its integrated approach to corporate responsibility, including  
its innovative strategies for transforming communities through  
global citizenship. The Report Summary is available in printed form  
and downloadable at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility. The full Corporate 
Responsibility Report is online with downloadable sections  
at http://www.ibm.com/responsibility.
General Information
Stockholders of record can receive online account information and 
answers to frequently asked questions regarding stockholder accounts 
via the Internet (http://www.ibm.com/investor). Stockholders of record can  
also consent to receive future IBM Annual Reports and Proxy Statements 
online through the Internet at this site.
For answers to general questions about IBM from within the continental 
United States, call (800) IBM-4YOU. From outside the United States, 
Canada and Puerto Rico, call (914) 499-1900.
International Business Machines Corporation
New Orchard Road, Armonk, New York 10504
(914) 499-1900
Algorithmics, DS8000, IBM, IBM SmartCloud, ILOG, Initiate Systems, 
Lombardi, Lotus, Netezza, OpenPages, POWER7, Power Systems, Rational, 
Smarter Cities, Smarter Commerce, Smarter Planet, Sterling Commerce, 
System x, System z, Tivoli, WebSphere, XIV and zEnterprise are trademarks 
or registered trademarks of International Business Machines Corporation  
or its wholly owned subsidiaries. Jeopardy! is a registered trademark  
of Jeopardy Productions, Inc. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus 
Torvalds in the United States, other countries, or both. Oracle is a registered 
trademark of Oracle Corporation. UNIX is a registered trademark of the 
Open Group in the United States and other countries. Other company, 
product and service names may be trademarks or service marks of others.
The IBM Annual Report is printed on recycled paper and is recyclable.
Printed in the U.S.A.    COL03002-USEN-02
Design: VSA Partners, Inc.    Printing: RR Donnelley


===== PAGE 148 =====
Let’s build a smarter planet.
